Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/GPSM_NgPalden_Comm_GChonyi_ABC.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:14.496236
================================================================================

 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM  
Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
 
 
The Illumination of the  
Texts of Tantra  
by  
Ngawang Palden  
  
Oral Commentary  
by 
Geshe Chonyi  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  
2009  
 
 
The Illumination of the Texts of Tantra  
translated by Voula Zarpani and Ian Coughlan  
 
Commentary by Geshe Chonyi   
transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek , Alison Wong  and Vivien Ng  
edited by Cecilia Tsong,  
and checked by Yap Siew Kee  
Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Guyrme  
 
Compiled and lightly edited for the FPMT Basic Program by Olga Planken, FPMT Education Services  
 
RESTRICTED TO HIGHEST YOGA TANTRA INITIATES 
 
 
O
ral Commentary to t he Illumination of the Texts of Tantra 
 Geshe Chonyi and Amitabha Buddhist Centre 
2009 
A
ll rights reserved  
No p art o f this w ork m ay be reproduced in an y form o r by a ny m eans,  
electronic o r mechanical,  including p hotocopying, recording,  or by any in formation storage 
and retrieval system or technologies now known or later developed, without permission in 
writing from Geshe Chonyi and Amitabha Buddhist Centre 
Translation of The Illumination of the Texts of Tantra 
 Voula Zarpani and Ian Coughlan   
A
ll rights reserved  
No
 part of this work may be reproduced in any form or by any means,  
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any 
information storage and retrieval system or technologies now known  
or later developed, without written permission. 
P
ermission for use in the FPMT  Basic Program granted by Wisdom Publications, 
September 2005
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Transcript o f the Oral Commentary  
to Ngawang Palden ’s The Illumination of the Texts o f Tantra   
by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Root text : The Illumination of the Texts of Tantra: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of 
the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden , translation and copyright Voula 
Zarpani and Ian Coug hlan, 2005.  FPMT Basic Program material, edition 2005.  
 
 LESSON NO: 1     DATE: 17
TH FEBRUARY 2009  
 
There is a Tibetan saying, “A man must have a mind just as a pig must have a nose.”  What this 
means is that as human beings with minds, we have the   ability to distinguish between what is 
right and what is wrong. To be a human being, we must have this ability. In a similar way, the pig must have a pig’s nose to be a real pig.  Having this ability to distinguish between right and wrong means we can deve lop a good and kind heart and make our human existence more 
meaningful.  
 There is no limit to the development of our ability to think and analyse. There is so much to think about. In the teachings of the Buddha, we have the stages of the path that are sha red 
with the persons of small capacity which are taught to those whose mental powers and abilities are not so well developed. For those whose minds are more developed, then the path 
that is shared with the persons of middling capacity is revealed. When the  mind improves, the 
Mahayana path is revealed. When the mind is developed even further, the path of tantra is 
revealed to such practitioners.  
 When we set our minds on something that is meaningful, that accords with reality and is purposeful, we can devel op our understanding of such objects or topics. There is no limit to our 
understanding of these objects/topics as we can  reflect on them in so many different ways.  
 This is one of the reasons why whatever teachings we receive should fit the level of our m inds. 
The same applies to the practice of tantra. In order to receive teachings on tantra, one has to receive an initiation. When the teachings don’t fit the level of our minds, our mental capacity, 
then receiving teachings on tantra may be more harmful th an beneficial for our minds.  
  
Geshe -la: There is another phrase in Tibetan, “The frog in the well who died of a heart attack.” 
There is once a businessman who went for a business trip across the seas. When he returned from his trip, he bought a tortoise. He put the tortoise inside a well together with a frog which he already owned. One day, the frog and the tortoise had this conversation.  
Frog: Where did you come from? Tortoise: I came from a big ocean.  
Frog: How big is your ocean? Is it that big? (The fro g indicated the width with its two fingers).  
Tortoise: No, no, no. It is bigger than that.  
Frog: (The frog then widened his fingers) This big?  
 
Lesson 1              Page 1 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Tortoise: Bigger than that.  
Frog: (The frog then fully stretched out both of its arms) That big?  
Tortoise: No, no, no. It is much, much bigger than that. It is millions of times bigger than that!  
 
The frog, upon hearing this, died of a heart attack! This is because what the tortoise had told the frog could not fit its mind.  
 
That is why when you hear teachings on tantra and if they cannot fit your mind, then you may 
get a heart attack or you may criticise tantra, thinking that what you heard is impossible, simply because it cannot fit your mind. You may think, “How is that possible?” because you don’t have enough k nowledge of tantra. Just by hearing a word here and there, you may think 
that tantra is not the teachings of the Buddha, that it is useless or confusing it with Hindu tantra or karma yoga. That is not beneficial.  
 Lama Tsongkhapa said in the Foundation of All Good Qualities: “Having become a pure vessel 
by training in the general path,/Please bless me to enter/The holy gateway of the fortunate ones:/The supreme vajra vehicle.”  This is why  we should practise to train our minds well in the 
shared paths.  
 Today’s session is only an introduction but from the next lesson onwards, only those who have received the appropriate great initiations can listen to these teachings. You can listen to the 
entire teachings only if you have received the initiation of highest yoga tantra (HYT). If you 
have received the great initiation of action tantra, then you can listen to the teachings on 
action tantra. But when we move on to the HYT section, you are not allowed to listen to the 
teachings. Please observe this tradition. It  will be detrimental to both the teacher and the 
student if this tradition is not observed.  
 To those students who have attended the Basic Program on a regular basis but have not received any initiations, there is not much thing we can do about that now. However, I would like to suggest that you study the Lam Rim text every Tuesday and Thursday for two hours at the same time as these classes. If you are able to schedule that time during the class days by reading 5 to 10 pages for the next three months, it will be very beneficial. If you can study the Lam Rim in such a manner, it will help you to gain an understanding of the Lam Rim. It would be very helpful if you can reflect on and contemplate what you have read.  
 
Whether you gain an understanding of tantra or whether your tantric practice goes well 
depends on how well you know the sutric teachings and how well you practise them. Good understanding of tantra and good practice of tantra can only come about on the basis of having good understanding of the sutric teachings and practising them well, especially the three principal  aspects of the path: renunciation, bodhicitta and the correct view.    The teachings of the Buddha have two divisions: (1) the scriptural teachings and (2) the realisational teachings . The scriptural teachings have three divisions which are known as the 
three scriptural collections (or the Three Baskets). They are:  
 1. the vinaya, the main subject matter which is the higher training in ethics;  
 
Lesson 1              Page 2 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
2. the sutras, the main subject matter which is  the higher training in concentration and  
3. the Abhidharma, the main subject matter which is the higher training in wisdom.  
 
The three scriptural collections can also be condensed into two: (1) the Hinayana scriptural collections and (2) the Mahayana scrip tural collections.  
 The Mahayana scriptural collections have two divisions: (1) the scriptural collections of the 
Mahayana causal perfection vehicle and (2) the scriptural collections of the Mahayana 
resultant vajra vehicle.  
 The realisational teachings are the practice of the realisations of the three  higher trainings which are the subject matter of the three scriptural collections.  
In short, the realisational teachings are the three higher trainings. Elaborating further on the realisational teachings,  then there are the realisational teachings of the three vehicles : 
 1. the realisational teachings of the hearers vehicle, which can be divided into the five paths of the realisations of the hearers.  
2. the realisational teachings of the solitary realisers vehicle, which can be divided into the five paths of the realisations of the solitary realisers.  
3. the realisational teachings of the Mahayana vehicle, which can be divided into the five paths of the realisations of the Mahayanists.  
 This then is what constitutes  the teachings of the Buddha, that is, the scriptural and the 
realisational teachings.  
 What does it mean then “to uphold the teachings of the Buddha”? That means  we should uphold the scriptural teachings of the Buddha as well as the  realisational teachings of the Buddha:  
 
• Upholding the scriptural teachings of the Buddha means studying the three  collections and 
sharing our understanding of them with others.  
• Upholding the realisational teachings of the Buddha means to engage in the practice of the 
three hi gher trainings and when they take root in our minds, that is upholding the 
realisational teachings of the Buddha.   
 We all accept that the teachings of the Buddha are very good and beneficial and that there is a need to preserve those teachings so that they can last for a very long time. In order to do this, we have to learn and understand those teachings. On the basis of that understanding, if we can develop the three higher trainings, the realisations of the paths in our minds, that would be even better.  Since we all recognise the value and benefit of the Buddhadharma, we all have 
this responsibility to preserve the teachings of the Buddha. This is something we should keep in our minds at all times.  
 We have to understand what is really meant when we say we want to preserve, uphold or spread the teachings of the Buddha. His Holiness the Dalai Lama always mentions in his teachings that preserving the teachings of the Buddha is not building new prayer halls or more 
 
Lesson 1              Page 3 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
monasteries. Nor does it mean the presence of many Sangha  members. The actual meaning of 
the preservation of the Buddhadharma is preserving both the scriptural and the realisational 
teachings through studying, learning and sharing them with others and by gaining the realisations.  
 The purpose of practising the teachings of the Buddha is to correct our own mistakes and improve the states of our minds. It is not for the sake of correcting the faults and mistakes of 
others. It is important therefore that whatever we practise should not become the condition 
for minding other people’s business. We should remember this when we listen to and practise the teachings.  
 The beginning of the Lam Rim teachings deals with how we should listen to the teachings by abandoning the three faults of the vessel, that is , (1) being upside down, (2) though held right 
side up, being dirty and (3) though clean, having a leaky bottom. Abandoning the fault of the contaminated vessel means to listen to the teachings with a correct and pure motivation. Otherwise, we will not ben efit from those teachings even though the teachings are pure. The 
best motivation is what I have mentioned earlier, that is, to learn the teachings in order to correct our mistakes and to improve ourselves. We should reflect on the teachings so that they have some impact on our minds so that our minds can change for the better. This is something 
we have to do on our own. When our minds improve,  even by a little bit, we will naturally feel happy,  enthusiasm will arise and we will want to learn more and ref lect more on the teachings.  
 Whatever I have mentioned so far is not something that you do not know or is unaware of. I brought these points up as reminders for you. There are students, especially those who have 
attended many teachings, who are unaffected  by the teachings. The teachings do not benefit 
their minds.  Rather they think,  “I  have heard this before. I already know all this.”  Because of that  attitude, they do not pay much attention to the teachings even though they are physically present. If they go on like that, then they will not derive any benefit from the teachings. This is 
something we have to be aware of and to make sure that this does not happen to us. As I mentioned earlier, changing our minds can only happen when we reflect on the tea chings from 
our own side. Nobody else can do this for us. Our minds will not change simply by listening to the teachings alone. We have to reflect on and analyse them. Only then can change happen. This is another thing that we have to remember all the time . 
 The realisational teachings have two divisions:  
  
1. The realisational teachings of the Lesser Vehicle (the Hinayana)  
2. The realisational teachings of the Great Vehicle (the Mahayana)  
 The Hinayana and the Mahayana are differentiated by the path followed and the method.  There is no practice of bodhicitta (or mind generation) in the Hinayana. Developing bodhicitta exists only in the Mahayana.   In terms of the three vehicles, there are the (1) small vehicle, (2) the middling vehicle and (3) the great vehicle. T he small and middling vehicles are subsumed under the Lesser Vehicle (the 
Hinayana). Therefore, the Hinayana has two divisions:  
 
Lesson 1              Page 4 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
(1) the hearers path and  
(2) the solitary realisers path.  
 
The differences between the hearers path and solitary realisers pat h lie in terms of:  
 
• their ability to bring to culmination their familiarisation with the path.  
• the faculty of their trainees (i.e. some have sharper faculties than others) and  
• the goal of their attainment i.e. nirvana. (One’s state of liberation is higher than the other).  
 When we look at the realisational teachings of the Mahayana, there are two divisions:  
 (1) the Mahayana causal perfection vehicle and  
(2) the Mahayana resul tant vajra vehicle  
.  
These two are not differentiated by their views of reality (emptiness) but are differentiated on the basis of method.  
 The view of reality that is taught in both the Mahayana vehicles is the same, that is, the emptiness asserted by the  Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS). The main goal of the 
Mahayanists is to achieve the welfare of others. Their aspiration to attain enlightenment is necessary for them to accomplish their true goal which is to achieve the welfare of others.  
 
The enligh tenment they are seeking consists of two bodies: (1) the truth body (or dharmakaya) 
and (2) the form body (or rupakhaya). It is through the form body that the Buddha works for 
the benefit of others by appearing to the objects that are to be subdued (i.e. s entient beings) in 
the aspect of the form body. The Mahayanists therefore primarily aspire to achieve the form 
body because it is through the appearance of the form body that the welfare of others can be accomplished. In this context, enlightenment specifi cally refers to the form body. It is not that 
the Mahayanists do not seek to achieve the truth body. In fact, the form body cannot be achieved without achieving the truth body because these two bodies are attained simultaneously. But their primary aim is t o achieve the form body because it is through the 
form body that they can work for the benefit of sentient being.  
 Both the Mahayana causal perfection vehicle and the Mahayana resultant vajra vehicle assert that it is through completing the collection of wisdom that  one attains the truth body and it is through the completion of the accumulation of merit that one achieves the form body. As 
mentioned earlier, these two vehicles are also not differentiated by their view of emptiness.  
 
The difference comes i n their assertions regarding the causes for achieving the form body. The 
Mahayana resultant vajra vehicle has the presentation of the uncommon causes for achieving the form body of the Buddha which is not found in the Mahayana causal perfection vehicle and  
constituted a special method at the time of the cause (i.e., when one has still to attain buddhahood) whereby one meditates by visualising oneself as the deity.  
 The Mahayana causal perfection vehicle (Mahayana sutra) teaches the meditation on emptiness  which is similar in aspect to the goal of the dharmakaya which is to be achieved at 
 
Lesson 1              Page 5 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
the time of the result. But this vehicle does not teach the meditation that is similar in aspect to 
the rupakhaya that one will achieve at the time of result. This meditation is only found in the Mahayana resultant vajra vehicle (tantra) which involves visualizing oneself as the deity which is similar in aspect to the form body that one will achieve at the time of result. The difference between these two Mahayana vehicles therefore is primarily based on the method which refers to the cause for achieving the form body of the Buddha.  
 
Why is the Mahayana causal perfection vehicle and Mahayana resultant vajra vehicle so called?  
 
• For the former vehicle, at the time when one is training on the path, one trains only in the 
mind generation (bodhicitta) and the six perfections and these are posited as the causes for 
achieving the form body. According to this vehicle, at the time of the cause while one is still at the path, one does not meditate on the aspects of the four complete purities that exist at the 
time of the result. Therefore this Mahayana path is called the causal perfection vehicle  
 
• The Mahayana resultant vajra vehicle is also referred to as the Vajrayana, Secret Vajrayan a, 
Mantrayana, Secret Mantrayana or Methodyana. The Mahayana resultant vajra vehicle teaches meditation that can be done while one is still on the path at the time of the cause. One meditates on the four complete purities that exist at the time of enlighte nment (i.e. the 
time of the result). Because of this meditation technique, it is called the Mahayana resultant  
vajra vehicle.  
 
• In the term, “Vajrayana,” vajra refers to the inseparability of method and wisdom for in the 
practice of this path, both method a nd wisdom can be found in one mind. For example, while 
one visualises oneself as the deity, at the same time, with the same mind, one realises that the deity’s body is empty of inherent existence. In this way, both method and wisdom can be found in a singl e consciousness. Therefore, this is also called the inseparable yoga of method 
and wisdom. Such a path that is the inseparability of method and wisdom is not found in the Mahayana causal perfection vehicle. There is discussion in this vehicle on how method  is 
conjoined with wisdom and vice versa and how they both complement one another but this method and wisdom are in two separate minds, that is, both method and wisdom are not found in one mind.  
 
• The term, “Methodyana” (or method vehicle) refers to the fact that the Vajrayana possesses 
a method of achieving the form body of the Buddha which is superior to the method taught in the causal perfection vehicle .  
 
• The Vajrayana is also called Secret Mant ra because we should keep such teachings and 
practice secret and not reveal them to unsuitable vessels or  recipients. The Sanskrit term mantra means protecting the mind. What are we protecting the mind from? In Je Tsongkhapa’s text, it is mentioned that w e are protecting the mind from the suffering of 
samsara and the lower realms.  In the writings of the Seventh Dalai Lama, Kelsang  Gyatso, he 
explains that mantra means protecting the mind from ordinary appearance and grasping.  
 
• The Mahayana sutra, the cau sal perfection vehicle is also referred to as the path that is 
 
Lesson 1              Page 6 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
separated from desire (or attachment). The Mahayana tantra, the resultant Vajra vehicle is 
referred to as the path that is with attachment. As to how the resultant Vajra vehicle is the path tha t is with desire and on how it is related to the four classes of tantra, we will elaborate 
further in the next lesson.  
 
  
 
Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
  
 
Lesson 1              Page 7 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 2     DATE: 19TH FEBRAURY 2009  
 
Shakyamuni Buddha said, “Listen well, listen thoroughly and hold it in your mind.” What the 
Buddha said is extremely important. The essence is that you have made your way to the centre, 
putting up with difficulties and so forth, thinking, “I am here to lis ten to the teachings.” Since 
you are already physically here, you may as well be mentally present instead of letting your 
mind wander elsewhere. You should pay attention to the teachings. Otherwise, you are 
probably not going to learn anything.  
 If possib le, we should reflect on the benefits of listening to Dharma teachings, such as how it 
plants positive imprints on our mental continua. You should listen to the teachings voluntarily, with a happy mind from your own side.  Tantra is more profound than sutra so we should 
remind ourselves how fortunate we are to have this opportunity to learn about it. Please keep 
this in mind.  
 
*******  
In the previous lesson, we mentioned that there are two yanas (vehicles): the Hinayana and 
Mahayana, both of which have two  divisions.  
 The Hinayana has two divisions: (1) the hearers vehicle and (2) the solitary realisers vehicle. 
Why is this so? The differentiation does not lie in their view of reality (the wisdom aspect) but 
rather with the method. What is this method? The  solitary realisers are able to accumulate 
merit over a longer period of time than the hearers who do not have this ability.  
 The Mahayana also has two divisions:  
1. the Mahayana causal perfection vehicle  (Paramitayana or Mahayana Sutra)  
2. the Mahayana resulta nt Vajrayana (vajra vehicle)  
These two are also not differentiated by their views of reality (emptiness) but they are differentiated with regards to the collection of merit which is the cause for actualising the Buddha’s form body.  
 
The resultant vajra veh icle teaches a method for attaining the form body that is more profound 
than that taught in the causal perfection vehicle. In the causal perfection vehicle, it is taught that through familiarisation with the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness, one accumu lates 
the collection of wisdom leading to the attainment of the truth body. Through the practice of 
bodhicitta together with the six perfections, one accumulates the collection of merit which leads to the attainment of form body.   The explanation of how the form body is achieved in the Mahayana sutra was covered in the previous module on the Uttaratantra. The bodhisattva on the tenth ground achieves the 
mental body adorned with the signs and exemplifications of a buddha and that is the 
substantial cause fo r achieving the form body of the Buddha. We should analyse whether this is 
the case or not in reality.   This position is not accepted from the tantric perspective, which asserts that the mental body 
 
Lesson 2            Page 8 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
of the tenth level bodhisattva that is adorned with the signs and exemplifications of a buddha 
is not the substantial cause for the form body of the Buddha. It is only in tantra that there is an uncommon cause for achieving the Buddha’s form body which means tantra has a superior method for achieving the form b ody of the Buddha and is therefore superior to sutra.  
 The final conclusion is that it is only in tantra that we are able to find the correct explanation for the substantial cause of the Buddha’s form body. That is what makes tantra really precious 
and more exalted than sutra. This is the conclusion but proponents of the Mahayana sutra may 
object, “It is not that we do not know the cause to achieve the Buddha’s form body. We know the cause to be the mental body of the tenth level bodhisattva that is adorned with the major 
marks and minor signs.”  
 I brought up this qualm so that you can squeeze your brain a little bit. It is pointless to immediately give you the answer. When a qualm is raised, instead of the teacher giving the answer right away, you should th ink about it. After thinking about it for a few days and if you 
still cannot get the answer, then you can ask the teacher. At that time when the teacher gives the answer, the answer will stay in your mind forever. If you do not think about it, the teacher’ s  
answer may stay in your mind only for maybe one or two days. It will never stick in your mind.  
 The main point is that tantra has the uncommon explanation on how to actualise the Buddha’s form body which the Mahayana sutra does not.  The Mahayana tantr a is superior to sutra 
because of this superior explanation on how to achieve the Buddha’s form body. You have to prove to yourself why the Mahayana sutra’s explanation on the method of achieving the Buddha’s form body is inadequate. We are not saying that the Mahayana sutra does not teach 
the method for achieving the Buddha’s form body but from the perspective of tantra, that explanation is incorrect and inadequate.  
In this context, there are two parts in the explanation of the principles of the grounds a nd 
paths of the four great secret classes of tantra:  
1 A brief teaching of the way to progress on the path of the three lower classes of 
tantra  
2 A more detailed explanation of the way to progress on the path of the Highest Yoga 
Tantra  
THE THREE LOWER TANTRAS  
 
1 A BRIEF TEACHING OF THE WAY TO PROGRESS ON THE PATH OF THE T HREE LOWER 
CLASSES OF TANTRA  
has two divisions:  
1 The actual lower classes of tantra  
2 The way of positing the five paths and the  ten grounds for them.  
 
1.1 THE ACTUAL LOWER CLA SSES OF  TANTRA  
This has three divisions:  
 
Lesson 2            Page 9 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
1 The way to progress on the path of Action Tantra  
2 The way to progress on the path of Performance Tantra  
3 The way to progress on the path of Yoga Tantra  
 
ACTION TANTRA  
 
1.1.1  THE WAY TO PROGRESS ON THE PATH OF ACTIO N TANTRA  
has four divisions:  
1 Becoming a vessel suitable to meditate on the path.  
2 Keeping the vows and commitments pure, after becoming a vessel.  
3 The way to perform prior approximation, while abiding in the commitments.  
4 The way to establish the siddhi s after renderin g the approximation serviceable  
 
1.1.1.1   BECOMING A VESSEL SU ITABLE TO MEDITATE O N THE PATH  
 
How does one become a suitable vessel to receive such teachings or practices?   As is stated in the Great and Condensed Stages of the Path, (first ) one trains one’s (mental) 
continuum well in the common paths. Then through relying on a qualified vajra master in the way that it is explained in the classes of Tantra, one enters in the mandala of any of the three lineages of Action Tantra and receives the empowerment.  
 There are different ways of relying on the guru. One way of relying on the guru is explained in the vinaya, the code of conduct for the Sangha. Disciples are taught to regard their teachers to be like the Buddha himself by cultivating faith in and respect towards them. This is the same 
approach to be followed by Hinayana trainees.  
 
A superior manner of relying on the guru is taught in the Mahayana sutra.  It is insufficient to 
view the guru to be like  the Buddha but one should generate the attitude that the guru is  the 
actual Buddha and on that basis, one cultivates faith in and respect towards him. Such guru devotion is based on the recognition that the nature of the guru is the Buddha and not that th e 
guru is taking the physical aspect of a buddha.  
 An even more advanced manner of relying on the guru is taught in the resultant Vajrayana. In tantric practice, one trains not only to regard the nature of the guru to be Buddha but even in his physical ap pearance, one trains to see the guru as having the pure aspect of Vajradhara. 
This is the correct manner of relying on the guru and is required for tantric practice. We can see here how the practice of guru devotion is progressively more profound and diffe rent within 
the Hinayana, Mahayana sutric and Mahayana tantric vehicles.   
 
On that basis, in order to practice Action Tantra, one enters into the mandala of Action Tantra 
in any of the three lineages:  
  
 
Lesson 2            Page 10 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
  
Three 
Lineages  Level  Illustration of 
deity  One recognises the lineage of the deity 
through identifying the   
adornment of the lord of lineage:  
Tathagata 
lineage  Superior  Namgyalma  The lord of the lineage is Vairocana  
Lotus lineage  Middling  Chenrezig  The lord of the lineage is Amitabha  
Vajra line age Lower  Sangye  
Mitrugpa  The lord of the lineage is Akshobhya  
 For example, Chenrezig is adorned with Amitabha as the lord of the lineage. That deity is therefore classified to belong to the lotus lineage of Action Tantra. This is just an introduction to the three lineages of Action Tantra. There are further subdivisions within these three lineages.  
 In Lama Tsongkhapa’s Great Stages of Mantra, which is the tantric equivalent to the Lamrim 
Chenmo , he says that  someone who has entered the mandala and received the initiation of a 
deity of the Tathagata lineage, that pe rson is also allowed to do the approximation retreats and 
practices of the deities of the Lotus lineage and Vajra lineage even though that person has not received the great initiations of those lineages.   
 
If a person has received the great initiation and  entered into the mandala of a deity of the 
Lotus lineage of Action Tantra, that person can also do the retreats and practices of the deities 
of the Vajra lineage of Action Tantra, that is, the lineage of the lower lever but not the lineage of the level above it.  
 If a person has received the great initiation and entered into the mandala of the deity of the Vajra lineage of Action Tantra, that person is only allowed to do the retreats and practices of the deities of that lineage.  
 Can a person who has rece ived the great initiation of Highest Yoga Tantra do the practices of all 
the tantras below it without having received the great initiation of those tantras? As mentioned earlier, a person who has received the great initiation of the Tathagata lineage can 
do the practices of the Lotus and Vajra lineages even without having received the great 
initiation of the relevant deities. If we extend this logic, then we have the following qualm: Can a person who has received the great initiation of a Performance Tantra  deity do the practices 
of Action Tantra deities without having received the great initiation of those deities? This is a qualm that is not explicitly mentioned anywhere. If I do get a chance to ask someone about this, I will clarify this point later.  
  Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
Lesson 2            Page 11 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson 2            Page 12 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 3     DATE: 24TH FEBRAURY 2009  
 
Many conducive factors have to be present before one can listen to the teachings. When they 
are present, then the teacher is able to teach and the students also have the opportunity to 
listen to the teachings. It is not so easy for all these factors to come about. Sometimes, one 
cannot find any listeners and there are times when people cannot find a teacher. There is a 
story of a Ganden Tripa, the throne holder who is deemed to be a repre sentative of Lama 
Tsongkhapa. Therefore, he must be very learned but no -one came to listen to his teachings. So 
he had to perform a ritual which involved waving a wand to trap all the positive conditions. He 
shouted,  “May you bring the fortunate disciples  to me.”  
 From the side of the student, it may not be conducive if there are only two or three persons 
attending class. Normally, it is more encouraging when you see more people in class. This also 
encourages oneself to continue the class as a group. It does help. But if you come to a class 
with only a few people,  it may not be so helpful to one’s mind. We are all from the same class. 
We are part of the Basic Program. On an individual level, when we see our classmates, we 
should understand that they are a  kind of support to our studies and are one of the conducive 
factors for us to continue in our studies. Since that is the case, then it is important to have 
mutual respect for one another.  
 
At this present moment, we are experiencing the situation in whic h all the conducive factors 
and conditions are there for us to study. Since the conditions are there, then we have to try as 
much as possible to attend classes and while we are here, we should try as much as possible to listen attentively. Also, we should read the text.   
It is important to make it a point to attend the classes regularly without missing any of the classes. However, if one really cannot put aside the time on a particular day, then of course, nothing can be done. But we should keep the goal o f wanting to study in our minds and with 
this goal in mind, we have to put in the effort to come to classes continuously, without missing any of the classes. If you don’t come to classes continuously, on a regular basis but only attend classes from time to  time, I think it is difficult to learn anything.  
 
Geshe -la: Maybe I should just tell you my own experience. When I was studying in Sera Je, I 
almost never missed  a class, debate session or puja, except when I was very sick and could not 
move. Then that is  a different story.  
 
One time I went for a holiday in Nepal to visit my parents and I couldn’t get back in time for the classes and I had to miss classes for one particular subject. I knew all the other subjects quite well, but somehow I was not good at t hat particular subject. I feel I still don’t know and was not 
comfortable with that subject. Even though I continued with the class and listened to the 
teacher,  somehow I cannot really grasp and still have my doubts with that subject.  Sometimes 
I  regret  missing those classes. I can still remember  that.  
 
 
Lesson  3                           Page 13 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Different people may have different ways of studying. For me, I must listen, I must debate and 
discuss. Normally, I don’t listen to the recordings and also, I don’t really keep notes. My way of learning is through listening and discussing. My point is that because of having missed the 
classes for that particular subject, I am still ‘blur’ (unclear) about it. To me, it is extremely important that if I want to learn, I shouldn’t miss class. This is my own experience.  
 It is important to come to class continuously. Not only that, you need to read and you also need 
to discuss. Only after that will you have some kind of understanding and you won’t forget the 
subject easily. If you just listen but don’t discuss or don’t rea d again, you may understand it 
today and tomorrow but after two or three days later, you would forget what you had learnt or what you had heard. To study, it is good to listen and then read and then to have discussions. That is important. If you do that co ntinuously, I think you will have some kind of stable 
understanding.  
 Also, I see some people writing lots of notes. I am not saying this is not good as different people may have different methods. But for me, this is useless. You can’t concentrate fully as you write. You won’t be able to  concentrate well. After writing the notes, you go back and maybe study them for a few times. But normally, we write the notes and then close [the book] and then we write again in the next class and close [the book]. Some times it is good to keep some remarks or 
some kind of short notes or points. Then it is beneficial.   
I am just talking about my own experiences. That doesn’t mean that it is good for everyone as 
everyone has their different methods of learning.  Whatever works best for you, try and learn that way.  
 
**************************  
 In what mandala is the empowerment bestowed? It is permitted to bestow the empowerment either in a mandala made of colored particles or one painted on cloth and so forth or for some special persons in an absorption mandala.  
 A sand mandala, painted cloth or photocopied picture of the mandala is commonly used. When the person conferring the initiation has attained stable concentration, without having to rely on a basis of attainment ei ther in a form of a sand or painted mandala, he can visualise the 
entire mandala by using his powers of concentration. On the basis of that visualised mandala, 
the vajra master confers the initiation upon his disciples. But this is not something that is 
commonly done. The concentration mandala is only used or reserved for special persons. There 
is also a three -dimensional erected mandala but generally speaking, initiations are not 
conferred using this kind of mandala. I think the Kalachakra initiation is th e only exception.  
 There is no body mandala and so forth, because in the case of the three lower classes of tantra, the conventions of the body mandala, relative bodhichitta mandala, lotus -of-the mother 
mandala and the ultimate bodhichitta mandala are not  mentioned. The reason for this is that 
these four (types of mandalas) are attributes of Highest Yoga Tantra only.  
 
 
Lesson  3                           Page 14 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The body mandala does not refer merely to placing different deities on different parts of the 
body. For example in the practice of Vajrabhai rava (Yamantaka), there is a visualisation of 
placing various deities on different parts of the body. But it is not said that Yamantaka has the practice of the body mandala. In the Guhyasamaja practice, there is a practice of the body mandala, but there is n’t an initiation into the body mandala of Guhyasamaja whereas in the 
Heruka Chakrasamvara practice, there is an initiation into the body mandala of Heruka. What then does the practice of body mandala mean? An actual practice of the body mandala 
involves visualising different parts of the body transforming into different parts of the celestial 
mansion. That is what is  meant by the practice of body mandala.   The relative or conventional bodhichitta mandala is only found in highest yoga tantra and refers to  the secret substances of the father and mother.  
 The bhaga mandala refers to the secret lotus of the mother.  
 The ultimate bodhichitta mandala refers to the final unification of no more learning.  
 Generally when we hear the word “mandala,” we usually h ave the idea that it refers to the 
celestial mansion with its four doors and four sides. But this is not necessarily so. Rather the word “mandala” literally means the place from which you take the essence.   
What empowerments are bestowed? Only the vase em powerment (is bestowed). The three 
higher empowerments do not exist in the three lower classes of tantra.  
 
The three higher initiations are:  
1. the secret initiation  
2. the wisdom initiation  
3. the word initiation  
 
There is difference in the number of empowerments (given) in the four classes of Tantra. Action Tantra merely has the water and crown empowerments plus the final (empowerment of) ritual objects. Performance Tantra has as well as the first two (empowerments ), just the 
vajra, bell and name empowerments (which constitute) the five knowledge empowerments plus the final (empowerment of) ritual objects. Yoga Tantra has as well as those, just the vajra master empowerment plus the final (empowerment of) ritual obje cts. Highest Yoga Tantra has 
as well as those, the three higher empowerments, (thus making) all four empowerments. In the specific Highest Yoga Tantra, the Kalachakra Tantra, there are seven empowerments as if entering childhood, the four higher empowerments, the four greatly higher empowerments, and the empowerment of the great vajra master lord, making sixteen empowerments.  
 Still, the Vajra Rosary of Mandala Rites states that in Action and Performance Tantras, the five knowledge empowerments are bestowed.  
 There are four classes of Tantra:  
1. Action Tantra  
2. Performance Tantra   
 
Lesson  3                           Page 15 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
3. Yoga Tantra and  
4. Highest Yoga Tantra  
There is a difference in the number of initiations given in the four classes of tantra. For 
example, in Action Tantra, only the water and crown initiations are given together with the final empowerment of ritual objects, for example, one is given the seven  royal possessions of 
the wheel turning kings and then the eight auspicious signs.  
 
Final empowerment of Ritual Objects (mtha’ rten): A type of empowerment given for breath 
and auspiciousness. It is bestowed by cards bearing pictures of deities, mandalas, the seven precious royal emblems, the eight auspicious signs, the eight auspicious substances etc . 
 “Still, the Vajra Rosary of Mandala Rites states  that in Action and Performance Tantras, the five 
knowledge empowerments are bestowed”: It is mentioned earl ier in Action Tantra, it is 
sufficient to confer the water and crown initiations but  it is not incorrect also to bestow the vajra, bell and name initiations in the Action Tantra initiation.  
 1.1.1.2  KEEPING THE VOWS AND  COMMITMENTS PURE AFT ER BECOMING A  VESSEL  
 If one is a suitable basis for the individual emancipation vows, one should take any of the seven types of vows or at the very least, take on the ethics of abandoning the ten nonvirtuous actions as a basis.  
 The outline states that after becoming a suitable vessel, one should keep the vows and commitments purely. If one is a suitable basis for the pratimoksha vows, then one should take 
any of the seven types of vows. The vows have eight categories but only seven is enumerated here. The seven types of pratimoksha vows that are enumerated here are the vows of the:  
1) fully ordained monk  
2) fully ordained nun  
3) novice monk  
4) novice nun  5) probational nun (trainee nun)  
6) layman   7) lay woman  
 The eighth category of pratimoksha vows  is the near abiding vows which refer to the 
pratimoksha vows that are taken for only a day, that is, they last only  for a day and night. I guess because it is only taken for a day, that is why is it is not counted here as one of the vows that is to be co nsidered.  
 Ideally a person who wishes to take a tantric initiation should have taken one of these seven types of pratimoksha vows. You should be someone who falls into one of these categories. If not, at the very least, the basis for taking an initiation  should be the practice of ethics, that is, 
abandoning the ten non -virtuous actions.  
 
 
Lesson  3                           Page 16 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The vows that are to be kept at the time of the empowerment are only the bodhisattva vows 
because, in (the case of) Action and Performance Tantra, there are no tantric v ows to be kept. 
Due to this, the root downfalls to be guarded (against) are none other than the bodhisattva root downfalls. Nevertheless, there are many specific mantra commitments to be kept. This is understood from the quotation of the well accomplished tantras in the Great Stages of Mantra.  
 As for the root downfalls, one should look them up in the Central Path to Enlightenment . 
Having come to know these, one must definitely put effort into not being polluted by the root downfalls. Even if one gets polluted by other faults, one must not leave it as it is without thinking anything about it. One needs to restore at night those downfalls that occurred during the day and to restore in the day, (down)falls that occurred during the night and to purify them thro ugh confession as is mentioned in the Great Stages of Mantra.  
 
Up to this point, at the very least, you should know that:  
• in Action and Performance Tantras, the initiation is conferred using either the sand mandala 
(more specifically, a mandala made of  coloured particles) or a cloth mandala.  
• the two initiations that are conferred in Action and Performance Tantras are the wa ter and 
crown initiations.  
• the vows that are taken for the initiations of Action and Performance Tantras are the 
bodhisattvas vows and what have to be guarded against are the bodhisattva root downfalls.  
 
What is the nature (entity) of an initiation? The in itiation consists of two entities: - 
1. the entity of consciousness and  
2. the entity of the non -associated compositional factors  
 In Action Tantra, in the water initiation, the water is the initiation substance that is poured into the vase. On the basis of coming into physical contact with the vase and water, one generates the wisdom of great bliss in one’s mental continuum. This gen eration of the wisdom of great 
bliss is the initiation of the entity of consciousness. This water initiation purifies the mental stains and  leaves the potential in the mind to actualise the dharmakaya (truth body). Leaving this imprint in the mind is the initiation of the entity of the non -associated compositional 
factors.  
 Whether or not we actually receive the initiation depends on whether we understand what the vajra master is saying. When the vajra master introduces and gives the initiation, we need t o 
understand what he is saying. For example, when we are given the vase and water, the vajra 
master says, “When the vase and the initiation substances touch you, think that you are 
experiencing great bliss.” This is done through belief. This belief is the entity of consciousness.  
 When you generate the thought, “I am now generating great bliss,” this plants an imprint in your mind that leaves a potential in the mind to actualise the dharmakaya. This imprint is the entity of the non- associated compositional factors.  
 There may be many people present at an initiation but everyone receives the initiation at different levels. Only the best disciples generate the wisdom of great bliss in their continua. 
 
Lesson  3                           Page 17 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The rest of the disciples will receive the initiation by thinking that such bliss is generated. At the 
very least, at the most basic entry level, in order to receive the initiation, when the vajra master introduces the great initiation, when he says, “T his is the initiation being given. Now 
you have received this initiation,” one must understand what the vajra master is saying and 
generate the belief and think, “This is happening. I am receiving the initiation. I am experiencing this bliss.” If this is not done, then one does not receive the initiation.  
 
This is a  funny story. A man came with a big box of butter to an initiation. At the end of the 
initiation, he brought this box of butter to the Lama and told the Lama, “Now, Lama, please 
visualise that I am offering this box of butter to you and also visualise that  you have received 
this butter.” After saying this to the Lama, he left with the box of butter!  
 As mentioned earlier, there are four classes of Tantra:  
• In Tantra, there is the method of transforming desire into the path and the four Tantric 
classes are differentiated by the various means in which desire is taken into the path.  
• In the Hinayana, no exception is made for the desire or attachment which is seen only as an 
object of abandonment. The Hinayanists are taught the methods to abandon desire completely.  
● In the causal perfection vehicle (Mahayana Sutra), although there is no mention of taking 
desire into the path, nevertheless desire is not viewed as a bad thing and there are exceptions where desire can be used as a tool to benefit sentient beings.  
• In Mahayana Tantra, by taking desire into the path, desire is eliminated in  Tantric practice. 
An analogy would be the example of an insect that is born from the wood which ends up eating the entire piece of wood. Likewise, through the Tantric path that is generated from desire, that path overcomes  desire.  
 The four different ways in which desire is taken into the path are as follows:   
In Action Tantra , the trainee generates desire from gazing at a visualised goddess and then 
brings that desire into the p ath, the entity of which is non- dual profundity and clarity. The 
object here is not an actual goddess but a visualised one.  
 The term, “bringing or transforming desire into the path” should be analysed for its actual meaning. Does desire itself actually t ransform into the path? I guess the meaning is that 
through the desire that arises from gazing at the visualised goddess, one experiences bliss. One then transforms that bliss into the path. The trainee who is practising Action Tantra would only have the a bility to employ this method of transforming the desire that arises from gazing at the 
visualised goddess into the path.   
  In Performance Tantra , in addition to bringing the desire that arises from gazing at the 
visualised goddess into the path, the trai nee is also able to bring the desire that arises from 
smiling at the visualised goddess into the path.  
 In Yoga Tantra, in addition to bringing the desire that arises from gazing or smiling at the 
visualised goddess into the path, the trainee is also able to bring the desire that arises from holding hands with or embracing the visualised goddess into the path.  
 
Lesson  3                           Page 18 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
In the three lower classes of Tantra, the desire that is brought into the path is in relation to a visualised goddess, not a real living person.  
 In Highest Yoga Tantra, the object is not a visualised goddess but an actual person. The trainee 
has the ability to bring the desire that arises from sexual union (literally, the coming together of the two sexual organs) with a real woman into the path.  
 One has to understand the above points carefully, especially with regards to the bringing of the desire that arises from sexual union into the path in relation to the practice of Highest Yoga Tantra. Otherwise, there may be the danger of equating this prac tice with ordinary sexual 
activity.  
 We should understand that the suitable basis for receiving the initiation is that one should be observing one of the seven types of pratimoksha vows. This is very clear. If that is not possible, in order for one to rec eive the initiation, at the very least one must avoid the ten non -virtuous 
actions. Further explanation on this particular point will come later. The main point is to avoid the danger of having the wrong idea that ordinary sexual relationships can be relat ed to the 
practise of Highest Yoga Tantra. It is not like that at all.  
 As mentioned earlier, the suitable basis for receiving the initiation is to keep one of the seven 
types of pratimoksha vows. The supreme pratimoksha vows are the vows of the fully ordained 
monk. This means that a celibate ordained monk does not engage in any sexual activity. If that person engages in sexual activity, then that person would not become a suitable basis for 
receiving the initiation.  
 One of the reasons for the four cla sses of Tantra is because of the different ways of bringing 
desire into the path. There are also different ways to explain the reasons for the four classes of Tantra. We will cover them later.  
 What is the actual meaning then of “transforming desire into the path?” Does this mean that the desire is actually generated into the entity of the path? If that is the case, are we saying that that desire will carry on to enlightenment?  
 Question: During a Kalachakra initiation, it seems that I heard His Holiness t he Dalai Lama tell 
the Theravadan monks that they should not take the initiation as it may cause them to break their vows. Would this be correct?  
Answer:  I don’t think it has to do with breaking the vows if indeed His Holiness actually 
mentioned such a thi ng. I guess it is from the perspective of their familiarity and affinity with 
the Theravadan tradition that may make them  unsuitable vessels as it might be difficult for them to accept such practices.   When we look at the vinaya that is practiced in the Theravadan and the Mahayana traditions, apart from some minor differences, the precepts and the vows are exactly the same. It does not mean that there is some special allowance for those practicing in the Mahayana tradition. 
 
Lesson  3                           Page 19 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The fully ordained monk who is practicing Tantra also needs to keep the vinaya, that is, all the 
vows purely.  There is no exception.  
 Question: Who would be a suitable recipient for the Kalachakra initiation?  
Answer : It is the same for any initiation. As mentioned clearly in many text s, the person who 
would be a suitable recipient of Tantric initiations should be a bodhisattva i.e. someone who has bodhicitta. For someone who aspires to take a Highest Yoga Tantra initiation, t he basis is to 
keep any of the seven types of pratimoksha vow s. The very basic foundation is one must avoid 
the ten non -virtuous actions and one must have the ability to keep the bodhisattva vows.   
 For those taking Highest Yoga Tantra initiation, in addition to the above, one must keep the Tantric vows purely. If one is able to fulfil all these criteria, one is qualified to take the 
Kalachakra initiation or any other Highest Yoga Tantra initiation.  
   Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  3                           Page 20 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 4     DATE: 26TH FEBRUARY 2009  
 
In the last class, we mentioned that an  Action Tantra initiation is conferred on the basis of 
either a sand or cloth mandala. The initiations that are conferred are the water and crown 
initiations. The vows that are taken during the initiation are the bodhisattva vows after which the downfalls to be guarded against are the bodhisattva root downfalls, of which there are 18 
and 46 transgressions or faults.  
 
We also looked at the entity/nature of the initiation. The entities are the entity of 
consciousness a nd the entity of the non -associated compositional factors. This is something 
that you must keep in mind because whether you  actually receive the initiation or not does depend on whether you understand the vajra master. When he is giving the initiation, yo u 
should at least generate the thought and belief, “Now I am receiving this initiation. Now I have received the initiation.” This is the basic minimum without which it is difficult to say that you 
have received the initiation.  
 
We take on vows and commitments (or samaya in Sanskrit, sometimes also  translated as 
secret pledge in English) during the initiation. Is there any difference between vows and 
commitments? In one of Lama Tsongkhapa’s  texts explaining the meaning of empowerments, 
he says that vows a nd samaya are one entity but two isolates, that is, they are one but they can 
be differentiated conceptually.  
 “Samaya” refers to something that you do not transgress, that is, you do not go beyond the established boundary. “Vow” refers to not doing something that is not good. Samaya and vow are mutually inclusive but they are not the same. We have discussed the difference between 
one and different some time ago. For example, “impermanent” and “product”  refer to the 
same thing. Someone who has an alias in addition to his name means he has two names but 
they both refer to the same person.   In the last lesson, we looked at the four classes of Tantra and how in all of them,  desire is taken into the path. However, the way this is done varies. The purpose of using desire on the 
path is to eliminate desire. That is the goal. All the four classes teach the inseparability of deity 
yoga and the meditation on emptiness:   
• In order for the Action Tantra trainee to generate the inseparable yoga of the meditation on 
emptiness and the visualisation of oneself as the deity, that trainee has to rely on external 
activities such as washing, eating pure foods and performing different hand mudras.  
• In Performance Tantra, there is a balance between such external activities and internal 
meditation.  
• In Yoga Tantra, there is only a slight emphasis on external activities. The main focus is on the 
inner yoga of meditation on emptiness together with the visualisation of oneself as the deity.  
• In Highest Yoga Tantra, the trainee does not  rely on external activities but completely 
focuses on the inner yoga with the practice of meditation on emptiness and deity yoga.  
 
Is it all right for someone who is not a suitable receptacle to receive the initiation or someone 
 
Lesson  4                           Page 21 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
who does not aspire to receive the initiation to enter or to see the mandala? Sometimes, this 
question arises. The text indicates very clearly that such people are allowed to enter and see the mandala. Simply by entering and seeing the mandala, one is able to purify obscurations  and 
negativities that have been accumulated over many eons. It also places  positive i mprints on 
that person’s mind to practice Tantra in the future. This is something that you should remember.  
 
1.1.1.3  THE WAY TO PERFORM P RIOR APPROXIMATION W HILE ABIDING  IN THE 
COMMITMENTS  
 
There are two (types of absorption):  
 
1. Absorption with recitation  
2. Absorption not reliant on recitation ( Pg. 3 of the root text )  
 In the beginning, one must train one’s mind on the shared path. On that basis, one enters the mandala and receives the initiation. After having received the initiation, one must protect all the vows and samaya that one has taken. Only after this does one perform the approximation (or retreat).  
 1.1.1.3.1   ABSORPTION WITH RECI TATION  
 One generates oneself as the deity by means of the six deities
1 and having invited the wisdom 
beings (to the place) in front of oneself, one makes offerings and so forth. One recites mantra 
without deterioration of the four branches2, through combining life -force exertion and 
retention. ( Pg. 4 of the root text)  
 
The four branches are:  
1. the self basis  
2. the other basis  
3. the mind basis and  
4. the sound basis.  
On the basis of these four branches, one “ recites mantra without deterioration of the four 
branches through combining life -force exertion and retention .” 
 
Though the same term ‘life -force exertion’ is explained in the three lower classes of tantra, in 
the cycle of the Arya system of Guhyasamaja and in the Wheel of Time (Kalachakra), the 
meaning (in each case) is different.  
 
1 Six deities: 1) empty deity ( stong pa’ i lha ), 2) letter deity (yi ge ’i lha ), 3) sound deity ( sgra ’i lha ), 4) form deity 
(gzugs kyi lha), 5) seal  deity ( phyag rgya’ i lha ) and 6) sign deity ( mtshan ma1i lha)  
2 Four branches of recitation (in the context of Action Tantra): 1) repetition while concentrating on the basis of 
sound ( sgr’'i gsi la gzhol ba), 2) repetition while concentrating on the basis of mind ( sems kyi gzhi la gzhol ba), 3) 
repetition while concentrating on the basis of an other ( gzhan gyi gzhi la gzhol ba) and 4) repetition while 
concentration on the basis of oneself ( bdag gi gzhi la gzhol ba).  
 
 
Lesson  4                           Page 22 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The meaning of ‘life -force exertion’ as explained in the context of the three lower classes of 
Tantra exists because the wind (that circulates) in exhalation and inhalation through the doors 
of the senses and so forth, and the pores of head and body hairs is the ‘life force’. ‘Exertion’ is when mindful of other focal objects, one is mindful of being distracted to them. When these two are held interna lly without external dispersal, this is the meaning of retaining ‘life -force 
exertion’. ( Pg. 4 of the root text )  
 
We now look at the meaning of the phrase “life -force exertion” in the context of the three 
lower classes of Tantra.  
• “Life -force” refers to th e subtle wind that moves in and out of the body through the hair 
pores, sense organs and so forth.  
• “Exertion” refers to the distracted mind that wanders to all sorts of different objects.  
 
“Retaining life -force exertion ” means to retain that subtle wind internally. With respect to 
exertion, it means to keep the mind inward by focusing on some object. In essence, it means not letting the wind out of the body but retaining it internally within the body and not letting the mind be distracted with discursive thoughts but retaining it internally by focusing on some object.  
 By combining life -force exertion and retention, one then recites the mantra without 
deterioration of the four branches in Action Tantra.   The first of the four branches is the basis of sel f. This means one generates oneself as the deity 
by means of the six deities.  Here we are talking about the process of deity yoga in Action 
Tantra which will be helpful in future when we do retreat. The process of generating oneself as the deity in Action Tantra is  always by way of the six deities.  
  
The first of the six deities is the ultimate deity  (or the empty deity). When we generate 
ourselves as the deity in Action Tantra, we meditate on the emptiness of the person who is meditating and the emptine ss of the deity which is the object of our cultivation, i.e., reflecting 
on the meditator and that which is being meditated upon as empty of inherent existence. These two are equal in the sense of not existing inherently. Within that emptiness of inherent existence, these two are inseparable in nature.   From this we can see how the foundation of Tantric practice is completely dependent on the practice of Sutra. This is because whatever deity one meditates on in Tantric practice, the meditation always start s with the meditation on the emptiness of inherent existence. The 
meditation is done through purifying everything into emptiness and then reflecting on the emptiness of inherent existence. We do not meditate on an inherently existent deity!  
 
The emptiness that is meditated upon at the beginning of all deity practices is the emptiness 
that is clarified by Nagarjuna and asserted by the Consequence Middle Way School. Tantra 
does not teach an emptiness that is more profound than that taught in Sutra. Therefore,  in 
order for us to do pure Tantric practice, we must first study and understand emptiness and realise it. Whether Tantra becomes profound or not depends entirely on whether we have, as our foundation, the understanding of Sutra.  
 
Lesson  4                           Page 23 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
We have to understand why deity yoga is said to be very powerful. It is because the meditation on emptiness is always done at the beginning of the practice of deity yoga. That meditation on emptiness is the antidote to our negative emotions and is how our negative emotions can be  
weakened.  
 If we practise deity yoga without any understanding of emptiness and then visualise the 
ordinary self as the deity thinking that it is this ordinary body which transforms into the deity, 
that practice will never help us to weaken our negative emotions as it cannot act as an antidote to our negative emotions. In fact, there is a danger that such a practice can become a condition for negative emotions such as pride to arise. It is only the practice of the meditation on emptiness that makes deity yoga an antidote to negative emotions.  
 With respect to the view of emptiness one is supposed to meditate on in  Tantric practice, one can meditate on emptiness in accordance with the Mind Only School or the Middle Way School. The point is that deity yoga is done on the basis of an ascertainment of the view of emptiness. On that basis, one generates oneself as the deity.   So, in the ultimate deity, one meditates on the emptiness of oneself who is  meditating on the deity as well as the emptiness of the dei ty that one is meditating upon. These two are equal in 
the sense of being empty of inherent existence. The mind (or wisdom) that ascertains the 
emptiness of the self and the emptiness of the deity is transformed into  the aspect of a full 
moon disc.   
In this particular text, the order of the six deities is that the letter deity follows the empty deity. 
However, in practice, the empty deity is followed by the sound deity. We visualise, resonating 
in space, the sound of the mantra of the deity. Although in t he aspect of sound, in reality, it is 
the deity we are meditating on taking the aspect of sound. We concentrate on that sound.  
 Next is the letter deity . Here, we visualise the sound of the mantra taking on the form of the 
letters of the mantra which settles on the moon disc we had visualised earlier.  
 We visualise light rays emitting from the letters of the mantra. At the tip of each light ray is the deity we are meditating on. These deities work for the welfare of sentient beings, purifying 
their negative karma and so forth. On  some of the tips of these light rays, countless offerings 
are made to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. Then, all the light rays that are emanated 
absorb  back into the letters of the mantra on the moon disc. The moon disc together with the syllables then transform into the deity that we are meditating on, e.g., in the practice of Chenrezig, we transform ourselves into Chenrezig This is the fourth deity, the form deity .  
  Next is the seal deity  (or mudra deity). Having completely transformed into the deity that we 
are meditating on, we perform the respective hand gesture (or mudra) in accordance with the mudra associated with tha t particular lineage of Action Tantra. In the abbreviated way, we 
touch the three different points of our body with the relevant mudra. In the extensive way, we touch the seven points of our body and in the middling way, we touch the five different points 
 
Lesson  4                           Page 24 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
of our body in accordance with Lama Tsongkhapa’s Great Stages of Mantra, which are:  
1. the heart  
2. the point between the eyebrows  
3. the throat  
4. the right shoulder  
5. the left shoulder  
The purpose of touching these different points of the body with the mudra is to bl ess ourselves.  
 
At this point, there is the practice of invoking the wisdom being to merge with oneself as the deity. This is followed by inviting the initiation deities to confer the initiation upon oneself as the deity. This is one way of doing it but, in another tradition, it is said that it is not necessary to do this. We should  follow the text of whatever deity approximation we are doing. In the practice text, there is usually the invocation of the wisdom being that dissolves into oneself and then inviting the initiation deities to confer empowerment on  oneself as the deity.  
 Next is the practice of the sign deity . Having completed the above visualisations, one generates 
clear appearance of oneself as the deity and, at the same time, cultivates divin e pride and, 
without any distraction, one thinks, “I am the actual deity.”  
 This is how one generates  oneself as the deity by means of the six deities  in Action Tantra. 
From here, we can see that the deities do not necessarily refer to the deities we usually think 
of such as having faces and arms and so forth.   
 
We are doing the approximation of the deity on the basis of the self generation practice and 
then generating the clear appearance and cultivating the divine pride of ourselves as a deity. We focus  on that as long as possible. When we become tired, in order to rest, we visualise a 
mantra garland in our hearts and visualise light rays emitting from the mantra garland going out to work for the welfare of sentient beings and making offerings to all the  buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. With this visualisation, we recite the mantra as many times as we wish.  
 In the process of generating ourselves as the deity, we have invoked and absorbed the wisdom being into ourselves So, before we end the session, we make re quests to the wisdom being 
who is abiding at our heart. We visualize the wisdom being leaving our heart and abiding in the space in front of us. We make offerings, offer praises and make requests such as, “Please bestow upon me and all sentient beings all the common and supreme attainments.” We then 
recite the hundred syllables mantra to pacify any faults and omissions we had made during the practice.  Then we visualise the wisdom being returning to his natural abode.  
We hold onto the divine pride of onese lf as the commitment (or samaya) being and then we 
can end the session.   
 In most of the deity practices of Action Tantra, there isn’t any practice of close dissolution though this practice does appear in some Action Tantra texts. There is such a practice  in the 
deity practices of Highest Yoga Tantra at the end of the sadhana.  
 There is a reason for bringing up this question of whether there is the practice of close dissolution. Sometimes, people do ask, “When I have generated myself as a deity, how do I 
 
Lesson  4                           Page 25 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
apologise for the mistakes and purify them?” Here, in the practice of Action Tantra, we 
visualise the wisdom being leaving from the heart of oneself as the deity and abiding in the space in front of us. It is in relation to that wisdom being that we then r equest for forgiveness 
for any mistakes made during the practice.  
 What we have discussed so far is the way of doing the approximation of the deity by depending on self generation alone, i.e., the self basis.  Here, in Action Tantra, it is taught that practising 
the self generation is sufficient for the approximation of the deity. It is not necessary to do the 
practice of the front generation.   It is important for you to remember of what we have discussed today because the same questions arise all the time. “How should I do the retreat? What should I visualise? What are the practices to be done during the retreat?” and so forth. We have discussed all this today. There is nothing more than that. Of course there are different ways of reciting the mantra in relation to the four branches and so far we have only covered the first branch, the self basis.   
   
   Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  4                           Page 26 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 5     DATE: 3RD MARCH 2009  
 
We usually recite prayers before each class, starting with the prayers on prostrations and so 
forth to the founder, Guru Shakyamuni Buddha and remembering the qualities of his holy body, 
speech and mind. In this way,  we cultivate and generate faith in and  respect for the Buddha.  
 
It is important that this happens while reciting these prayers. When we can do this well, even 
for a short time while reciting these prayers, we will be able to accumulate an immeasurable 
amount of merit very easily. This is some thing we should understand and remember and 
therefore, we should recite these prayers as well as we can.  
 
Do not commit any non- virtuous actions,  
Perform only perfect virtuous actions,  
Subdue your mind thoroughly –  
This is the teaching of the Buddha.  
 A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, a bubble,  
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud –   
See conditioned things as such!  
 
These two verses are the essence of the Buddha’s teachings. Relating the first  verse to the paths  of the persons of the three capacities, “ Do not commit any non- virtuous actions”  shows 
the path of the persons of small capacity and “ Perform only perfect virtuous actions ” shows the 
path of the persons of middling capacity. Here, the word “ perfect ” refer s to virtues that are the 
causes of liberation, that is, virtues created that are conjoined with the motivation of renunciation.  
 “Subdue your mind thoroughly ” indicates the path of the persons of great capacity and refers 
to purifying the mind of the afflictions together with their predispositions, i.e., eliminating the two obstructions which will subdue the mind thoroughly. This line can relate to both the causal 
perfection vehicle (Mahayan Sutra) and the resultant vajra vehicle (Tantra).  
 
Through these  three lines of this verse, we can understand all the paths of the persons of small, 
middling and great capacities. They also include both the Mahayana Sutra and Tantra. All of 
these are the teachings of the Buddha.  
 
 We will discuss the meaning of the nex t verse in the future. That verse indicates the practice of 
emptiness and the reflection on impermanence. One then concludes with the dedication 
prayer that starts, “ Through these merits may sentient beings attain the rank of all seeing…. ”  
 According to t radition, a mandala offering is made to request for the teachings as, in general, 
teachings are only granted upon request. Particularly here, in order to receive Mahayana 
 
Lesson  5                           P age 27 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
teachings, especially the Tantric teachings, the teachings can only be granted upon m aking 
request three times. At the time of making the mandala offering, one can visualise offering the 
mandala to Guru Shakyamuni Buddha. If you are able to do this, you will be able to accumulate an immeasurable amount of merit.  
 The point here is to encourage you so that whenever you recite such prayers or when you are making mandala offerings, you do so mindfully while reflecting on their meaning. Then, they 
will be very beneficial.   
 
*****************  
We have been looking at the recitation of mantra  without deterioration of the four branches. 
The first branch is the self basis where one generates oneself as the deity through the process 
of the six deities. This process is the same in both Action and Performance Tantra. When one is doing the approxima tion of the deity, one performs the approximation by doing the self 
generation practice by means of the six deities. Remembering this point would be beneficial. When we can understand how the practice of self generation is done by means of the six deities,  then whatever practice text on Action Tantra we take up, we would be able to 
understand it fairly easily because it is all there in the text.  
 The last deity of the practice of self generation that is done by means of the six deities is the sign deity. H aving generated oneself completely as the deity, one then generates clear 
appearance of oneself as the deity and, at the same time, cultivates the divine pride of oneself as the deity. When we say we perform an approximation of deity, it is through this cl ear 
appearance and divine pride that we approximate (become closer to) the deity.  
 One cultivates the divine pride and clear appearance of oneself as the deity through combining it with retaining the life -force exertion, i.e., by restraining the wind from  leaving the body 
through the hair pores and so forth and  cutting off all discursive thoughts. We should try to achieve such a clear appearance of ourselves as the deity that it feels like we are ‘seeing’ it directly with our mental eyes, so to speak, and  that we are able to touch it.  
 Cultivating the clear appearance and divine pride of oneself as the deity is the main practice during the approximation of the deity. When we are exhausted from the practice, we can rest by reciting the mantra of the deity.   
  
The next branch is the other basis  which refers to the front generation. We visualise the 
inestimable mansion in the space in front of us. (This is often translated as the celestial mansion but the correct translation is inestimable mansion).  
Inside t he mansion, one generates the commitment (or samaya) being and then invokes the 
wisdom beings which enter and dissolve into the commitment being. If the practice of generating the commitment being is not in the text, then one can proceed directly to the invocation of the wisdom beings to take their places inside the mansion and one then makes 
offerings and praises to them. This practice is usually found in the relevant texts. Many of you have done the Nyung -na practice so you should remember the practice of  the front generation 
that is done in that practice. One then make offerings and praises to the front generation deity with the practice of the seven limbs and so forth.  
 
Lesson  5                           P age 28 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
The next branch is the mind basis which refers to visualising a moon disc at the hear t of oneself 
as the deity and at the heart of the front generation deity. On those moon discs, we place the mantra  garland that we are going to recite. The letters of the mantra on the moon discs is the 
sound basis .  
 On page 4 of the root text, it says, “One recites mantra without deterioration of the four 
branches” .  The recitation of the mantra is done with all the four branches:  
1) the self basis, where we generate ourselves as the deity;  
2) the other basis, where the front generation of the deity is done;   
3) the mind basis, where in the hearts of ourselves as the deity and the front generation deity, 
we visualise a moon disc; and  
4) the sound basis, where on both of these moon discs, we visualise the letters of the mantra that we are going to recite.  
 Here, we  are talking about the way to recite the mantra through the four branches. It is not 
necessary that all mantra recitations have to be done in this way. But because we are 
discussing the recitation of mantra through the four branches, we need to know what t he four 
branches are.  
 There are two ways of performing the recitation (or repetition) of the mantra:  
1) Reciting the mantra by observing the form of the letters of the mantra.  
1. Recitation observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front and 2. Recitation observing the form of the letters at one’s own heart  
2) Reciting the mantra by observing the sound of the mantra.  
 When we say recitation observing the form of the letters, what exactly is the letter? Is the letter the sound or not?   Geshela: What do you think? What is a letter? What is ‘A’? Is ‘A’ shape?. The sound ‘A,’ is that ‘A’?  When you write ‘A’ like that, is that ‘A’ or is that the sound ‘A’? When you say form, there 
are many different kinds of form….Seems like you still have n’t realised ‘A’, isn’t it? I also don’t 
know what is ‘A’.  
 When impermanent phenomena are divided, there is form (or matter). When form is divided, 
there are five: visual, sound, smell, taste, touch. These five are all forms.  
 
RECITING THE MANTRA BY OBSE RVING THE FORM OF TH E LETTERS OF THE MAN TRA 
Recitation observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front  
During this recitation, we focus on the front generation deity in the heart of which  there is a moon disc. On that moon disc are th e letters of the mantra. By  observing these three together, 
we then recite the mantra.  
 There are two ways in which the mantra can be recited: (1) mental repetition, i.e., silently or (2) whispered repetition, i.e., softly with sound. The main purpose for  mantra repetition through 
the four branches is to develop single -pointed concentration. To develop concentration, we 
 
Lesson  5                           P age 29 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
need to restrain the life -force exertion. Here we do the mental repetition  by observing the 
form of the letters. We do so through reciting  the mantra mentally and combining it with the 
life-force exertion and retention to stop the movement of the wind.  
 
With respect to the wind in the body, there is the wind in the upper and lower parts of the body. We seek to control these winds by gatheri ng them at the navel and then making them 
remain there as long as possible. Whilst  retaining the winds at the navel, one focuses on the 
front generation deity together with the moon disc at its heart together with the letters of the 
mantra on the moon dis c. By observing these three while retaining the winds at the navel, one 
performs the mental repetition.  
 In Tantric teachings, the wind (or subtle energy of the body) is the mount of the consciousness, meaning the consciousness is the rider and the wind is  like the horse. If we are unable to 
control and stop the movement of this subtle energy, then it is very difficult to stop discursive thoughts and distractions from arising. That is why we have to do this practice of life -force 
exertion and retention. In the beginning, one is only able to retain the wind for a short time but with practice, this duration can be extended. This can be achieved slowly and through such practice, one would be able to develop single -pointed concentration. When the repetition is 
done through restraining the life -force exertion, there is no room for whispered repetition. 
One can only perform the mental repetition.  
 
RECITING THE MANTRA BY OBSERVING THE FORM OF THE LETTERS OF THE MANTRA  
Recitation observing the form of the letters inside one’s heart.  
When we do this recitation in connection with the four branches, we go through the process 
described earlier.   
 When we inhale, we visualise that the moon disc with the letters of the mantra in the heart of the front generation deity comes into our heart with our breath. We then stop breathing and hold our breath. While doing this, we observe the moon disc and the l etters of the mantra and 
perform the mental recitation. The moon disc and the letters of the mantra are the two objects of observation.  
 When we are unable to hold our breath any longer, we exhale and visualise that the moon disc together with the letters  of the mantra at one’s own heart go back to the heart of the front 
generation deity. Then the process is repeated.  
   RECITING THE MANTRA BY OBSERVING THE SOU ND OF THE MANTRA  
Here, the objects of observation are not the deity’s body, the moon disc or the letters of the mantra. Rather the object of observation in this practice is the sound of the mantra which we observe as we perform the mental repetition.   
  
When we perform th is repetition observing the sound of the mantra, we are reciting the 
mantra mentally in our mind. We visualise the sound of the mantra resonating when we recite the mantra mentally whilst restraining the wind.  
 
Lesson  5                           P age 30 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Three ways of  
reciting the mantra  Objects o f observation  
RECITING THE MANTRA BY OBSERVING 
THE FORM OF THE LETT ERS OF THE 
MANTRA:   
Reciting the mantra by observing the form 
of the letters at the heart of the front 
generation deity  Front generation deity, the moon disc and the 
letters of the mantra on it  
Reciting the mantra by  observing the form 
of the letters at one’s own heart  The moon disc and the letters of the mantra on 
it (Note: we do not focus on ourselves as the 
deity)  
 
RECITING THE MANTRA BY OBSERVING 
THE SOUND OF THE MAN TRA  
The sound of the mantra  
The object of observation becomes progressively subtler and this helps in developing single -
pointed concentration.  
 
Summary  
When we perform the recitation of mantra through the four branches:  
1. First we generate ourselves as the de ity by means of the six deities. That is the self 
basis.  
2. After that, we visualise the deity in front of us, i.e., the front generation deity. That is 
the other basis .  
3. Once that is done, we visualise a moon disc at the heart of ourselves as the deity and 
the heart of the front generation deity. That is the mind basis.  
4. When that is done, we visualise the mantra garland on the moon disc at one’s heart and the heart of the front generation deity. That is the sound basis.  
When these four branches are complete d, then we perform the repetition of mantra:  
1. First, we repeat the mantra by observing the form of the letters at the heart of the front generation deity.   
2. When that is done well, we repeat the mantra by observing the form of the letters at our own heart.  
3. Only when that is done well, then we move on to the repetition observing the sound of the mantra.  
The latter practices should only be done when the earlier ones are performed well.  
 Between the whispered and mental recitations, we should first perform th e whispered 
recitation followed by the mental recitation. When reciting the mantra, we should avoid the 
following faults:  1. one should not recite the mantra too quickly  
2. one should not recite the mantra too slowly  
3. one should not recite the mantra loudly  
4. one should not recite the mantra so softly that you yourself cannot hear what you are 
 
Lesson  5                           P age 31 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
reciting  
5. one should not recite the mantra while talking  
6. the mantra should not be recited when the mind is distracted  
7. one should recite the mantra by pronouncing it cle arly.  
We should avoid these faults while reciting the mantra which are mentioned in The Tantra 
Requested by Subahu.  
 
The Susiddhi Tantra mentions the number of recitations that are required when one is 
performing the approximation of the deity.  
• For mant ras with 15 syllables or less, each syllable has to be recited 100,000 times. For 
example, if the mantra consists of ten syllables, one would have to recite 10 x 100,000 
mantras, i.e., one million recitations.  In the approximation of Tara whose mantra has  10 
syllables, we have to recite 1 million Tara mantras. If we are performing the approximation of Chenrezig and using the six -syllable mantra, OM MANI PADME HUM, then we have to do 
600,000 mantras.  
• For mantras with 16 to 32 syllables, the mantra has to b e recited 300,000 times.   
• For mantras with more than 32 syllables, e.g., for the approximation of Sangye Migtukpa, 
10,000 recitations can be counted as an approximation.  
 Action Tantra emphasises external activities especially cleanliness. So, if during the course of 
the mantra recitation one falls asleep, sneezes, yawns or breaks wind, then one would have to stop the recitation and one cannot count the mantras that one has accumulated. One would 
have to perform the ritual of blessing and cleansing onesel f. After that is done, one can then 
start the recitation again. At the end of the session, with the mudra of the vase, one offers the 
root virtues accumulated from the recitation to the deity. One leaves one’s rosary in front of 
the deity without bringing it elsewhere and stops the session.  
 Question:  
Why do we visualise the moon and not the sun disc at the heart?  
Answer :  In the mind basis, we visualise the moon disc whether it is in the heart of the deity in 
front or oneself as the deity. The entity of the moon disc is  one’s mind which we visualise in the form of a moon disc.   In certain texts, the deity has three seats: the lotus, moon and sun discs. In that context, the lotus symbolises renunciation, the moon disc symbolises bodhichitta and the sun dis c 
symbolises the wisdom realising emptiness. This is to make us understand that the deity who is 
seated on these three seats has brought to culmination these three realisations, i.e., the deity 
has completely realised renunciation, bodhichitta and the wisdom realizing emptiness.  
Question: When is the whispered recitation done?  
Answer : Whispered recitation is done in all the forms of repetition that we have discussed so 
far. We have been discussing the different forms of recitation mainly from the perspective of mental recitation. Actually, whispered recitation should be done first before the mental recitation.  
 There is the whispered repetition observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front, observing the form of letters at one’s heart and observing the sound of the mantra.  
 
Lesson  5                           P age 32 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Question:  With regards to the number of mantras that have to be accumulated in retreat, do 
we divide them between whispered and mental recitations?  
Answer : The counting is done on the basis of the whispered recitations. We do not count the 
mental recitations. The main purpose of doing the men tal recitations is to develop single -
pointed concentration.  
 
 
  Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
Vetted with Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Lesson  5                           P age 33 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 6     DATE: 5TH MARCH 2009  
 
A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubbl e, 
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud –  
See conditioned things as such!  
 
“A star ”: We should reflect on its nature which is the collection of both  appearance and 
emptiness. We can validly posit that the two truths exist in all phenomena. On the basis of any given phenomenon, there is an aspect of it that appears to the mind which is not polluted by 
grasping at true existence and at the same time, there is another aspect of that same object 
that appears to the mind that is polluted by grasping at true existence.  
 When we look at an object, e.g., a vase, how does it appear?  When a person looks at the vase, 
the vase can appear in a particular way to that person’s consciousness that is not affected by 
grasping at true existence, i.e., that consciousness is uncontaminated.  The same vase can appear differently to a consciousness that is affected by grasping at true existence, that is, a 
contaminated mind. So, one mind is affected by ignorance and the other is not.  When these 
two minds look at the same vase, the vase appears differently to them. Do these two ways of 
appearance exist in rea lity? Yes.  
 
According to the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS), the uncontaminated wisdom or the wisdom of meditative equipoise is the wisdom that directly perceives emptiness. When this wisdom directly realising the emptiness of the vase looks at the vase, only the emptiness of that vase appears to that wisdom. That emptiness of the vase is the ultimate truth.  
 The star is used to show how an uncontaminated mind or the wisdom that directly perceives emptiness perceives its object. The star is always t here in the sky but during daylight, when the 
sun is shining brightly, we do not see it.   But that does not mean the star is not there. The star does exist. In the same way, when the wisdom that directly perceives emptiness (the wisdom of  meditative equi poise) sees only emptiness, conventionalities do not appear to that wisdom. 
What appears to that wisdom is none other than the emptiness of the object of negation, 
which is a non -affirming negation. Conventionalities  do not appear to the perspective of th e 
wisdom that directly realises emptiness. Only emptiness appears and this is the ultimate truth . 
 
When the sun sets, all the stars shine brightly. This is like conventionality appearing to the conventional mind. All phenomena appear to this conventional m ind that is polluted by 
ignorance. The conventional mind (which is a mistaken mind) is polluted by ignorance but it is a valid cognition. The phenomena that are posited by conventional valid cognisers are called the conventional truth.   The two truths (ul timate truth and conventional truth) exist together on any given 
phenomenon. The ultimate truth is the phenomenon that appears to the wisdom that directly perceives emptiness. The conventional truth is the phenomenon that appears to the 
 
Lesson  6                           Page 34 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
conventional valid cogniser. Depending on which mind is looking at the particular phenomenon, 
either ultimate truth or conventional truth is perceived. Both the vase and the emptiness of the vase are of one entity. You will not be able to posit a vase that is separate from t he vase’s 
emptiness nor can you posit an emptiness of the vase that is separate from the vase. In the same way, when we reflect on the meaning of the star, it shows us how in any given phenomenon, both appearance (conventional truth) and emptiness (ultimat e truth) exist 
together as one collection.  
 Answer to question: According to the CMWS, except for the wisdom that directly realises emptiness, all other consciousnesses in the continua of sentient beings are necessarily mistaken. The consciousness that po sits conventional truth is the conventional valid cogniser.  
 
***************  
We have completed the explanation of four -branched repetition. Now I will give you a 
summary so that you can reflect on this in an easy way. Please try to keep this process in yo ur 
head when we go through the steps. Thinking and analysing are very important, especially in tantric practice where you need to use your mind for thinking, reflection and for doing retreat. Once you are clear about the process, it would be easier for you to practise it. A lot of people 
ask, “What should I think about or visualise when I am doing such a practice?” What we have discussed so far is what should be done.  
 
In the four branches of repetition, there are:  
1) the self basis  
2) the other basis  
3) the mind basis  
4) the sound basis  
 
1) The self basis  refers to how to one generates oneself as the deity.  
a. At the beginning of generating oneself as a deity, we have to reflect on the meaning of 
emptiness as clearly as we can. We meditate on how oneself as the meditator and the object that is being meditated upon, the deity, are both equal in the sense of not e xisting inherently.  
b. The mind that ascertains the meaning of emptiness is transformed into a moon disc. The 
entity of this moon disc is one’s mind in the aspect of a moon disc.  
c. We then visualise in the space above the moon disc, say, if we are doing the  Chenrezig 
practice, the sound of the mantra, Om Mani Padme Hum reverberating in the space. The 
entity of this sound is the deity Chenrezig in the aspect of the sound of the mantra resonating 
in space.  
d. That sound then settles on the moon disc in the form of the letters of the mantra in the 
relevant colour, e.g. gold.  
e. We now visualise light rays emitting from the letters of the mantra touching and purifying 
sentient beings of their negativities and obscurations.  
f. We also visualise some of these light rays making offerings to all the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas.  
g. All the light rays that were emitted now gather back into the letters of the mantra.  
h. The letters of the mantras together with the moon disc then completely transform into 
oneself as the deity Chenrezig with one face and four arms.  
 
Lesson  6                           Page 35 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
i. After one is transformed into the deity, one blesses oneself with the respective mudra of the 
lineage, touching the five points –  the heart, the space between the eyebrows, the throat, the 
right shoulder and left shoulder. One  then thinks, “Now I have become the actual deity, 
Chenrezig.”  
j. Then one focuses on the appearance of oneself as the deity as clearly as possible.  
Now go through the whole process in your mind –  what is the first thing to be done, what 
follows after that a nd so forth. This is how one performs the self generation.  
 
2) The  other basis  refers to how we generate the deity in front. We will not go into the details 
here as they are very clearly indicated in the practice text.  
• In the beginning, we generate the ma ndala in front.  
• in the centre of the mandala, we generate the deity using the same process as that 
explained for self -generation.  
• When the deity is generated in the centre of the mandala, one then thinks that the actual 
deity is residing there.   
 3) The  mind basis  refers to visualising a moon disc at the heart of ourselves as a deity.  
 4) The sound basis  refers to visualising the letters of the mantra on the moon disc. We also 
visualise at the heart of the deity in front, there is a moon disc and on tha t moon disc, there are 
the letters of the mantra.  
 
Next we do the repetition of the mantra.  
● First, we focus on the front generation deity. At the heart of that deity is a   moon disc and on 
that moon disc are the letters of the mantra to be recited. These are the three objects of 
observation. We focus on these three objects  together – the front  generation of the deity, the 
moon disc at its heart and the letters of the mantra on the moon disc.  
• If we are doing the whispered repetition, we recite the mantra softly while focusing on 
these three objects and the recitation single -pointedly and without distraction.  
• When that recitation is stable and done well, we switch to the mental recitation which is 
done in silence. While focusing on those three objects, we perform the mental recitation while restraining the life -force exertion by holding the wind at the navel. We perform the 
mental recitation for as long as we are able to hold the wind.  
• The next practice becomes subtler and is done to help us to develop single -pointed 
concentration: We focus on the moon disc and the letters of the mantra at the he art of the 
front generation deity. When we inhale, we visualise the moon disc and the letters of the 
mantra at the heart of the front generation deity entering us together with the breath. Both 
the moon disc and the letters of the mantra settle at our hear t.  
• Then one focuses the mind single -pointedly on that while holding the wind and performs 
the mental recitation.  
• This next practice is even subtler: The object of observation here is only the sound of the 
mantra at one’s heart. We don’t even think of the  moon disc and the letters of the mantra.  
• While focusing on the sound of the mantra at one’s heart, we should do whispered 
repetition.  
• When that is done well, then we switch to mental recitation while holding the wind.  
 
Lesson  6                           Page 36 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
What I have just described is ano ther way of explaining  what we have been discussing so far. 
When we just listen to all this information, we may get confused and mix everything up. So it is important to think through the whole process to make it clear in our minds.  
 If you have done the Chenrezig practice and look at the Nyung -na sadhana, a lot of what we 
have discussed appear explicitly in there. Our greatest fault is that whether we are doing 
retreat or our daily prayers, we just look at and recite the words quickly without taking the 
time to reflect on them.  If we did reflect on them, then we would definitely benefit because 
we would experience the flavour of the practice and our interest in the practice would grow. Then, naturally, we would want to do the practice and not feel that do ing our daily prayers is a 
burden.  
 This method of recitation of mantra together with the four branches is primarily aimed at developing single -pointed concentration, especially calm abiding. It is clearly mentioned in all 
the texts that the development of calm abiding is extremely important. We need the 
realisation of calm abiding in order to realise emptiness. We free ourselves from samsara through the union of calm abiding and special insight realising emptiness.  
 At the end of the session, how do we stop the repetition? During the practice, we had generated the deity in front, the moon disc at its heart together with letters of the mantra and 
the sound of the mantra reverberating from those  letters. What follows is the dissolution 
process using the exa mple of the Chenrezig practice:  
•  In the centre of the mandala is Chenrezig  
• At the heart of Chenrezig is the moon disc together with the letters of the mantra Om Mani 
Padme Hum.  
• The sound of the mantra is reverberating.  
• The sound of the mantra dissolves i nto the letters of the mantra  
• The letters of the mantra dissolves into the moon disc  
• The moon disc dissolves into the body of the front generation deity.    
• We now focus on the body of the front generation deity.  
• We then absorb the front generation Chenrezig into ourselves. There is no longer any front 
generation deity.  
• What is left now is oneself as the deity. One’s body dissolves into the letters of the mantra 
at one’s heart  
• The letters of the mantras at one’s heart dissolves and becomes the entity of the sound of 
the mantra reverberating at the level of one’s heart.  
• One focuses on the emptiness of that sound and think that it does not exist inherently. 
What appears is emptiness.  
•  ● Within the state of emptine ss focusing on the emptiness of the sound of the   mantras, 
one arises as the deity. It is also said that, within the state of emptiness, one can arise as one’s normal self. The deity or oneself is like an illusion.  
•  
There are two (types of absorption):  
 
 
Lesson  6                           Page 37 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
1 Absorption with recitation  
2 Absorption not reliant on recitation  
We have now completed ‘ Absorption with recitation.’   
 
Answer to question:  It will be ideal if you can visualise the letters in Tibetan since it is meant as 
a medium for the transmission o f the teachings of the Buddha. It does make a difference as 
there is a continuation of the blessings (when we visualise in Tibetan).  However, Geshe -la does 
not see any reason to suggest that it would be inappropriate to visualise the letters in English.  
 
Answer to question:  The concept of the central channel only appears in Highest Yoga Tantra. 
The wind is to be held at the navel but it is difficult to talk about how to hold the wind at the 
navel and the duration of doing so.  
 
Question: Does the mental re petition while observing the sound of the mantra immediately 
precede the attainment of calm abiding?  
Answer:  No. There is still the concentration (absorption) of abiding on fire and the 
concentration of abiding on sound which come under the concentration w ithout recitation. 
When the concentration of abiding on sound is brought to culmination, then that is when calm 
abiding is achieved.  
 
Points regarding translation:  
• In the Tibetan text, “up to” means the concentration of abiding on sound have to be 
included. On page 4 of the root text (page 4): “ One establishes calm -abiding prior to  the 
absorption that abides on sound, and from the limit of sound one meditates on insight” . If the 
English translation seems to exclude the absorption that abides on sound, then that is incorrect because it should include  the concentration abiding on sound. When that is brought 
to culmination, then one achieves calm abiding. For example, when w e say from the eighth 
ground and below, that means it includes the eighth ground. Similarly, “prior to the absorption that abides on sound,” should mean it includes the absorption that abides on sound.  
• Fourth paragraph on page 3 of the root text :  “This is understood from the quotation of the 
well accomplished tantras in the Great Stages of Mantra. ” The correct translation should be: 
“This is understood from the quotation of The Susiddhi Tantra (that is quoted) in the Great 
Stages of Mantra’.  
• “Absorption ” can also be translated as “concentration.” Therefore “ Absorption not reliant on 
recitation” can also be understood to be “Concentration without recitation.”  
 1.1.1.3.2  ABSORPTION NOT RELIA NT ON RECITATION  
 (One) meditates on:  
1. Absorption that abides on fire 
2. Absorption that abides on sound  
3. Absorption that bestows emancipation at the limit of sound  
 When the concentration with recitation is performed well, one moves on to concentration without recitation.  
 
Lesson  6                           Page 38 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
1. Absorption that abides on fire  
One generates oneself in the aspect of the deity. Then one visualises at one’s heart a small tongue of flame and inside that flame is the sound of the mantra reverberating. In entity, that aspect of sound is one’s mind that understands emptiness. In this a bsorption abiding on fire, 
one does not perform any kind of repetition, neither whispered nor mental. One focuses solely on the tongue of flame together with the sound of the mantra reverberating whilst holding the 
wind.  
 
2. Absorption that abides on soun d  
One visualises oneself as the deity and a small moon disc at one’s heart. Inside that moon disc is a smaller version of the deity. The moon disc does not need to always be visualised as lying down flat. Here, the deity is inside the moon disc so we can visualise the moon disc upright like an orb of light. Inside the heart of that smaller deity is a tongue of flame. Inside that tongue of flame is the sound of the mantra reverberating. We then focus single -pointedly on the sound of 
the mantra inside the to ngue of flame at the heart of the smaller deity.   
 In the above concentrations abiding on fire and on sound, the manner of focussing on the sound of the mantra is not the same as the earlier practice of the repetition observing the sound of the mantra. The earlier practice falls under “absorption with recitation,” be it whispered or mental. In the latter practices, we focus on the sound as if we are listening to the 
sound. We are not whispering or reciting it mentally with our own voices.  
 When the concentration abiding on sound is fully completed, that is when we develop calm 
abiding. What is the measure of having achieved calm abiding?  The measure of having achieved calm abiding is when we are able to focus our minds single -pointedly on a chosen 
object for one -sixth of a day, i.e., four  hours. Then that would mean we have attained calm 
abiding.  
 Answer to question: It all depends on the level and the realisations of the individual. If one hasn’t achieved the earlier realisations, it is impossible to  meditate on the later steps. For example, depending on one’s state of mind, if one is able to meditate on bodhicitta then one can start immediately with that meditation without having to go through the paths of the small and medium capacities.  It depends o n where one is. If you know how to read, you don’t have 
to start again from the alphabet.  
 Answer to question: Won’t one face the same problem if one chooses the deity’s body as the object of observation for the development of calm abiding, with its head, hair, eyes, hands and so forth? When you have accomplished calm abiding with the deity’s body as the object, ho w 
does that deity’s body appear to you? Do the different body parts appear to you sequentially or does every part of the deity’s body appears to you at one go?  
 It is the same with using the sound of the mantra as the object of observation for developing calm abiding. It is mentioned in the texts that all the letters of the mantra appear at one time. When we develop calm abiding with respect to the mandala with the 32 deities of Guhyasamaja, all the deities appear simultaneously, not separately. I think th at is how the 
 
Lesson  6                           Page 39 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
sound of the mantra will appear to the mind that has achieved calm abiding when focusing on 
the mantra. I remember seeing this in one text.  
 Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tso ng 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
Vetted with Geshe Chonyi  
  
 
Lesson  6                           Page 40 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 7     DATE: 17TH MARCH 2009  
 
Before the beginning of class, we recite prayers of homage to the Buddha and the Three Jewels. 
I would like to talk a little bit about the benefits of doing such prayers.  
 
Imagine that you practise charity by making offerings of divine garme nts and food, equal to the 
number of grains of sands in the Ganges’ River, to each and everyone of the numberless sentient beings every day for an eon. We will probably agree that the merit accumulated by 
doing this will be unbelievable. Yet, if we offer a single meal  to a lay person living in the lay 
vows, the merit from that will be much greater.  
 
Furthermore, that merit will be much greater, at each level, if we make the same offering of a 
meal to a fully ordained monk (i.e., offering to a gelong generates more merit than offering to 
the lay person), a stream -enterer, a once -returner, a non -returne r up to a solitary realiser arhat.   
 Now imagine that we offer divine garments and food to a group of solitary realiser arhats equal in numbers to the particles in the ten directions everyday for eons. The merit accumulated 
would be even greater. But if w e compare those merits to the benefit of just hearing the name, 
“Buddha” or by seeing a painted image or statue of a buddha, there is more merit generated by those latter actions. It goes without saying then that the merit that we accumulate from 
putting o ur palms together and reciting verses of praise to the Buddha or making offerings to 
him when we see his holy form will be greater still.  
 All the physical and the verbal actions that we perform in relation to the Buddha such as seeing his representation,  reciting praises, making prostrations and offerings to him generate an 
immense amount of merit. But these are only physical and verbal actions. The mental actions done in relation to the Buddha,  such as generating single -pointed faith in him, carry even more 
merit.  
 Imagine that we fill all the world systems of the ten directions with precious jewels and offer all these to the buddhas equal in number to the grains of sand in the Ganges River for an eon. 
Even these merits are less than the merit of   gene rating single -pointed faith in the Buddha. 
This means that the virtuous activities of the mind in relation to the Buddha bring about much more powerful virtues.  
 
 In the same way, based on this line of reasoning, due to our faith and belief in the Buddha,  
when we study and analyse his teachings, we can understand the benefit and the amount of merit we accumulate.  
 
When we understand the merit we can accumulate in relation to the Buddha through our 
physical, verbal and mental actions, then it makes a differ ence whenever we make offerings 
and recite these prayers and verses of homage to the Buddha and the  Three Jewels. When we understand the benefit, we will be enthusiastic and will naturally want to engage in such activities.  
 
Lesson  7                           Page 41 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
What is the benefit of hearin g or reciting the name of the Buddha just once? It is said that that 
has  immense benefit particularly when we can develop single -pointed faith in him. The merit 
accumulated will be very great. The more merit one accumulates, at the same time, the more obscurations one purifies.  
 One should then understand how by just coming to class, one could receive so many benefits 
simply by reciting these prayers at the beginning of class. The benefits are really so 
inconceivable that they cannot possibly fit our minds!  
 I have mentioned before that the benefits we get from seeing a representation of the holy body of the Buddha, be it a painting, photo or statue is equal to the benefit of coming into contact with the Buddha’s teachings. However, the Buddha’s speech is said to be more precious than his holy body. If we can study the teachings of the Buddha and then develop some conviction or faith in his teachings, the merit we accumulate will be much greater.  
 Therefore, it is important for us to remember the benefits we will get from each and every single word of the teachings that we read. When we understand  the benefits, we can also understand how extremely fortunate we are for having such an opportunity and how we have fulfilled the purpose of our taking a human re birth. Then, naturally, we will feel happy.  
 
Sometimes when we hear such explanation of the benefits, we may think, “Can  it be true? 
How is that possible?” When that happens, when we over -analyse things, we will not be able to 
develop faith and that is no t good. In general, critical analysis is very important but too much 
analysis can become an obstacle that prevents us from developing faith.  
 It does not mean that someone who is intelligent and has good analytical abilities will necessarily receive such benefits because he may not necessarily have faith. Another person who is less intelligent, who does not analyse too much but because of his faith, he engages in such virtuous practices, that person will receive all the benefits of those practices. So too much thinking sometimes can obstruct the generation of faith.  
 I thought it will be beneficial for you to understand the benefits of reciting these prayers that we do before class. During the recitation, it will be very good if you are able to remember to develop faith in the Buddha by remembering the qualities of his holy body, speech and mind.  
 1.1.1.3.2  ABSORPTION NOT RELIANT ON RECITATION cont’d  
 (One) meditates on:  
1. Absorption that abides on fire  
2. Absorption that abides on sound  
3. Absorption that bestows emancipation at the limit of sound  
 One establishes calm- abiding prior to the absorption that abides on sound, and from the limit 
of sound one meditates on insight. If there is too much analysis by analytical wisdom, the prior 
 
Lesson  7                           Page 42 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
factor of abidance is destroyed. Due to that, one attains the union of calm -abiding and insight 
comprehending emptiness by combining analysis and placement.  
 
“One establishes calm -abiding prior to the absorption that abides on sound”: The English 
translation may give you the idea that calm abiding is established before  the concentration 
abiding on sound. That is incorrect.  Calm abiding is established when one has actualised the concentration by abiding on sound.  
 “And from the limit  (or end)  of sound one meditates on insight,” means we engage in the last 
concentration to develop special insight. We achieve calm abiding by actualising the absorptions that abide on fire and sound. But those realisations alone cannot liberate us from samsa ra. That is why we need the third concentration, the absorption that bestows 
emancipation at the limit of sound (also translated as ‘the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound.’) “ Emancipation” here refers to liberating ourselves from the t wo 
obstructions to achieving the truth body (dharmakaya). In order to do this, we need the realisation of special insight, to realise emptiness. That is why we need the third concentration: “the absorption that bestows emancipation at the limit of sound.”  
 “If there is too much analysis by analytical wisdom, the prior factor of abidance is destroyed. Due to that, one attains the union of calm -abiding and (special)  insight comprehending 
emptiness by combining analysis and placement”:  The teachings on emptine ss, such as the 
scriptures on the Middle Way, indicate we first need to identify correctly the objects of negation, the self of persons and the self of phenomena. We then have to understand how all phenomena do not exist inherently and are not ultimately e stablished. How do we do that? We 
arrive at that conclusion -  that phenomena are not inherently existent –  through analysis and 
we meditate on that conclusion.  However when there is too much analysis, the mind will move away from the object of observation . Faults such as distraction and excitement will then arise.  
 It is through analysis that one arrives at the ascertainment of the meaning of emptiness. When that ascertainment is achieved, we place our minds single - pointedly on the meaning of 
emptiness that we have ascertained. However, if the factor of calm abiding of that placement meditation becomes too strong,  that is a fault because the wisdom of individual analysis that analyses the meaning of emptiness weakens. At such a time,  there is the danger of laxity and dullness arising in the mind.  
 
It is mentioned in the short edition of The Stages of Meditation that when the special insight 
focussing on emptiness becomes too strong, the factor of calm abiding will weaken. When this 
happens, it is likened  to putting a butter lamp in the wind. The mind becomes disturbed and 
will move from the object and when this happens, one no longer sees emptiness clearly. So, when special insight becomes too strong, one needs to cultivate calm abiding. On the other hand , when calm abiding becomes too strong, one is likened to a person who is sleeping. 
Again, one will not be able to see emptiness clearly. At that time, one needs to meditate on special insight.  
 Faults will arise when either calm abiding or special insigh t is stronger than the other. 
Therefore, these two factors should be meditated upon equally, like ploughing the land with 
 
Lesson  7                           Page 43 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
two oxen that are tied together so that they can move together. This is the meaning of, “ Due to 
that, one attains the union of calm -abiding and insight comprehending emptiness by combining 
analysis and placement.”   
 
When one obtains insight comprehending emptiness, one transfers to the Path of Preparation and when one perceptually comprehends emptiness, one transfers to the Path of Seeing and so on, similar to the Perfection Vehicle.  
 However if one seeks to accomplish the limitless feats of special siddhis as stated in the Action and Performance Tantras, one needs as pre -requisites the four branches of recitation and the 
absorptions of just those three. The Great Stages of Mantra states that to establish many minor siddhis it is not definite that those are required.  (Pg. 4 of the root text )  
 “The four branches of recitation” should be understood as one noun phrase by itself. “The 
absorptions of just those three”  refers to the three concentrations (i.e., the concentrations of 
abiding in fire and sound and the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound). Collectively, these three concentrations are known as the concentrations of the three principles.  
 If we want to actualise the limitless feats of special attainment (the siddhis) in Action Tantra and Performance Tantra, this must be preceded by the concentration with repetition and the 
concentration without repetition.  
 
Question: What are “ the limitless feats of special siddhis”?  
Answer : Siddhis is the Sanskrit word for attainments.  
 The entire path of Action Tantra can be condensed into three forms of meditation: - 
1) Meditation on the deity’s body (Mahamudra) to actualise the Buddha’s holy body  
2) Meditation on the deity’s speech (Mantra) to actualise the Buddha’s holy speech  
3) Meditation on the deity’s mind (Suchness) to actualise the Buddha’s holy mind  
 
● Mahamudra is basically the meditation on the six deities.  
 ● The meditation on the deity’s speech (Mantra) is the concentration with repetition (i.e., the 
repetition observing the form of the letters and the repetition observing the sound of the 
mantra) but this is not considered to be the main practice. The main practice for the 
meditation on the deity’s speech (Mantra) is:  
1) The concentration abiding in fire  
2) The concentration abiding in sound  
 ● The concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound is meditated upon to achieve the 
Buddha’s mind, the dharmakaya.  
 The concentration focusing on the deity’s body is considered to be a coarse concentration. The meditation on the deity’s speech is considered to be subtler while the concentration in the meditation on the deity’s mind is considered to be even subtler tha n that.  
 
Lesson  7                           Page 44 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
With regards to the concentrations with repetition, mental recitation is considered to be subtler than whispered recitation, which is considered  coarse. But the concentrations without repetition is considered to be even subtler than those two.  
 The meditation on the deity’s body is also known as deity yoga . The meditation on the deity’s 
speech is known as mantra yoga which refers  to all the different forms of repetition up to the 
concentration of abiding in sound. These two yogas are classified  as yoga with signs . The 
practice of deity yoga and mantra yoga are done in conjunction with the mind realising emptiness and are the principal practices of yoga with signs.   The concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound comes under yoga with out signs . 
At the time of this concentration, there is the factor of appearance (which is the meditation on the deity’s body) and the factor of meditation on emptiness. In this context, the meditation on emptiness is considered to be more important so this   concentration is referred to as the yoga 
without signs.  
 Many masters hold different views with regards to the meaning of yoga with signs and yoga without signs. Where are the boundaries between the two? Some classify the yoga with signs as the yoga that is not conjoined with the meditation on emptiness and the yoga without signs 
as the yoga that is conjoined with the meditation on emptiness. This is one of the examples of 
the different views.  
 
1.1.2.3.1  YOGA WITH SIGNS  
 There is recitation with the four external branches, recitation with the four internal branches, 
whispered and mental repetition without deterioration of each set of these four branches, and retaining life -force exertion during mental repetition.  
 1.1.2.3.2  YOGA WITHOUT SIGNS  
 When one attains calm- abiding focusing on the body of the deity and so forth, one meditates 
on emptiness by combining it with deity yoga. One achieves the union of calm -abiding and 
insight comprehending emptiness through combining analysis and placement. ( Pg. 7 of the root 
text)  
 There is a discussion on yoga with sig ns and yoga without signs on pg. 7 of the root text, 
showing many qualms and also the responses on this issue. As I have always said, you should read the text, even a little bit, before coming to class. It makes a difference. But if you don’t have time, th en that is a different matter.  
 The way to progress on the Path of Action Tantra has  four  divisions:  
1 Becoming a vessel suitable to meditate on the path.  
2 Keeping the vows and commitments pure, after becoming a vessel.  
3 The way to perform prior approx imation, while abiding in the commitments.  
4 The way to establish the siddhis after rendering the approximation serviceable. ( Pg. 2 of the 
 
Lesson  7                           Page 45 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
root text ) 
 
We have completed the first three sections. Next is the way to establish the siddhis after rendering the approximation serviceable.  
 1.1.1.4   THE WAY TO ATTAIN TH E SIDDHIS  
There are three (types) of siddhis: (1) the supreme, (2) the medium and (3) the least and there 
are many ways of categorizing them in three.  
By means of nature, the supreme (siddhis) are knowledge bearing
3, higher perception and 
knowing all the treatises4. The middling (siddhis) are: invisibility, taking the essence5 and swift 
footedness. The least (siddhis) are subduing others, killing, expelling and so forth.  
By means of signs, there are  three: substances blazing (with fire), emitting smoke and heat.  
By means of basis, there are siddhis of body6, of substances7 and of resources8. 
By means of the speaker, there are (siddhis achieved through) mantras (pronounced) by arya 
beings, deities and  those upon the earth9. 
By means of lineage, the Great Stages of Mantra states:  
The actions of pacification10, increase11 and wrath12 will be achieved, in order, by (those 
belonging to) the Tathagata lineage, the Lotus lineage and the Vajra lineage. This is how the supreme, middling and least siddhis are attained.  
 
And:  
Also, in every lineage there are three (types of) siddhis and three  (types of actions:) 
pacification, increase and wrath. From these, the Lord of each Lineage, the Consort of the Lineage and the Wrathful (Deities) of the Lineage perform the three (actions of) pacification, (increase, wrath) and so forth.  
3 Knowledge- bearing (rig ’dzin) : the supreme siddhi of being able to proceed to a pure land with one's usual  
body. [Yoga Of Tibet]  
4 Knowing all the treatises: the supreme siddhi of knowing all the treatises immediately upon 
reading them. [YOT]  
5 Taking the essence (bcud len) : the medium siddhi of empowering a pill so that all nourishment can be derived 
from it. [YOT]  
6 Siddhis of body: enhancing the body so that it becomes free from disease, youthful, etc. [Yoga of Tibet]  
7 Siddhis of substances: using substances such as leaves, swords and so fo rth for gaining siddhis.[YOT]  
8 Siddhis of resources: changing ordinary resources into marvellous ones. [YOT]  
9 Those above the earth (sa bla’ i sngags) : Yakshas, Smell -Eaters, etc. [YOT]  
10 Actions of pacification (zhi ba) : include pacifying untimely death, illnesses, epidemics, harmers, and  
contagion. [YOT]  
11 Actions of increase (rgays pa) : include increase of life span, youth, magnificence, power, qualities [of  
realisation] etc. [YOT]  
12 Wrathful actions (drag po) : include killing, expelling, [confusing], and  so forth [of harmful beings]. [YOT]  
 
Lesson  7                           Page 46 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Through just thos e statements (the issue still remains) unclear. Also I have not seen (this point) 
clearly explained by later authors.  
One scholar says: Trainees of Action Tantra with sharp faculties who accomplish the siddhi of 
knowledge -bearer for remaining alive for man y aeons, can become enlightened in one life -time.  
Ngawang Palden: Such a thing is not stated clearly in the Stages of Mantra and if one accepts the statement of the General (Presentation of the) Classes of Tantra, which states:  
In the Action and Performance Tantras there is no sys tem of enlightenment separate 
from that (presented) in the Perfection system.  
One should examine the assertion of needing to attain enlightenment as a being of the Dense Array Akanishta Buddha Field. ( Pg. 5 -6 of the root text )  
The “Dense Array Akanishta Buddha Field”  is basically one of the pure lands called Akanishta.  
 “In the Action and Performance Tantras there is no sys tem of enlightenment separate from that 
(presented) in the Perfection system.”  Is there any fault i n this statement? One should think 
about this.   “In every lineage there are three (types of) siddhis and three (types of actions:)” refers to the 
fact that there are three types of siddhis and actions in each of the lineages in Action Tantra -  
the Tathaga ta Lineage, the Lotus Lineage and the Vajra Lineage.   
 
“From these, the Lord of each Lineage, the Consort of the Lineage and the Wrathful (Deities) of 
the Lineage perform the three (actions of) pacification, (increase, wrath) and so forth”:   
 
TATHAGATA LINEAGE  
Supreme siddhi 
(attainment)/action of 
pacification  Achieved by lord  
of  the lineage  Manjushri  
Middling siddhi/action of 
increase  Achieved by consort  
of the lineage  Goddess Marici  
Least siddhi/action of wrath  Achieved by wrathful  
deity of the lineage  Achala  
 I will elaborate on this further in the next lesson. Please read on your own as well and bring up your questions in the next lesson.  
 Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Lesson  7                           Page 47 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 8     DATE: 19TH MARCH 200 9  
 I mentioned in the last class the great benefit of simply hearing the name of the Buddha. By applying logic and reasoning, we can infer that even more benefit can be derived from studying and reflecting on the meaning of the Buddha’ s teachings. Therefore, we should understand 
that studying the teachings of the Buddha is extremely meaningful and beneficial and we 
should do so with great enthusiasm and delight, seeing how fortunate we are to have  this 
opportunity now to listen to teac hings on such a profound subject. Then, we will listen to and 
study the teachings with a happy mind.   Sometimes, one neglects listening to, studying and reflecting on the teachings but such studies and reflection are extremely important. There are the three wisdoms that come from the threefold activities of hearing, reflection and meditation: the wisdom that comes from hearing, the wisdom that comes from reflection and the wisdom that comes from meditation.  
 In order to develop the wisdom that comes from hearing, we must first hear and study the teachings. The more we do this, the more we develop the wisdom that comes from hearing. Likewise, the wisdom that comes from reflection arises from the activity of reflection. The more reflection and analysis we do,     more wisdom that comes from reflection is generated.  
 
What is the object of meditation? That will be the object that has been ascertained by the 
wisdom that comes from reflection. The wisdom that comes from meditation is generated by the meditation on  that object of ascertainment.  
 The more developed the wisdom that comes from hearing, the stronger the wisdom that comes from reflection. The greater the wisdom that comes from reflection, likewise, the stronger will be the wisdom that comes from meditat ion. 
 Then this question may arise, “So what if these wisdoms are more developed?” The stronger one’s wisdom that comes from meditation, the greater will be one’s ability to meditate from many various angles and perspectives, which will give one a more powerful tool to eliminate one’s faults and to develop good qualities. We should ask ourselves, from time to time, what are the threefold  activities, why are they so important and how do they benefit us? We have to  understand their importance because the n we will be motivated to study, reflect and 
meditate.  
 This is a common mistake that we often make. As mentioned by Choden Rinpoche recently in his Lam Rim teachings at ABC, we think that the Dharma  we study is different from the Dharma that we practise.  We see these two as separate. That is wrong. The very thing we have 
learnt and studied is the very thing that we put into our practice. The thing that we put into our practice is the very thing that we have learnt. These two are actually one. Many people come to classes thinking it is about studying for knowledge or intellectual stimulation and that it has nothing to do with their practice. That is a real mistake. So it is very important that we do not let this happen to us.  
 
 
Lesson  8                           Page 48 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
*************  
In Action Tantra there are three lineages:  
 
THREE LINEAGES  RANK  ACTION  LORD  MOTHER  WRATHFUL  
Tathagata  Supreme  Pacification  Manjushri  Marici  Achala  
Lotus  Middling  Increase  Chenrezig  Tara  Hayagriva  
Vajra  Least  Wrath  Vajrapani  Analapramohani  Amritakundali  
 
The actions of pacification13, increase14 and wrath15 will be achieved, in order, by (those 
belonging to) the Tathagata lineage, the Lotus lineage and the Vajra lineage. This is how the 
supreme, middling and least siddhis are attained. ( Pg. 5 of the root text )  
 
Why is the Tathagata lineage supreme, the Lotus lineage middling and the Vajra lineage the 
least? If that is the case, is there some difference in the power of the deities of the three 
respective lineages? Aren’t their realisations the same?  
The deities o f these three lineages are all buddhas and their realisations must be equal. But the 
supreme, middling, least siddhis are attained in relation to the three lineages. Since there are 
differences in the siddhis attained depending on the lineage, then we have  to say that there 
must be some difference in their realisations. This is a question for further discussion in our  
Sunday class.  
 
TATHAGATA LINEAGE  
Supreme siddhi /action of pacification  Achieved by lord of  the lineage  Manjushri  
Middling siddhi/action of increase  Achieved by consort of the lineage  Goddess Marici  
Least siddhi/action of wrath  Achieved by wrathful deity of the lineage  Achala  
 
(Please refer to the tables above for the three siddhis in the Tathagata lineage and the Lords, 
consorts and wrathful deities of the Lotus and Vajra lineages).  
 
There are many other divisions in the three lineages which we will not cover here as they are quite complicated. There is a trinity known as the protector of the three lineages who are 
usually depicted in thangkas. They are Manjushri, Chenrezig and Vajrapani. They are the protectors of the three lineages because they are the Lords of their respectiv e lineages: 
Manjushri is the Lord of the Tathagata lineage, Chenrezig is the Lord of the Lotus lineage and Vajrapani is the Lord of the Vajra lineage.  
 A question that often comes up is how one knows whether one’s approximation retreat has been successful or done well.  According to the Susiddhi Tantra, which is an Action Tantra, the 
signs of the approximation retreat having hit the mark are when, during the retreat:  
• one’s experience of hunger, thirst and general suffering subside  
13 Actions of pacification (zhi ba) : include pacifying untimely death, illnesses, epidemics, harmers, and 
contagion. [YOT]  
14 Actions of increase (rgays pa) : include increase of life span, youth, magnificence, power, qualities [of  
realisation] etc. [YOT]  
15 Wrathful actions (drag po) : include killing, expelling, [confusing], and so forth [of harmful beings]. [YOT]  
 
Lesson  8                           Page 49 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• if one is sick, one’s sickness becomes less serious  
• one feels very happy  
• one’s physical appearance becomes more majestic  
• one experiences good dreams  
• one is eager and happy to recite the mantra  
• one’s body or the retreat room is infused with a pleasant smell  
• one develops strong  faith in the deity that is being practised in the retreat  
 
Another Action Tantra text called The Concentration Continuation mentions the following signs 
of an unsuccessful retreat when one experiences the following during the retreat:  
• more hunger and thi rst 
• the mind is disturbed or becomes unhappy  
• one has doubts questioning, “Why am I doing this retreat?”  
• lack of real desire to practise, meditate or recite mantras  
• experiencing bad dreams  
• one wants to engage in idle gossip  
 In short, when one feels happy during the retreat and enjoys the retreat, then that is the sign 
that the retreat is going well. However, when one feels miserable or unhappy, then that is the 
sign the retreat has not gone well.  
 We should distinguish betwe en what is meant by: (1) one is entering into Tantra and (2) one is 
entering the Tantric path. There is a lot of debate on this issue. Are they referring to the same 
thing or are they different?  
 Entering into Tantra  
The doorway into Tantra is by taking th e initiation. What is the meaning of “to receive an 
initiation”? The entity of an initiation has two parts: consciousness and the non- associated 
compositional factors. At the time of the initiation, one has to understand what is being said, what is being c onferred, what to meditate on and so forth for one to receive the initiation. If 
one has received the initiation properly, then one has entered into Tantra.  
 Entering the Tantric Path 
One must enter a path. We will discuss this in the context of the path o f Action Tantra.  
First one enters into Action Tantra by receiving an Action Tantra initiation. Then comes the 
time when one develops the uncontrived bodhicitta by thinking, “I must achieve enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings.” At this tim e, one enters the path of accumulation of 
Action Tantra. What constitutes this path? It starts from that beginning up to the concentration abiding in sound.  
 In the practice of Action Tantra, when one achieves the meditative stabilisation which is the union of calm abiding and special insight, that is when one   enters the path of preparation  of 
Action Tantra, which means one has actualised yoga without signs.  
 We had seen how the path of Action Tantra is divided into the two yogas: (1) the yoga with 
 
Lesson  8                           Page 50 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
signs and (2) the yoga without signs. The yoga with signs has many divisions that constitute the 
path of accumulation. When one achieves the yoga without signs for the first time, then one 
achieves the path of preparation of Action Tantra.   At the yoga withou t signs, which is the yoga of non- dual profundity and clarity, when that 
wisdom directly perceives emptiness, one has entered the path of seeing  of Action Tantra. The 
direct perception of emptiness by this wisdom of non- dual profundity and clarity acts as an 
antidote to the intellectually acquired afflictive obstructions:  
• When one achieves the wisdom of non- dual profundity and clarity that directly perceives 
emptiness for the first time, one enters the uninterrupted path of path of seeing.  
• The intellectua lly acquired afflictive obstructions are abandoned when one achieves the 
path of thorough release .  
• When one arises from that meditation, one is in post meditative equipoise , which is a 
wisdom which is neither of those two.  
• One is still on the path of seeing.  
• Through greater familiarisation with  the wisdom of non -dual profundity and clarity, which 
then acts as the antidote to the innate afflictive obstructions, one then enters the first uninterrupted path of the path of meditation.  
 There are nine leve ls of innate afflictive obstructions to be abandoned on the path of 
meditation: - 
1. three big innate afflictive obstructions  
2. three middling innate afflictive obstructions  
3. three small innate afflictive obstructions  
4.  
According to the explanation given by one scholar, Jedun Sherab Wangpo, the three big innate 
afflictive obstructions and the three middling innate afflictive obstructions are being 
abandoned sequentially from the first to the sixth grounds. When one achieves the path of 
thorough release on the sev enth ground, these afflictive obstructions are completely 
abandoned. The abandoning of the three small innate afflictive obstructions takes place simultaneously on the seventh ground.  
 On the eighth to the tenth grounds, the three levels of knowledge obstr uctions (or obstructions 
to omniscience) are abandoned. When those are abandoned, one achieves enlightenment and the four bodies of the Buddha simultaneously.
12 
 In the General (Presentation of the) Classes of Tantra composed by Khedrup Je, it  states:  
 In the Action and Performance Tantras there is no system of enlightenment separate 
from that (presented) in the Perfection system. ( Pg. 6 of the root text )  
 
For the trainees with sharp faculties, by depending on the path of Action Tantra, completing 
the four branched repetition and bringing the  concentration without repetition to culmination, they will achieve the supreme siddhi (or the siddhi of knowledge be arer). Once that siddhi is 
achieved, one has the ability to live for thousands of years and based on that lifespan, one can 
 
Lesson  8                           Page 51 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
achieve enlightenment.  
 
According to the Perfection Vehicle (Paramitayana), one achieves enlightenment in the Akanishta pure land. I s this necessarily so for the  trainee of both Action and Performance 
Tantra?  
 One should examine the assertion of needing to attain enlightenment as a being of the Dense 
Array Akanishta Buddha Field. ( Pg. 6 of the root text ) 
 
One needs to achieve enlight enment in the Akanishta pure land because the the basis for 
actualising the  sambhogakhaya is Akanishta.  We talked about the four bodies in the last module on the Ornament for Clear Realisations . There are five certainties connected with the 
complete enjo yment body or sambhogakaya, one of which is the certainty of abode, that it 
abides only in Akanishta. 
3 
 If the abode of the complete enjoyment body is necessarily Akanishta Pure Land, does that 
mean one has to be there when one first achieves enlightenmen t? If that is the case, does the 
Action Tantra trainee necessarily have to be there when he first achieves enlightenment?  Do 
you understand the reason why, in accordance with the Perfection Vehicle, the place of enlightenment is necessarily Akanishta Pure  Land and not the desire, form or formless realms?  
 
Yet according to Khedrup Je’s text, “I n the Action and Performance Tantras there is no system 
of enlightenment separate from that presented in the Perfection system.”  Is there any fault 
then in asserting that for the Action Tantra trainee, the abode of enlightenment is necessarily 
Akanishta?  
 Let us say a person from the desire realm enters into the path of Action Tantra. By actualising the yoga with signs and yoga wi thout signs, with the culmination of those concentrations, he 
achieves the supreme siddhi of knowledge bearer and has a very long life. Where does this person achieve enlightenment? Is it in the desire realm? When one practices Tantra, one achieves enlight enment in one life and one body. In the context of Action Tantra, it is not 
necessary then for that person to first achieve enlightenment in Akanishta. If that is the case, then the system of enlightenment in the Perfection Vehicle and in the Action Tantra  are 
different. Can we say then that Khedrup Je is wrong?  I brought this issue up for the purpose of discussion.   
• In the context of Action Tantra, when the trainee of Action Tantra first achieves 
enlightenment, is that place of enlightenment necessarily Akanishta?  
•  According to the Mahayana Sutra, is it possible to achieve enlightenment in one life and 
one body? When one achieves enlightenment, doesn’t one do so in one life and one body? Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment in the same life and same body, didn’t he?  
 The phrase “non -dual profundity and clarity”  is used in the first three classes of Tantra – 
Action Tantra, Performance Tantra and Yoga Tantra. What do these words mean?  
• “Profundity” refers to the wisdom realising emptiness.   
• “Clarity” re fers to the clear appearance of the deity’s body  
 
Lesson  8                           Page 52 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• “Non -dual” means that these two are united in one causal collection, i.e. they are present in 
a single consciousness.  
 
Yoga with signs:  
There is recitation with the four external branches, recitation with the four internal branches, whispered and mental repetition without deterioration of each set of these four branches, and retaining life -force exertion during mental repetition.  
 Yoga without signs : 
When one attains calm- abiding focusing on the body of the  deity and so forth, one meditates 
on emptiness by combining it with deity yoga. One achieves the union of calm -abiding and 
insight comprehending emptiness through combining analysis and placement. ( Pg. 7 of the root 
text) 
 According to Mahayana Sutra, someone of definite Mahayana lineage will have already realised emptiness when they enter the Mahayana path. If that is the case, then for a trainee of Action Tantra, who has supposedly sharper faculties than the trainee of definite Mahayana lineage 
entering the Sutra path, that trainee will necessarily have the realisation of emptiness when he 
enters the path.  
 One can also analyse this: Does the bodhisattva on the Tantric path of accumulation possess the yoga with signs in his mental continuum? That bodhisa ttva necessarily has the realisation 
of emptiness so whatever deity yoga he practises be it visualising the deity, recitation of mantra and so forth will  necessarily be conjoined with the realisation of emptiness. That being  the case, does that bodhisattva possess the yoga with signs?   
(Concerning) the meaning of Yoga with and without Signs, the Stages of Mantra states:  
 
Yoga with Signs is deity meditation and repetition without meditation on emptiness. Yoga without Signs is deity meditation and repetition with meditation on emptiness. It is not meditation on emptiness alone. (Pg. 7 of the root text )  
 
Is there then a yoga  with signs that is devoid of meditation on emptiness? But according to the 
quotation, “ Yoga with Signs is deity meditation and repetition without meditation on 
emptiness. ”  This seems to be saying that yoga  with signs is deity meditation and repetition 
that is devoid of meditation on emptiness, i.e., there is no meditation on emptiness when one is practising yoga with signs. But yoga with signs is found on the path of accumulation. If that is the case, that will mean that the bodhisattva on the Tantric pat h of accumulation  does not 
realise emptiness. Is there anything wrong in saying that? Doesn’t the yoga of non- dual 
profundity and clarity exist on the Tantric path of accumulation?  
 The point here is to highlight that it is not so straightforward or easy to delineate between yoga with signs and yoga without signs.  
 If one performs deity meditation and repetition without meditating on emptiness, then that 
serves no purpose.  Therefore, in Tantric practice, deity yoga is always conjoined with the 
 
Lesson  8                           Page 53 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
realisation  of emptiness. If that is the case, then all Tantric practices are necessarily yoga 
without signs, which will mean that yoga with signs is unnecessary.  
 
Question: Under yoga without signs, there is the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound  which is a concentration that does not rely on repetition. Is there then any repetition 
of mantra during the yoga without signs?   
Answer : Yes, there can be repetition of mantra during the yoga without signs. For example, a 
trainee on the Tantric path of preparation has already achieved the yoga without signs and that 
bodhisattva can practise deity yoga, repetition of mantra and so forth.  
 In the last lesson, we discussed how the entire path of Action Tantra is condensed into the three meditations: the me ditation on the deity’s body (Mahamudra), the meditation on the 
deity’s speech (Mantra) and the meditation on the deity’s mind (Suchness).  These meditations are done sequentially. Even within repetitions, there are different levels. The meditation of the deity’s body and meditation of the deity’s speech fall under yoga with signs.  
    Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
 
Lesson  8                           Page 54 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 9     DATE: 24TH MARCH 200 9  
 We have to remind ourselves constantly of the inconceivable benefits  of listening to, studying 
and reflecting on the Buddhadharma because with that understanding, we will engage in our practice and studies with delight and enthusiasm. The more we study, the more we are able to analyse and reflect on the teachings. With mor e reflection, we can also meditate more. The 
more we are able to meditate, we will have more ways at our disposal to eliminate the different faults and to achieve all the good qualities.   Meditation is extremely important. Whether we are able to meditate or not depends on whether we have studied or reflected on the teachings. Realising the importance of studying and reflection, we should strive to put effort into these activities.  
 Studying, reflection and meditation will make a difference even to the pra ctice of taking refuge 
when we recite the refuge prayer, “I go for refuge until I am enlightened to the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha .”  With greater understanding of the teachings, there will be so much 
to think about and so much more benefit when we recite this prayer and it will help us with the different levels of the refuge practice.  
 It is unnecessary for me to talk about the importance of having the correct motivation for 
studying the Buddha’s teachings. The main purpose of studying the teaching s is to enable us to 
put them into practice. That is the kind of motivation we should have when we engage in 
Dharma studies.  
  
A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,  
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud-  
See conditioned things as such!  
 The analogy of the star illustrates the two truths: the conventional truth and the ultimate truth. Both appearance and emptiness can be found in functioning things. The object appears one way to the wisdom of meditative equipoise directly realising emptiness. The same object appears in a different way to the conventional valid cogniser, which is a conceptual consciousness. In relation to the two truths, that is how ultimate truth appears to the wisdom 
directly perceiving emptiness and how the conventional truth appears to the conventional valid 
cogniser.  
 Phenomena appear as truly existent to the conventional valid cogniser but that is not how they exist in reality. That leads us to the next analogy, the “ visual aberration .” If phenomena exist in 
the way they appear to the conventional valid cogniser, this will mean that they are truly existent, which will be the final mode of abiding of phenomena. If conventionality is the final mode of abiding of phenomena, then phenomena should be seen as such by the meditative equipoise directly realising emptiness of all the aryas. But the aryas in meditative equipoise directly perceive emptiness and do not perceive conventionality at all.  
 
 
Lesson  9                           Page 55 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
A visual aberration can be likened to someone with impaired vision who sees   before his eyes 
falling hairs, which is a mere appearance to the eye consciousness of that person. In reality, the falling hairs do not exist. If the falling hairs exist in reality, then anyone without the visual impairment will  also see them. But this is not the case.   Although phenomena are not truly existent, nevertheless, they exist as mere appearances.  It does not mean they do not exist and to understand this, we have the next analogy of “a flame 
of a lamp” which we will discuss in the next lesson. I am explaining this verse so that when we 
recite it, we can reflect on its meaning. I thought this might be helpful. It does make a difference if we know the meaning of what we are reciting.  
 Question: According to the Consequence Middle Way School, what is the difference between a mistaken and a wrong consciousness?  
Answer :  A wrong consciousness is a knower that is mistaken with respect to its object of mode 
of apprehension. A  mistaken consciousness is a knower that is mistaken with respect to its 
appearing object. For example, a conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase is a valid cogniser that is a mistaken consciousness but it is not a wrong consciousness.  
 We have now c ompleted the section on Action Tantra.  
 In the Action and Performance Tantras there is no system of enlightenment separate from that 
(presented) in the Perfection system. ( Pg. 6 of the root text )  
 
In the last lesson, we saw how the system of the enlightenment as presented in Action Tantra 
is the same as that presented in Mahayana Sutra (Paramitayana) with regards to the abandonment of the obstructions to liberation and obstructions to omniscience.  
 In Paramitayana, one needs to accumulate the collection of merit over a period of three great countless eons. In the practice of Action Tantra then, does one also need to accumulate merit over three great countless eons to achieve enlightenment? If the pa th of Action Tantra’s path is 
quicker, then the system of enlightenment between Action Tantra and Paramitayana is different, isn’t it?   
PERFORMANCE TANTRA  
 
1.1.2    THE WAY TO PROGRESS ON THE PATH OF PERFORMANCE TANTRA.  
 There are four:  
1 Becoming a suitab le vessel  
2 Keeping the vows and commitments pure  
3 The way to approximate (the deity)  
4 The way to attain the siddhis  
 
1.1.2.1     BECOMING A SUITABLE VESSEL  
As it is stated in the Performance Tantra, one becomes a vessel suitable to meditate on the 
 
Lesson  9                           Page 56 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
path by attaining the empowerment given in the mandala possessing the essence of great 
compassion and so forth. One requires the five Knowledge empowerments, as (one is) not 
permitted by the Water and Crown empowerments alone (to meditate on the path). Apart from that, the rest is probably similar to Action Tantra.  
1.1.2.2    KEEPING T HE VOWS AND COMMITME NTS PURE  
The root downfalls are similar to (those in) Action Tantra. Also other commitments explained in Action Tantra are probably stated to be common (to both ). 
In the Manifest Enlightenment of Vairochana
16 is stated that:  
It is necessary that one does not give up immaculate dharma and bodhichitta even for the sake of one’s life, (that one) is not miserly and does not cause harm to sentient beings, and abides in  the foundation of the training abandoning the ten non -virtuous 
actions.  
 
1.1.2.3      THE WAY TO APPROXIMA TE (THE DEITY)  
There are two:  
1 Yoga with Signs   
2 Yoga without Signs  
 
1.1.2.3.1  YOGA WITH SIGNS  
There is recitation with the four external branches,  recitation with the four internal branches, 
whispered and mental repetition without deterioration of each set of these four branches, and 
retaining life -force exertion during mental repetition. ( Pg. 6 -7 of the root text)  
The four branches are the same as  in Action Tantra, i.e., they are the self basis, other basis, 
mind basis and sound basis.  
 
In Performance Tantra, there are four external branches and four internal branches. In the practice of Tantra, whenever there is the generation of a deity, it is a lways done with an 
ascertainment of emptiness. It is that mind that realises emptiness that is generated into the entity of the deity. So, within that state of emptiness, one instantaneously arises as a deity.  
 In Performance Tantra, the deity practice is  that of Vairochanabhisambodhi, a deity of the 
Tathagata lineage of Performance Tantra, who is yellow in colour with one face, a crown protrusion, two arms with the hands in meditative equipoise,  sitting  on a lotus and moon disc in the aspect of the complete enjoyment body (sambogakhaya).  
There are 116 deities in his entourage. With the principal, there are 117 deities in the mandala. 
In this practice of Vairochanabhisambodhi:  
 
16 Perfect Enlightenment of Great Vairochana Sutra  
 
Lesson  9                           Page 57 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
FOUR EXTERNAL BRANCHES 
External self basis  
• One generates oneself as the deity in the beginning and meditates on emptiness.  
• The mind that ascertains emptiness transforms into a moon disc.  
• On top of the moon disc is the gold- coloured syllable, AH.   
• Light rays radiates from the AH and performs the two purposes, i.e.,  purifying the 
negativities and obscurations of sentient beings and making offerings to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.  
• The light rays then gather back into the syllable AH on the moon disc and one then 
completely transforms into the  deity, Vairochanabhisambodhi.  
External other basis   
One visualises the deity Vairochanabhisambodhi in the space in front of oneself.  
External mind basis  
One visualises a moon disc, which entity is one’s own mind realising emptiness, at the heart of the deity in the space in front.  
External sound basis  
On top of the moon disc at the heart of the front generation deity, one places the mantra garland that one is going to repeat.  
These are the four external branches.   
 After one has visualised these four branches, one then maintains clear appearance of oneself as the deity and generates divine pride on the basis of that deity. When that is done well, one focuses on the mantra garland on the moon disc at the heart of the deity in front and performs 
the mental repetition of the mantra while retaining the life -force exertion.  
 The way of performing the above visualisation is similar to that of Action Tantra but the generation of the six deities is not clearly stated in the text for Performance Tantra.  
 As stated in the text, the recitation of the four external branches involves the whispered and the mental repetition, “ Whispered and mental repetition without deterioration of each set of 
these four branches, and retaining li fe-force exertion during mental repetition.”  
 FOUR INTERNAL BRANCHES Internal Self Basis  
At the beginning, one meditates on emptiness. Within the state of emptiness, one arises as a deity through any one of the following four syllables: AH (long), AH (shor t), AUM, AH.  
Internal Other Basis  
Then visualise at one’s heart standing upright like a mirror, a moon disc. On the surface of that moon disc, there is another Vairochanambhisambodhi deity similar to the self -generation deity.  
 Internal Mind Basis  
In th e heart of that deity, there is a moon disc.  
Internal Sound Basis  
On the top of that moon disc is the mantra garland of the deity.  
 
 
Lesson  9                           Page 58 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
On the basis of these four internal branches, one performs the repetition of the mantra 
progressing from whispered repetition to mental repetition. At this point in time, one strives to achieve calm abiding. Once that is achieved, one analyses the meaning of emptiness. Through the practice of alternating between analysis and placement, one develops the union of calm abiding and special insight and when that is achieved, one actualises yoga without signs.  
 Summary  
• Recitation with the four external branches.  
• Recitation with the four internal branches.  
• Whispered and mental repetition without deterioration of each set of th e four branches.  
• Retaining life -force exertion during mental repetition.  
• Actualising yoga without signs.  
 1.1.2.3.2  YOGA WITHOUT SIGNS  
 When one attains calm -abiding focusing on the body of the deity and so forth, one meditates 
on emptiness by combining it  with deity yoga. One achieves the union of calm -abiding and 
insight comprehending emptiness through combining analysis and placement. (Pg. 7 of the root text)  
 Question: What is the purpose of the four internal branches? This seems to be the main differe nce between Action and Performance Tantra.  
Answer : It isn’t quite like that. The manner of practising Action Tantra and Performance Tantra 
is almost similar but there are some slight differences in explaining the paths.  
 The four external branches are si milar to the practice of the concentration with repetition in 
Action Tantra. The four internal branches are similar to the practice of the concentration 
without repetition in Action Tantra. In  Performance Tantra, these concentrations are explained 
under the four external and internal branches.  
 Also, in Action Tantra, the process of self -generation is done through the six deities whereas in 
Performance Tantra, this is not clearly stated in the text.   
 (Concerning) the meaning of Yoga with and without Sig ns, the Stages of Mantra states:  
 
Yoga with Signs is deity meditation and repetition without meditation on emptiness. Yoga without Signs is deity meditation and repetition with meditation on emptiness. It is not meditation on emptiness alone. ( Pg. 7 of the  root text )  
 Based on this verse in Lama Tsongkhapa’s Stages of Mantra, we can identify what is yoga with signs and what is yoga without signs. Is there a yoga with signs that is deity meditation and 
repetition without meditation on emptiness?  Is there a  yoga without signs that is deity 
meditation and repetitions with meditation on emptiness?   
You cannot say that whatever is mentioned in this verse is not the intended meaning because 
this verse states what is meant by yoga with and without signs.   
 
Lesson  9                           Page 59 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
One scholar says: Deity yoga that is not qualified and (yoga that is) qualified by the 
discernment comprehending emptiness is respectively the meaning of Yoga with and (Yoga) without Signs.  
 Ngawang Palden: This should be examined because there is Yoga with Signs that is qualified by the discernment comprehending emptiness because it is said that if one meditates on 
emptiness prior to Yoga with Signs and at that time one has a strong discernment 
comprehending emptiness, the Yoga with Signs that follows after that will be qualified by it. (Pg. 7 of the root text )  
 Ngawang Palden is saying that this should be examined because there is yoga with signs that is conjoined with the mind realising emptiness. This is because it is said that when one meditates on emptine ss prior to y oga with signs  and at that time one has a strong realisation of 
emptiness, then the yoga with signs that follows will be conjoined with the mind realising emptiness.  
 That is because it is similar to what is stated in the Condensed Stages of  the Path:  
 
If one has a strong wisdom comprehending emptiness, when one is practicing generosity, prostrations, circumambulations and so forth, although the mind that is 
focused on these (activities) does not comprehend emptiness, it is not contradictory 
that it engages (in these activities) through the strength of that (comprehension of emptiness).  
Similarly, if one generates strong bodhichitta at the beginning of the session, when (one later) engages in concentration on emptiness, at that time although bodhichitta is not manifest, it is not contradictory that (concentration on emptiness) is qualified by the presence (of bodhichitta). ( Pg. 7 of the root text)  
 Ngawang Palden’s response is substantiated by the Middle Length Lam Rim  and is the main 
reason  that he states it is incorrect to differentiate yoga with signs and yoga without signs on 
the basis of the whether that yoga is conjoined with the mind realising emptiness.  
 Question: If a Hinayana arhat enters the tantric path after having been awakened by the 
Buddha and meditates on the yoga with signs, can we say that there is no realisation of 
emptiness in that arhat’s mind?  
Answer : Before we analyse, we have to be very clear as to what is yoga with and without signs. 
There is an instance of yoga with signs qualified by the meditation on emptiness and there is an 
instance of yoga without signs involving the manifestation of the deity. Is there a yoga with 
signs that realises emptiness? Is there a yoga without signs that appears as the deity?  
  Interpre ter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  9                           Page 60 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 10    DATE: 26TH MARCH 200 9  
 We usually regard relics to be very precious and holy. There are many types of relics: hair, nail, etc. as well as relics that appear after death. For example, after Shakyamuni Buddha passed away into parinirvarna, the remains of his holy body became relics.  
 
After the holy body is cremated, we get another kind of relics, mustard seed- like relics. It is said 
that seeing these relics are like seeing the Buddha himself and  considered very beneficial. This 
is why there is always so much interest from people when relics are on display.  
 Then there is a fourth type of relics which are known as the dharmakaya relics. From the perspective of Tantra, these relics refer to all th e dharanis (or retention mantras) of the four 
classes of Tantra. There are different dharanis for Highest Yoga Tantra, Yoga Tantra, Performance Tantra and Action Tantra. The dharmakhaya relic is considered to be the most superior among the four types of re lics. One of the reasons that holy objects and statues are 
seen to be so precious and as supreme objects of homage and offerings is because they are filled with the dharmakaya relics of the different dharanis of the four classes of Tantra. Since that is th e case, when one recites the different mantras (or dharanis) which are posited as the 
dharmakhaya relics, it will bring about inconceivable benefits.  
 
When one analyses this further, applying logic and reasoning, the benefits that we get from 
studying and learning about the four classes of Tantra cannot be less than the benefit of simply 
reciting the mantras. In fact, we will get even more  benefit by studying Tantra. Seeing the 
physical relics of the Buddha and holy beings can bring about so much benefit.  If we then study 
the valid treatises of the Tantric teachings of the Buddha and put them into practice, that will really be receiving the benefit of meeting the dharmakaya relics.   The Buddha’s main purpose in leaving behind relics was to benefit the dis ciples. Think about 
this: what is it that actually transforms our minds? It is the activities of learning and studying and then reflecting on the teachings of the Buddha. So we can say that these teachings are the dharmakaya relics.   Following this line o f reasoning, we can understand that we get inconceivable benefits and 
merits by studying the teachings of the Buddha. We will accumulate more merit when we 
reflect on those teachings. Then, if we were to meditate on the teachings, we will accumulate 
even m ore merit. Therefore we should make as much effort as possible to meet with the 
dharmakaya relics,  the teachings of the Buddha. We need to understand and remember the benefits of listening to, studying and reflecting on the teachings. We will then  engage  in our 
studies with enthusiasm.   It is possible that some students think that coming to class for two hours is a waste of time. It is good if you can understand what is being taught during class but even if you do not understand anything, that doesn’t me an that you have wasted your time. It is not like that because when 
you spend two to three hours looking at physical relics, you don’t consider that a waste of time.  
 
Lesson  10           Page 61 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Over the years during this Basic Program, I have been encouraging and reminding you of the importance of studying and reflecting on the teachings. I have  constantly mentioned the importance of studying. Many of you have heeded my advice and have tried your best to study. I think that is my responsibility as a teacher. From my side, I have t o do that. The fact that 
students have responded to my encouragement to study fulfil the purpose of my teaching here.  
 
***********************************  
 We have started the section on Performance Tantra. In that practice, there are the four -
external -branched repetition and the four -internal- branched repetition. Bringing these to 
culmination, one achieves calm abiding. After one achieves calm abiding, one moves on to achieve the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness.   I had for gotten to explain the ways to distinguish between Sutra and Tantra. They are primarily 
differentiated by the existence of a meditation on the path that accords with the four complete purities that exist at the time of the result. The presence of such a meditation determines whether the practice is Tantra or not. The four complete purities  are: 
1) The complete purity of the abode , which refers to meditation on the inestimable mansion 
that is the reflective appearance of the enlightened wisdom of the deity  
2) The complete purity of the body , referring to the deity’s holy body that is adorned with the 
signs and exemplifications  
3) The complete purity of the enjoyments , referring to the offering substances that are the 
reflective appearance of the enlightened wisdom, i. e., the offering substances that arise 
from the wisdom of the buddha ground.  
4) The complete purity of the actions or enlightened deeds , referring to the uninterrupted 
continuous activities of the Buddha that exist until the end of samsara.  
In essence, the r esultant four complete purities refer to the Buddha’s abode, the Buddha’s holy 
body, the enjoyments experienced by the Buddha and the Buddha’s activities.   Geshe -la: I am not sure what the Buddha eats. Do you think the Buddha eats? When Nepali 
Buddhists m ake offerings to the Buddha’s statue, they bring the food in a plate and then they 
will put the food into the mouth of the statue of the Buddha!  
 
In Tantra, even before one achieves enlightenment, one can engage on the path in meditations 
that accord with the aspects of the four complete purities of the resultant stage:  
● For example, one meditates on where one lives as the inestimable mansion of a deity. That 
meditation accords with the aspects of the complete purity of the environment which exist at the time of result.  
● In order to achieve the complete purity of the body which exists at the time of the result, 
while one is on the path, one practises deity yoga, visualising oneself as the deity. One meditates on emptiness and then, within the state of em ptiness, one arises as the deity. In the 
case of Action Tantra, one arises as the deity by means of the six deities. In Performance Tantra, one does so through the three rituals.  
 
Lesson  10           Page 62 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
● In the practice of Tantra, one generates oneself as the deity and then mak es offerings to that 
self-generation. The offerings are also generated from within the state of emptiness. This 
practice accords with the aspects of the complete purity of the enjoyments which exist at the 
time of the result.  
● For the meditation of the pr actice that accords with the aspects of the complete purity of the 
enlightened activities which exist at the time of result, it is very clear in Yoga and Highest Yoga Tantra that there is the practice of the supreme victorious mandala in which there is a 
meditation on emanating various deities to work for the welfare of sentient beings and then 
gathering them back again.  
 
This is not so clear in Action and Performance Tantra. There, one visualises oneself as the deity and then places the mantra garland at one’s heart. One then visualises light rays radiating out, 
working for the benefit of sentient beings. I guess that meditation is the meditation that accords with the aspects of the complete purity of the activities which exist at the time of result.  
 So, the Tantric path is the path with the meditations that accord with the aspects of the four 
complete purities which exist at the time of result. The path that does not have these meditations that accord with the aspects of the four complete purities which e xist at the time 
of result is not the Tantric path. It is Sutra.  
 
Question: How does one make offerings to the self -generation deity?  
Answer : After one has generated oneself as a deity, one visualises from one’s heart, offering 
goddesses emanate. They hold various offering substances in their hands and they then make 
these offerings to oneself as a deity.  
 
Here is a qualm: When you visualise yourself as a deity, can you still do the practice of tonglen? Ordinary appearance and grasping are counteracted when you generate yourself as a deity. At that time, if one’s concentration is very strong, one may have a strong clarity of oneself as the deity with strong divine pride. I think at that time it may be difficult to do tonglen.  
 But if one’s ordinary appe arance and grasping are still there and the clarity of oneself as the 
deity and the divine pride are not that strong, at that time it may not be so difficult to do tonglen. A scholar, one Lama Kirti Lobsang Thinley,  mentioned in his text that one can prac tice 
tonglen by visualising oneself in the ordinary aspect at the heart of oneself as the deity. 
However he said this is  not definitive and only his personal view.  
 
In the Paramitayana, method and wisdom are two separate minds but there is a practice of conjoining them, either method conjoins with wisdom or vice versa. However, these two are 
separate entities although they assist each other.  
 In Tantra, however, method and wisdom are not distinct entities but both are found in one consciousness. In Tantra , method is referred to as the extensive deity yoga whereas wisdom 
refers to the profound wisdom realising emptiness.  What the consciousness is ascertaining is emptiness and that appears in the form of a deity. I am not saying that method is wisdom as method and wisdom are separate but they are found in one consciousness.  
 
Lesson  10           Page 63 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Question: Why should it be more difficult to practice tonglen as a deity?  
Answer : The main reason for doing tonglen practice is to overcome self- cherishing and is a 
practice of volunta rily taking on the suffering of others.  
 Although this is the way that method and wisdom are united in the sutric system, uniting method and wisdom is not (achieved) by that alone in the mantric system. This is because both 
the extensive (method of) deity yoga and the profound wisdom comprehending the lack of 
inherent existence are inseparably united as the collection of method and wisdom, at one time and in one awareness. (Pg. 7 of the root text ) 
 The way method and wisdom are united in Sutra is mentioned in the Condensed Stages of the Path but t he way of uniting method and wisdom in Tantra is something different. As stated in 
the text “This is because both the extensive method of deity yoga and the profound wisdom 
comprehending the lack of inherent existence are inseparably united as the collecti on of 
method and wisdom, at one time and in one awareness. ” The reason for the inseparability of 
method and wisdom at one time and in one awareness in Tantra is then given.  
 The Stages of Mantra states:  
 
At the time of the result, both the deity adorned w ith the marks and signs and the mind 
of non- observation reliant on that abide indivisible in nature, at the same time. 
Similarly, at the time of the path,  it is necessary that both the method, which is one’s 
body appearing as the Tathagata’s body, and the wisdom focusing on the non -inherent 
existence of the suchness of one’s mind at that time, are indivisibly united as the collection of method and wisdom, at one time, in the indivisible nature of one awareness. ( Pg. 8 of the root text )  
 What this extract is saying is that the Buddha’s enlightenment that  we are trying to achieve is 
characterised by the Buddha’s body and mind. At the time of the result, these two (body and mind) are inseparable in entity. That being  the case, then at the time of the path, the causes for actualising such an inseparable body and mind must be a consciousness that unites both method and wisdom in one inseparable entity. ( Interpreter ’s note: “ At the time of the path”  is 
missing from the English translation of the original root t ext although it appears in the Tibetan 
text).  
 And:  
Although that wisdom comprehending the lack of inherent existence of the appearance of the deity, the aspect held, is one in nature with the mind of extensive deity yoga, positing them as distinct method  and wisdom is by the power of the convention of 
distinct isolates, which negates wrong (modes of) distinction. (Pg. 8 of the root text )   
 
Answer to question: The practice of method and wisdom is to achieve the two bodies - the 
truth body and the form body. This is the same in both Tantra and the Paramitayana. The method in Paramitayana is great compassion and bodhicitta which are the causes for achieving 
 
Lesson  10           Page 64 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
the fo rm body of the Buddha. The wisdom realising emptiness is the cause for achieving the 
Buddha’s mind, the dharmakaya.  
 
This is mentioned by Nagarjuna in the Precious Garland and also in the concluding prayers of 
the Eight Mahayana Precepts,  “May I and all s entient beings achieve the two enlightened holy 
bodies created by the two vast accumulations of merit and transcendental wisdom.” Why do we need method and wisdom? In order to achieve the two bodies - the form body and the 
truth body. Method and wisdom are  posited as the collection of merits and wisdom. The 
collection of merits is accumulated through the meditation on bodhicitta which results in the form body of the Buddha, i.e., that meditation is the cause for achieving the form body of the Buddha. Wisdom  is likewise the cause for the attainment of the truth body.  
 Question: In terms of method, how come bodhicitta is replaced by deity yoga in Tantra?  
Answer : The way to achieve these two bodies – the truth body and the form body - is the same 
in Tantra, i.e ., through method and wisdom. However in Tantra, the method is the practice of 
the extensive deity yoga which is the cause for the attainment of the form body. In Tantra, the way of achieving the form body is posited in an uncommon way. Therefore the metho d in 
Tantra is more profound than the method posited in the Paramitayana. This means that the method posited by the Paramitayana is not the ultimate method.  
 The reason for meditating on deity yoga to achieve the form body is because,  at the time of 
the cause, there must be a meditation that accords with the aspects which exist at the time of 
result, enlightenment. A specific cause leads to a specific result. Concordant causes lead to 
their respective results. A concordant result cannot arise from a disco rdant cause.  That is why 
the  method posited in Tantra is more profound and the method is changed from bodhicitta to deity yoga.  
 Student:  I can’t believe that bodhicitta is a discordant cause for achieving enlightenment.  
Response : Bodhicitta is a consciousness. A form body is form. If you assert  that bodhicitta is 
the substantial cause of the Buddha’s form body, this follows that a consciousness can act as the substantial cause for form. That is not possible. Can our present consciousness act as the substantial cause for the physical body of the next life?  
 A vase is a product and is also impermanent but these two, product and impermanence are not the same but are different. The vase is impermanent because the vase is the reverse of not 
undergoing change in each and every moment. Therefore it is posited as impermanent. The 
vase is a product because it is the reverse of that which is not produced. Product and 
impermanence are mutually inclusive but they are not the same because they have different names. One is the reverse of a specific thing and the other is the reverse of another specific 
thing. Therefore, they are not the same but they are mutually inclusive.  
 In Tantra, there is the inseparable yoga of method and wisdom which are found in one collection. It is method and also wisdom. The wisdom in this inseparable pair of method and 
wisdom is so called because it is the reverse of apprehending reality in the distorted way. The method is so called because it is the reverse of the lack of potential t o achieve the Buddha’s 
form body.  
 
Lesson  10           Page 65 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Question: Please explain the meaning of “ the aspect held” in the above quotation. What is the 
referent object here?  
Answer : “Aspect held ” is sometimes translated as the aspect of the apprehender and the 
apprehended. In this context, the aspect of the apprehended refers to the mind realising emptiness which then arises as the deity. The aspect of the apprehender is in the aspect of the object that is appearing to that consciousness. For example, there is a consciousness  
apprehending vase. What appears to that consciousness is the object, vase. We can say that 
consciousness is in the “aspect” of vase.  
 
The two paragraphs from the root text are quotations from The Stages of Mantra. The first 
paragraph establishes the reason f or having method and wisdom in one inseparable entity. It 
shows that there is such a thing. A qualm may then arise. If method and wisdom are inseparable, are these two the same thing? The second paragraph then goes on to explain that although they are one inseparable entity, they are posited as “ distinct method and wisdom .”  
   
 
Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
Lesson  10           Page 66 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 11    DATE: 29TH MARCH 200 9  
 We are going to meditate for five minutes. You can reflect on any topics of your choice or you can reflect on what we have covered so far in class. You can also use this opportunity to set your motivation or do a simple deity yoga practice.  You can visualise Shakyamuni Buddha in the space in front and perform the seven limbs practice and generate the mind of 
enlightenment (bodhicitta). It is very beneficial to do this as generating a mere wish to achieve 
enlightenment purifies so many  obscurations and creates so much merit.  
 All of you have received many teachings so you should reflect for the next five minutes on whatever you think is most suitable and beneficial for your mind.  You should try to do this. Meditation is not easy and you will not succeed by just doing it once or twice. But for the next five minutes, you should try for one minute, then two minutes and then extend the duration of your meditation to  five minutes. It is not easy in the beginning as the mind gets distracted from the object of meditation. Sometimes, one gets bored after meditating for a while and the mind becomes very dull and one en ds up not thinking of anything at all. That is not meditation. 
The point is to hold the object of focus very clearly in the mind. It is important for the mind to remain alert whether one is doing analytical or placement meditation. If you allow yourself to  
space out and your mind to become dull, this will not benefit you. So let us try (to meditate) for the next five minutes.  
 
********************* 
We will continue with the verse from The Diamond- Cutter Sutra : 
 A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp, An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,  
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud -  
See conditioned things as such!  
 The analogy of “ a flame of a lamp” is used here to highlight the fact that all phenomena appear 
to the consciousness as inherently existent even though that is not how they exist in reality. Although phenomena do not inherently exist, nevertheless it is important to posit the existence of c onventional phenomena which appears to the conventional awareness (mind). 
How does the flame of a butter lamp come about? That depends on many conditions coming 
together, i.e., the butter and wick in the container.  The flame of the butter lamp exists in 
dependence on many conditions for its production. Therefore it is not inherently existent.  
 For the Autonomy Middle Way School and the tenets below it, a phenomenon, such as the flame of the butter lamp which came about through the coming together of many causes and conditions, is established by way of its own character.  
 According to the Consequence Middle Way School, however, because phenomena, such as the flame of the butter lamp, come into existence by depending on causes and conditions, therefore they  are not inherently existent.  
Neither samsara nor nirvana exists inherently. Samsara exists as the result of many causes and 
 
Lesson  11           Page 67 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
conditions. Likewise, nirvana (the attainment of liberation) occurs as the result of many causes 
and conditions. When we think of samsara, it appears to exist inherently from its own side. Not only does it appear  to be inherently existent from its own side to our minds, our minds believe 
that is how samsara exists. Due to this grasping at an inherently existent samsara, we experience  the problems of samsara.  
 Although samsara does not exist in the way it appears to us –  although it appears as inherently 
existent, it does not exist inherently – we believe that is how samsara exists and we grasp at 
samsara as inherently existent. That leads to all sorts of problems and sufferings. This is illustrated by the next analogy, “ an illusion .” An illusionist can produce many kinds of illusions 
such as an attractive person or a frightening image but, in reality, these are just  illusions. There is really nothing there but when we look at these images, we believe in those appearances, thinking that there is an attractive person or frightening image. That (belief) causes us suffering.  
 The analogy of the illusion shows that although things and eve nts do not exist by way of their 
own character (do not exist inherently), nevertheless we believe in and grasp at how they appear to us, which only results in problems and suffering.  
 
• The verse from The Diamond- Cutter Sutra  begins with “ a star ” which illu strates how the two 
truths (i.e., both appearance and emptiness) exist within any given phenomenon.  
• The analogy of “ a visual aberration” Illustrates that things do not necessarily exist in the way 
they appear to us. They appear to us as inherently existen t but they do not exist inherently. 
That appearance of the inherently existent  phenomenon is like a visual aberration.  
• The analogy of “ a flame of a butter lamp”:  If things do not exist inherently, does that mean 
they do not exist? No, that is not the ca se. Things do not exist inherently but nevertheless we 
need to posit their conventional existence. That phenomenon is mere appearance but it does  
exist.  
• The next analogy of “ an illusion ” illustrates how we are drawn into suffering because of our 
believing  in the appearance of an inherently existent phenomenon.  
 It is beneficial to reflect on the meaning of this verse as we recite it. Better still if we can 
memorise the verse and then we can reflect on each of those analogies as we read the words. 
If there is time, we can pause after each analogy that we recite, for example, when we say “ a 
star,” and give ourselves some time to reflect on its meaning. Likewise, we can do the same 
thing for “ a visual aberration”, “a flame of a lamp”  and so forth. When we can reflect on the 
meaning of the verse as we recite it, we fulfil the purpose of learning and  committing this verse to memory.   
 
***********************  
Thus, the Yoga without Signs in this context, is profound and clear non -dual yoga. It is not 
merely deity yoga qualified by discernment comprehending emptiness because without 
meditation on emptiness it does not become concentration without signs. ( Pg. 8 of the root 
text)  
 As explained here, the author is  saying that the non -dual yoga of profundity and clarity is the 
Yoga without Signs. If it is a non -dual yoga of profundity and clarity, is it necessarily a Yoga 
 
Lesson  11           Page 68 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
without Signs? Can there be a non -dual yoga of profundity and clarity which is a Yoga with 
Signs? Does the non-dual yoga of profundity and clar ity exist on the Tantric path of 
accumulation?  
 
It is difficult to say that the non- dual yoga of profundity and clarity, which is essentially the 
inseparable yoga of method and wisdom, does not exist on the Tantric path of accumulation. Will it be correct to say that such a yoga does not exist on the Tantric path of accumulation?  
 This is a qualm that you have to think about. There is no decisive conclusion here but according to this author, he is saying that the non- dual yoga of profundity and clarity is t he Yoga without 
Signs. He further substantiates his assertion by quoting Kedrup Je’s The General (Presentation 
of the) Classes of Tantra:  
 
Although they have consummated the absorption with signs, they do not have the direct antidote that severs the root o f samsara. Therefore to sever the root of samsara, 
Yoga without Signs is needed. To meditate on that one must meditate according to instruction through becoming expert in analytical and placement meditation on emptiness, that does not meditate on any relat ive aspect such as the body of the deity 
and so forth.  
And:  
Yoga without Signs familiarizes with the continuity of the determining awareness 
determining the emptiness of inherent existence of all dharmas through logic such as 
neither being one nor many and so forth. ( Pg. 8 of the root text )  
 
“Although they have consummated the absorption with signs, they do not have the direct 
antidote that severs the root of samsara. Therefore to sever the root of samsara, Yoga without Signs is needed” : Is this sentence then saying that the Yoga with Signs (the absorption with 
signs) is not the direct antidote that severs the root of samsara? If that is the case, then Yoga with Signs is not the realisation of emptiness.   
  
Here, it is clear that the Yo ga with Signs is not the direct antidote that severs the root of 
samsara, “ Therefore to sever the root of samsara, Yoga without Signs is needed.”  
 “To meditate on that one must meditate according to instruction through becoming expert in analytical and placement meditation on emptiness, that does not meditate on any relative 
aspect such as the body of the deity and so forth”  refers to the Yoga without Signs.  
A qualm is then presented:  
 
Regarding that someone says: Take as the subject Yoga without Signs, it follows that it is not deity yoga because the body of a deity with the aspects of face, arms and so forth, does not appear. This is because it is a mind directly comprehending emptiness.  
 Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion because one must accept that t he subject, the basis 
which is empty, appears to the conceptual logical awareness comprehending emptiness. This is because the Great Commentary to the Madhyamikakarika and the Stages of the Path state just 
that. (Pg. 8 -9 of the root text ).  
 
Lesson  11           Page 69 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
The author replies to the qualm by saying that even if it is deity yoga, it does not necessarily mean that aspects of the deity, such as the arms, must appear. Even if it is a mind realising emptiness, it does not mean that the deity cannot appear.   
 This is a difficult point. The “ conceptual logical awareness comprehending emptiness ” refers to 
the inferential cogniser realising emptiness. The question is this: Does the basis of emptiness 
appear? According to Lama Tsongkhapa, the answer is “Yes”, the basis  of emptiness does 
appear. According to Khedrup Je however, the answer is “No,” the basis of the emptiness does 
not appear as stated in this quotation, “ To meditate on that one must meditate according to 
instruction through becoming expert in analytical and placement meditation on emptiness, that does not meditate on any relative aspect such as the body of the deity and so forth.”  
 This is a complicated issue as different masters hold different views. In accordance with the assertion of the author, even if it is a conceptual logical awareness comprehending emptiness , 
this does not necessarily mean that the deity’s body does not appear to that consciousness. It is possible for the deity’s body to appear.  
 Question: When there is the direct realisation of emp tiness, doesn’t only emptiness appear?  
Answer : This is not referring to the direct  realisation of emptiness but to the conceptual 
consciousness realising emptiness.   
 The author is basically saying that to the inferential cogniser apprehending emptiness, that consciousness realises emptiness and it is also possible for the deity’s body to appear to that 
consciousness. These two are not necessarily contradictory.  
 Although this is the way that method and wisdom are united in the sutric system, uniting method and wisdom is not (achieved) by that alone in the mantric system. This is because both the extensive (method of) deity yoga and the profound wisdom comprehending the lack of inherent existence are inseparably united as the collec tion of method and wisdom, at one time 
and in one awareness. ( Pg. 7 -8 of the root text ) 
 This goes back to our earlier discussion of what non-dual yoga of profundity and clarity is. In 
Tantra, both method and wisdom are found in one single consciousness. T his consciousness 
(non -dual yoga of profundity and clarity) realises emptiness and what appears to that 
consciousness is the deity’s holy body. This is the meaning of, “ the extensive (method of) deity 
yoga and the profound wisdom comprehending the lack of inherent existence are inseparably united as the collection of method and wisdom, at one time and in one awareness”  (Pg. 8 of the 
root text ). In this context, the Yoga without Signs is the non- dual yoga of profundity and clarity. 
It ascertains emptiness and the deity’s body appears to that consciousness.  
 To that someone says: It follows that when Yoga without Signs perceptually comprehends emptiness by the strength of meditation, the body of the deity possessing the aspect of a face and arms appears because your thesis is correct.  
 
 
Lesson  11           Page 70 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion because although the body of the relative deity does 
not appear, it is posited as deity yoga by means of continuum. (Pg. 9 of the root text ) 
 When we talk about Yoga without Signs, it c an refer to a Yoga without Signs that is conceptual 
consciousness or a Yoga without Signs that is a direct perceiver (direct perception consciousness). We said earlier that the Yoga without Signs that is the conceptual consciousness ascertaining emptiness,  it is possible for the deity’s body to appear to that 
consciousness.  
 What happens when the Yoga without Signs changes its entity from being a conceptual consciousness to a direct perceiver? When this direct perceiver  directly perceives emptiness, the de ity’s body does not appear to that direct perception of emptiness. The question then 
arises: is that Yoga without Signs deity yoga? According to the author, the answer is “Yes,” because “it is posited as deity yoga by means of continuum.”  
 In general, if it is either the Yoga with or without Signs, there is no pervasion that the body of the deity with the aspects of face and arms will appear, because in this context there are four yogas*: deity (yoga), empty (yoga), wind (yoga) and repetition yoga. Yoga wit h Signs and Yoga 
without Signs subsume these (four).
17 This is because the Stages of Mantra states:  
 
In Action and Performance Tantras there are four important yogas: deity and empty 
yoga, wind and repetition yoga. In that, the two yogas of the relative and the ultimate 
deity are the main establishing (factors) of the two bodies. Since repetition (yoga) is the branch for motivating the mind of whichever deity is meditated upon, it is subsumed as a branch of relative deity yoga. Since wind yoga is the branch stabilizing both deity yogas, it is subsumed by both (yogas). Through that (the four) are subsumed by two: the Yoga with Signs and the Yoga without Signs. (Pg. 9 of the root text ) 
 “The two yogas of the relative and the ultimate deity are the main establishing (factors) of the two bodies”:  The yoga of the relative deity establishes the form body and the yoga of the 
ultimate deity establishes the truth body. The wind yoga refers to the practice of keeping the wind (subtle energy) inside the body as we perform repetition yoga. Under these yogas, there is the concentration abiding in sound and concentration abiding in fire. In those concentrations, we do not focus on the deity’s body but rather focus on sound but these are deity yogas. Does the deity’s body appear in those deity yogas? No, it does not.  
 The main point is that if it is a deity yoga, it does no t necessarily mean that the deity’s body will 
appear to that consciousness.  
 Question:  What does “motivating” the mind mean?  
Answer : Kyabe Lama Zopa Rinpoche uses the word, “persuading.”  
17 The four yogas: in Action and Performance Tantras there are four yogas: 1) empty (ultimate) yoga is the main 
means for achieving the Truth Body, 2) deity (conventional) yoga is the main means for achieving the Form Body, 
3) wind yoga 4) repetition yoga. None of these include the Stage of Completion that is found only in the Highest 
Yoga Tantras.  
 
 
Lesson  11           Page 71 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Question: Are we “persuading” the deity’s mind or our own mind?  
Answer:  When we are doing repetition, we are persuading the holy mind of the deity to grant 
us both the common and supreme attainments. That is why we do the repetition over and over again so that we can get closer to the deity with the hope that certain feats or attainments can be achieved. It is similar to a beggar harassing you to give until you succumb to his request.  
 
Question: Isn’t the action of a deity spontaneous?  
Answer:  Are you saying that if you don’t do anything, the Buddha will give you bless ings?  
 
At the very beginning, you should have a clear understanding of the two truths and how they are not mutually exclusive in the sense of both being present in any selected phenomenon.  
 In the Heart Sutra, there is the four -fold emptiness –  “Form is emptiness; emptiness is form;  
emptiness is not other than form; form is also not other than emptiness .” It will be beneficial to 
have a clear understanding of this in this context.  
 “Form is emptiness; emptiness is form ”: When one looks for form, in the e nd, what one finds is 
the emptiness of an inherently existent form. But form does exist. The form that one finds is 
the form that arises from within the state of emptiness –  while it is empty, there is form. One 
discovers a form that is the display of empt iness.   
 Understanding this, whatever phenomenon we select, be it form or the deity’s body, both are equal in their being empty and within the state of emptiness, both are equally pure. Within the 
state of emptiness, the emptiness of the I and the emptiness of the deity are the same and it is within this state of inseparability in emptiness, that one arises as the deity. That is how one arises as the deity.  
 1.1.2.4     THE WAY TO ATTAIN TH E SIDDHIS  
 Through relying on external substances such as the  sword and so forth, one attains knowledge 
bearing of the sword and so forth. Through meditation on the mandalas of earth, water, wind and fire in places inside (one’s) body, one attains the actions of pacification, increase and so forth. Through establishing Manjushri and so forth, if such a Bodhisattva were to stroke one’s head or congratulate one at the end of one’s recitation, it is stated in this Tantra to be the (sign 
of the) attainment of the concentration not forgetting bodhichitta. Many ways to att ain these 
and other siddhis are stated. ( Pg. 9 of the root text ) 
 
Question: How is the wind yoga subsumed under the ultimate deity?  
Answer : In the text, it says the “ wind yoga is the branch stabilizing both deity yogas, it is 
subsumed by both (yogas ).” The  wind yoga can be found in both the yogas of the relative and 
the ultimate deities and is essentially the practice of restraining the life -force exertion which 
stabilises the mind so that one can meditate on emptiness with a stable mind. Restraining the life-force exertion also helps in one’s concentration focussing on oneself as the deity and 
therefore helps one’s practice of deity yoga.  
 
 
Lesson  11           Page 72 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Question:  In Performance Tantra, is there an order of progression in practice, starting with 
Yoga with Signs and then moving on to Yoga without Signs?  
Answer : Yes, one starts with training in Yoga with Signs and then progresses on to Yoga without 
Signs.  
 
Question: Should Yoga with Signs be seen as a preliminary to Yoga without Signs? What is the purpose of Yoga with Signs?  
Answer : At the end of Yoga with Signs, you generate calm abiding but the realisation of calm 
abiding alone is insufficient to sever the roots of samsara. Therefore, one needs to train in Yoga without Signs, the primary objective of which is to achieve the  union of calm abiding and 
special insight focussing on emptiness.  
 Question: Can we say that the Yoga with Signs is the path of accumulation and Yoga without Signs is the path of preparation?  
Answer:  Yes. The Yoga with Signs is practised on the path of a ccumulation and when one 
achieves the Yoga without Signs, one attains the tantric path of preparation.    
 Question: Can we assume that the Yoga with Signs is on the tantric path of accumulation and that the Yoga without Signs exists on the tantric path of preparation all the way up to the moment before enlightenment?  Answer: Before we answer this, we need to think ab out this: Is the Yoga with Signs necessarily 
found only  on the path of accumulation? Can Yoga with Signs be found on the higher paths –  
the path of preparation, the path of seeing and the path of meditation as well?   
    Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Vivien Ng and Cecilia Tsong  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
  
 
Lesson  11           Page 73 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 12    DATE: 31ST MARCH 200 9  
 
YOGA TANTRA  
 1.1.3   THE WAY TO PROGRESS ON THE PATH OF YOGA TANTRA  
 
It has four divisions:  
1 Becoming a suitable vessel 
2 Keeping the vows and commitments pure  
3 The way to perform approximation  
4 The way to attain the siddhis  
 
1.1.3.1   BECOMING A SUITABLE VESSEL  
 One becomes a vessel suitable to meditate on the path through attaining the empowerments bestowed in such mandalas as the Vajra Sphere and so forth. There is a difference b etween 
those who merely have the trainee empowerment who hold only the bodhisattva vows, and those on whom the complete vajra master empowerment, who hold both (the bodhisattva) and the tantric vows. (Pg. 10 of the root text )  
 
In the empowerment of Yoga T antra, if the trainee (student) empowerment is bestowed, the 
vows to be protected are the bodhisattva vows.  
 
If the vajra master empowerment is also conferred, one will also have to keep the tantric vows. 
Whether one has to keep tantric vows or not depends on whether one has received the vajra master empowerment.  Since the vajra master initiation is usually conferred in the Yoga and Highest Yoga Tantra initiations,  the recipient will have to keep the tantric vows. Since the vajra master initiation is not  conferred in Action and Performance Tantra empowerments, one does 
not need to keep the tantric vows.   
 One becomes a suitable vessel to meditate on the path of Yoga Tantra by entering into the mandala of a Yoga Tantra deity. One receives the empowerment after entering the mandala.  
 
1.1.3.2   KEEPING THE VOWS AND  COMMITMENTS PURE  
If one is suitable vessel for (holding) the Emancipation (vows) one should practice through possessing the three (types of) vows. Therefore one should have all three vows and guar d the 
commitments
18 as stated in the Supreme Glory19 and in the Peak20. (Pg. 10 of the root text ) 
18 The fourteen commitments related to the Yoga Tantra: 1 -3) taking refuge in the Three Jewels as the three 
commitments related to the ground of the Tathagata family, 4 -6) commitment of holding vajra [mudra], bell 
mudra and master, as the three commitments related to the Vajra family, 7 -10) being generous with Dharma, 
material things, fearlessness and love, as the four commitments related to the Jewel family, 11 -13) holding the 
external action tantra, the inner yoga tantra and the Dharma of the three vehicles,  as the three commitments of 
the Lotus family, 14) striving in the offering activities, as the commitment of the Action family.  
19 Supreme Glory Tantra: Paramadya Tantra ( pal mchog dang po zhes bya ba theg pa chen po ’i nog pa’i  rgyal po)  
 
Lesson  12           Page 74 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The emancipation vows are the vows of individual liberation or pratimoksha vows. A lay or 
ordained person can possess the three vows:   
 ● A lay person who possesses the three vows (holder of the three vows) is someone who has 
taken the lay precepts and the bodhisattva and tantric vows. ●  An ordained person is a holder 
of the three vows if that person has taken the ordination vows either as a novice or fully 
ordained monk or nun and, on that basis, taken the bodhisattva and tantric vows.  
 When one is a holder of the three vows, one has to protect and guard them as well as the uncommon commitments specified in some of these Yoga Tantras such as the Supreme Glory Tantra and the Vajra Peak Yoga Tantra .  
 1.1.3.3   THE WAY TO PERFORM A PPROXIMATION  
 There are two divisions:  
1 Yoga with Signs  
2 Yoga without Signs  
 1.1.3.3.1  YOGA WITH SIGNS  
 There are two divisions:  
1 Focusing on the whole deity.  
2 Focusing on specific hand implements.  
 1.1.3.3.1.1  Focusing on the whole deity  
 By obtaining merely the trainee empowerment, one has (the commitment for) the (single)  
yoga of the deity upon which the flower has landed. (Pgs. 10 –  11 of the root text )  
 The word “single” does not appear in the translation but it is in the Tibetan text. (In general, it 
is challenging to get an understanding of Yoga Tantra as it is not very clear in the various commentaries on Yoga Tantra). The yoga performed by those who rec eive only the trainee 
empowerment is called the single yoga. What single yoga actually refers to is not very clear. I haven’t seen any clear explanation of the practice of single yoga. Does it refer  merely to the practice of a self generation alone or the  practice of self generation together with the 
repetition of mantra or does it mean something else as well?  
 By obtaining the master empowerment, in order to empower students and establish oneself as the deity, one engages in either the extensive approxima tion which meditates without any 
decrease of the three concentrations along with the great yoga of self completion, the medium approximation condensing the rite for generating the supreme conqueror mandala
21, or the 
abbreviated approximation which includes the recitation of 100,000 (mantras) for each of the 
20 Vajra Peak Yoga Tantra: (Explanatory Tantra of the Yoga Tantras) ( sang ba rnal ’ byor chen po ’i rgyud rdo rje rtse 
mo) 
21 Supreme Victory Mandala ( dkyil ’khor rgyal mchog)  
 
Lesson  12           Page 75 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
great yoga deities . (Pgs. 10 – 11 of the root text )  
 
There are three ways that the approximation can be performed: extensive, middling and abbreviated.  The great yoga deities mentioned in the abbreviated approximation refer to the deities of Yoga Tantra.  
 The practice of Yoga with Signs in Yoga Tantra focusses on the coarse deity as one engages in 
the approximations. The extensive way of performing the approximation is done through the 
three concentrations which are found in the long sadhana and are:  
1. the initial preparation  
2. the supreme victorious (or royal) mandala   
3. the supreme victorious (or royal) activities  
 In the practice of the self- generation, one generates another mandala in front of oneself in the 
centre of which one visualises the Yoga Tantra deity in his full aspect. For example, if the principal deity is Kunrig, one visualises him in the centre of the mandala. The practice of the self generatio n up to visualising the principal deity in his full aspect in the centre of the 
mandala is the concentration of the initial preparation. If one decides at this point to focus on reciting the mantra, this is the shortest way of performing the approximation.   This is the 
abbreviated approximation.  
 
Having visualised the principal deity in the centre of the mandala in front of oneself, one then 
visualises emanating from the heart of the deity the other retinue deities and placing them in their respective posi tions in the mandala. This practice is the concentration of the supreme 
victorious mandala and doing this practice in addition to the concentration of the initial preparation is the medium approximation.  
 There is then the practice of persuading the holy m ind of the deity to work for the benefit of 
sentient beings. The principal deity in the mandala emanates limitless replicas of himself to do this. This practice is called the concentration of the supreme victorious activities. Adding this practice to the e arlier two practices is the way to perform the extensive approximation.  
 Question: What is the “ great yoga of self completion ”?  
Answer : It is not clear in the text as to whether this refers to the three concentrations or 
something else. The meditation on the generation stage of Highest Yoga Tantra also has similar 
terminologies and the structure of the three concentrations.  
 
In the practice of Yoga Tantra, after one generates oneself as the deity, one performs the impressions of the four seals which are:  
1. the great seal of the body  
2. the doctrine seal of the speech  
3. the pledge seal of the mind  
4. the action seal of the action  
   
 
Lesson  12           Page 76 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
THE FOUR SEALS  
 The Basis  The Path  The Result  
The great seal of 
the body  One’s ordinary  
body  The meditation of oneself as the 
deity purifies the ordinary body  Achieving the  
holy body of the Buddha  
 The Basis  The Path  The Result  
The doctrine seal 
of the speech  One’s ordinary 
speech  The repetition of mantras purifies 
one’s ordinary speech  Achieving the  holy 
speech of the Buddha  
The pledge seal of 
the mind  One’s ordinary 
mind  The non -dual yoga of profundity 
and clarity purifies one’s ordinary 
mind  Achieving the  
holy mind of the Buddha  
The action seal of 
the action  One’s ordinary 
actions of body, 
speech and mind  The practice of emanating and 
gathering back the emanations who work for sentient beings is the supreme royal activit y that 
purifies one’s ordinary actions  Achieving the holy 
actions of the Buddha  
 
These four seals are related to purifying our ordinary body, speech, mind  and  action into the 
Buddha’s holy body, speech, mind and action.  
 
In the practice of Yoga Tantra, after one has generated oneself as the deity, one gathers the wisdom beings and causes them to dissolve into oneself. After that one performs the impression  of the four seals. This is extremely important in Yoga Tantra and is extensively 
explained in Lama Tsongkhapa’s Stages of Mantra.    
 The root tantra of Yoga Tantra is Compendium of Principles Tantra refers to the four lineages. 
Usually there are five line ages but it is mentioned very clearly in the Stages of Mantra that the 
Compendium of Principles Tantra specifically talks about the four lineages which are:  
1. the Tathagata lineage  
2. the Lotus lineage  
3. the Vajra lineage  
4. the Jewel lineage  
The fifth lineage, Action lineage is not explicitly mentioned but is subsumed under the Jewel lineage, i.e., this means that the agent and activities are combined into one. From the perspective of agent, we talk about the Jewel lineage. From the perspectiv e of activities, we 
talk about the Action lineage. We can employ the same logic with respect to the three lineages in Action Tantra which mentions only the Tathagata, Lotus and Vajra lineages. The Jewel and Action lineages are not explicitly mentioned and can be understood to be subsumed under the 
three lineages.  
 
So, to recap, Yoga with Signs has two divisions, the first of which is the focussing on the whole (or coarse/gross deity) as opposed to the second division which is focussing on the subtle (here translated as “specific”) hand implements.  
 1.1.3.3.1.2      Focusing on specific hand implements  
 
 
Lesson  12           Page 77 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
While clearly (visualizing) oneself as the deity, one holds one’s mind on the small vajra hand 
implement at the upper opening (of the central channel), simi lar in color to one’s special deity. 
One should perform (acts) such as sending out and gathering (the hand implements) and so forth, when the mind has stability on that. (Pg. 11 of the root text)  
 Having  visualised oneself as the deity, one then visualises a very small five -pointed vajra at the 
tip of the nose which, at its largest, should be no bigger than a mustard seed and, at its 
smallest, is the size of the tip of a single hair.  (The ‘tip of the nose’ accords with what appears 
in the  Tibetan text. The central channel is not referred to in the lower tantras. Only in Highest 
Yoga Tantra are the upper and lower openings of the central channel mentioned).  
 
Different masters have the different wa ys of explaining this practice:  
• According to the great master, Kunga Nyingpo (Anandagarbha), one first visualises this five -
pointed vajra at the navel and then draws it up to the tip of the nose to abide there. Then one concentrates on that vajra.  
• Accord ing to another master, Shakyamitra, one visualises the vajra at one’s heart and then 
draws it to the tip of the nose. One then concentrates on that object.  
• According to the master Buddhaguhya, one should stop breathing and hold the wind in the 
nose. While  doing that, one then focusses on the vajra at the tip of one’s nose.  
 By concentrating on the very small five -pointed vajra at the nose and keeping one’s mind on 
that object, one achieves calm abiding. To develop dexterity in calm abiding, one then 
visua lises that vajra emanating countless replicas of itself filling all of space. Then, one gathers 
back all those replicas into the vajra at the tip of one’s nose.  
 
In Yoga Tantra, through the practice of focussing on the coarse body of the deity and the sub tle 
hand implements, one brings those practices to culmination and one actualises calm abiding. These two practices are the Yoga with Signs.  
 “One should perform (acts) such as sending out and gathering (the hand implements) and so 
forth, when the mind has  stability on that.” : Here, “mind has stability on that,”  does that mean 
one only does the practice of emanating and gathering back the vajras after one has achieved calm abiding or is that done before one achieves calm abiding?  Reading this, I guess we c an 
say that this practice of emanating and gathering back the replicas of the vajra to the small five-pointed vajra at the tip of the nose is done after  one has achieved calm abiding.  
 
One text says, “ Within the deep concentration focusing on the vajra at the tip of the nose 
without being distracted from that, we then train by using another part of the mind to emanate 
and then gather back these vajras.”  This means that the yogi has already achieved the 
realisation of calm abiding and in order to improve the  dexterity of his concentration, while he 
is in a deep state of concentration focussing on the vajra, he uses another part of his mind to do the practice of emanating and gathering back the replicas.  This can be seen as the training to develop special ins ight which is cultivated within  calm abiding.  
 1.1.3.3.2  YOGA WITHOUT SIGNS  
 
 
Lesson  12           Page 78 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
One resolves that the deity in front of oneself together with the letters of the mantra do not 
inherently exist. When one attains certainty of that, and the continuum of that determining awareness combines analysis and placement, one establishes the union of calm- abiding and 
insight comprehending emptiness. When one obtains such insight, one transfers to the Path of Preparation and so forth, similar to before. ( Pg. 11 of the root text )  
 Let’s say one is doing the Yoga Tantra practice based on Vairochana:  
• One visualises Vairochana in the space in front.  
• In the heart of Vairochana is the mantra garland.  
• One then focusses on the deity together with the mantra garland at the hea rt, reflecting on 
how both do not exist inherently.  
 
(Interpreter ’s note: “awareness combines analysis and placement ” should be read as 
“awareness alternating between analysis and placement”.)  
 I myself am not knowledgeable on Yoga Tantra and it is quite challenging as the commentary in the text itself is not very clear. I guess what I have mentioned so far is correct. If there is anything that is incorrect, I will make the correction in the future.  
 Question: What is the difference between the dexterity o f concentration and pliancy?  
Answer : There are physical and mental pliancy and both are special forms of contact. Dexterity 
can also be translated as skill in training the mind to develop special insight.  
 Question: What is the process of generating onesel f as the deity in Yoga Tantra?  
Answer:  This is a complicated issue and I shall dispense with that. Basically one generates 
oneself as a deity through the five manifest enlightenments.  
      Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
Lesson  12           Page 79 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 13   DATE: 2ND APRIL 2009  
 
A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,  
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud-  
See conditioned things as such!  
 
The analogy of “ an illusion”  refers to the fact that although all pheno mena are not inherently 
existent yet we believe them to be so. This grasping at phenomena leads to all sorts of 
problems and sufferings. Phenomena are like illusions but be it a phenomenon, a self or an aggregate, we apprehend them to exist from their own side. This grasping at phenomena to be 
inherently existent acts as a basis for us to grasp at them to be permanent and unchanging.   
 
In reality, they are not permanent as shown in the next analogy, “ a drop of dew.”   The self, the 
‘I  and the aggregates are not permanent although we grasp at them to be so. They are like the 
drop of dew at the tip of a blade of grass. As soon as the sun rises, that dewdrop evaporates. 
Likewise our body, the self, the I are impermanent , undergoing change from moment to 
moment. From the moment they are produced, they are produced in the nature of undergoing 
momentary change.  
 
We are born to die as mentioned in Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Verses , “Production is for the 
purpose of destruction.” Once something is born, it undergoes momentary change and moves 
towards disintegration. In that sense, things are produced so that they can be destroyed.  
 The Lord of Death is one of the four maras. We usually think of him as  something external, a frightening creature waiting to take our lives. But we are the Lord of Death. We are moving towards death.   It is insufficient to simply realise that things can disintegrate. It is important to realise that they 
undergo momentary change. For example, when we  are born, in the next moment we have 
aged. Change is happening in each and every single moment. A person doesn’t start aging after 
a few years but aging begins  from the second moment of his existence. It is important we 
realise this.  
 
It is the same wit h our concept of time. When we talk about the past and the future, the past 
seems very short relative to the future. But in reality, whether it be the past or future, there is 
no difference in terms of the actual length of time but there is a difference in  how we feel 
about it. Let’s say we are in our 50’s or 60’s. Although 50 or 60 years had passed yet that time seems to be very short. When we think of the future, we feel we are going to live for many more years to come. But in reality it is not like that.   
 Let’s take the example of someone whose life span is 70 years. This person is now 50 years old. In his mind, he thinks that he still has many years to live. The past seems quite brief in comparison. But actually the reverse is true because he has alread y lived for 50 years and now 
he only has 20 years left. The future is much shorter. Having already lived for 50 years, he 
 
Lesson  13           Page 80 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
should be able to manage his life for the next 20 years without any difficulty. But because of  
thinking that he is going to live for another 20 years, he feels he  needs to work very hard to accomplish happiness.    
Such grasping at permanence leads to the arising of attachment, desire and anger. When we are able to remember the impermanent nature of things, it will benefit us in terms of reducing those afflictions. Therefore, it is important for us to reflect on impermanence. Using this 
analogy of the dewdrop, we can reflect on the impermanence of the self and I that is imputed 
on these aggregates. These aggregates can come to an end wh en conditions are present 
because these two, the I and the aggregates are in the nature of impermanence and momentary change, that is, they undergo change in each and every single moment.  
 It is important to reflect in this way as it becomes the reflectio n on subtle impermanence. The 
realisation of the momentary nature of impermanent phenomena helps us to develop renunciation, helps us to develop compassion and helps us to understand and realise emptiness. If we can understand the momentary nature of thing s and events, it will help us to 
reduce or even eradicate a lot of problems and sufferings in this life.  
 It is mentioned in the Lam Rim that amongst all the realisations, the best realisation is remembering impermanence. We understand this intellectually  but we have difficulty blending 
this understanding with our minds, which can only be achieved through continual reflection.  
 
******************************  
 
The way to perform the approximation in Yoga Tantra is through the Yoga with Signs and Yoga withou t Signs. Yoga with Signs is developed through focussing on the coarse body of the deity 
and the subtle hand implements. After that, one does the practice of Yoga without Signs.  
 1.1.3.4   THE WAY TO ATTAIN SI DDHIS  
 Many siddhis are said to be attained thro ugh the three: absorption, recitation and fire pujas.  
 The Stages of Mantra states that from among those, the two, coming to hold the knowledge mantra
22 of a Bodhisattva bearing the form of a complete Buddha and attaining the actual 
siddhi in the form of th e great seal of the body of one’s deity, are the purest siddhis initially 
established by the supreme disciples of Yoga Tantra.  
 In Action and Performance Tantras attaining the siddhi of knowledge -bearer (is stated) as the 
attainment of the great siddhi of the body. (Pg. 11 of the root text ) 
 Siddhis is a Sanskrit word and can also be translated as feats, many of which  are said to be attained through these three activities: - 
1. concentration (absorption)  
22  Knowledge mantra ( rig sngags) : (Vidya mantra) mantras primarily meant for establishing the vajra wisdom 
aspect of mind and the enlightened activities as a deity in a female form together with its sound, mudras etc.  
 
Lesson  13           Page 81 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
2. repetition  
3. burnt offerings (usually translated as fire pujas)  
 
Supreme attainment by (means of) the three lower tantras depends on the initial attainment of worldly siddhis. The Great Commentary of the Kalachakra states that in accordance with Highest (Yoga Tantra), it is suitable to establish supreme siddhi by uninterruptedly meditating on the generation and completion stages without relying on those.  
 Also the Stages of Mantra states:  
Initially one purely maintains the vows and commitments that are the sources of siddhis. One then attains potency by putting effort into four sessions (of) Yoga with and without Signs. Then, having attained the common and uncommon siddhis, one progresses through the path. This way (of making progress) should be known in the three lower tantras. Also, it is unsuitable to assert that one progresses on the path by fusing wind, repetition, empty and deity yogas. ( Pgs. 11 –  12 of the root text ) 
 This quotation is saying that in order to progress to the higher paths, one does so through achieving the common and uncommon siddhis and not merely by practising the wind, repetition, empty and deity yogas. In the three lower tantras, one progresses on the paths and grounds after having completed the attainment of, first, the common siddhis followed by the uncommon siddhis (feats).  
 
In the Yoga Tantra section of the Stages of Mantra by Lama Tsongkhapa, there is an extensive 
explanation of the various feats that are achievable. These feats are achieved after one has 
brought to culmination the practices of Yoga with Signs and Yoga without Signs. I will mention a few here:    
Feat of revealing treasure 1. Meditate on a treasure vase at one’s heart.  
2. There is a mo on inside the treasure vase.  
3. On the top of the moon, there is a five -pointed vajra.  
4. One meditates on these signs until one has a strong sense of being able to ‘see’ and touch the vajra in the treasure vase at one’s heart.  
5. Having achieved this, one then per forms repetition and meditation for the whole night. 
Then one goes to the place where one hopes to find the treasure and makes offerings to 
the deities and spirits.  
6. One should then protect the treasure and the place with the mantra and seal (or mudra) of 
Vajraspota.   
7. When all these have been done, the treasure will be found.  
 As mentioned earlier, to accomplish these feats, one has to bring to culmination the practices of Yoga with Signs and Yoga without Signs. Without the realisations of these yogas, it will be extremely difficult to achieve anything even though one tries to perform the visualisations.  
 Feat of not sinking into water  
1. One goes to the bank of a spri ng and fills a great clay vessel with water.  
 
Lesson  13           Page 82 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
2. One meditates for four sessions daily that the water (in the vessel) has transformed into 
vajras until one gets the sign of seeing the body of water as vajras and, when touched, is as hard as vajras.  
3. One then draws a mandala of the appropriate lineage, performs the preliminary rites and 
remains in that meditative stabilisation for the entire night.  
4. Then, when one goes into the water in that state of meditative stabilisation, one will be able to walk on the wat er. 
 These are common feats (or shared feats), so called because they are the common attainments of the four classes of Tantra. There are also specific or uncommon attainments in each class of Tantra, which are achievable only through that particular Tantra.  
 Question: What is the difference between worldly and common feats?  
Answer:  Worldly feats are equivalent to common feats. I am not sure whether common feats 
can be achieved by non -Buddhists. In reality, feats such as invisibility, flying through the sky  or 
pacification of illnesses can also be achieved by non -Buddhists. I am not 100% sure but I would 
equate worldly siddhis to common siddhis and transcendental siddhis to uncommon siddhis.  
There is a reason why one must establish the common siddhis before  establishing the supreme 
siddhi through the path of the three lower tantras because Engaging in the Bodhisattva’s Way 
of Life  states:  
 
All these branches
23 are proclaimed by the Muni for the purpose of wisdom.  
 The system of both Great Vehicles
24 is that the wisdom comprehending emptiness is 
enhanced by the factor of method. ( Pg. 12 of the root text ) 
 
The point of cultivating a method to enhance the factor of wisdom is to make that wisdom powerful. This is the same for both the Paramitayana and Vajrayana in that the wisdom comprehending emptiness is made powerful by the factor of method.  
 
According to the Perfection Vehicle, the wisdom comprehending emptiness is rendered 
capable to abandon the knowledge obscurations
25 through training for a limitless time 
in limitless clear divisions such as generosity and so forth.  
According to Highest (Yoga) Mantra, co mprehension of emptiness in reliance on a 
combination of the points of both (types of) bodhichitta is enhanced by taking desire 
from the union of the two (sexual) organs as the path.  
 
As for the three lower tantras, it is not mentioned that one should tra in for a limitless 
time in the limitless clear divisions such as generosity and so forth, as in the Perfection Vehicle. Nor is it mentioned that one should train in the method of generating a special object -possessor comprehending emptiness as mentioned in  Highest Yoga Mantra. 
Therefore, there is need to enhance the comprehension of emptiness through dexterity 
23 The first five perfections.  
24 The two Mahayana vehicles: (Perfection ) Sutric vehicle and Tantric vehicle.  
25 Knowledge obscuration s: obscuration to omniscience abandoned during the last three, pure grounds  
(according to the Middle Way  Consequence school).  
 
Lesson  13           Page 83 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
in methods such as the attainment of many common siddhis, being taken care of and 
blessed directly by Buddhas and higher Bodhisattvas. ( Pg. 12 of the  root text )  
 According to the Highest Yoga Tantra, from the union of the two sexual organs, the two bodhicittas – the white bodhicitta from the father and the red bodhicitta from the mother –  
come together. One then generates the mind of great bliss which  is used to ascertain 
emptiness. The purpose is to generate that special object- possessor comprehending emptiness 
in order to abandon the knowledge obstructions  
 
It is not mentioned in the three lower Tantras that:  
• one has to train for a long time or train  in so many things such as generosity and so forth as 
in the Perfection Vehicle nor is  
• there a special method for generating the special object -possessor comprehending 
emptiness that is produced by depending on the gathering of the two bodhicittas as 
desc ribed in the Highest Yoga Tantra.  
 What happens then in the three lower Tantras? As stated in the above extract, “ Therefore, 
there is need to enhance the comprehension of emptiness through dexterity in methods such as the attainment of many common siddhis , being taken care of and blessed directly by Buddhas 
and higher Bodhisattvas.”  We are examining here what makes the wisdom realising emptiness 
powerful in the three lower Tantras, i.e.:  
• the attainment of many common siddhis and  
• being taken care of and ble ssed directly by Buddhas and higher Bodhisattvas .  
These are the two things that make the wisdom realising emptiness powerful in the three 
lower Tantras, which is different from that which makes the wisdom comprehending emptiness powerful in the Paramitayana.  
 As stated earlier, it is the factor of method that makes the wisdom comprehending emptiness powerful in Paramitayana. It is also stated that it is the factor of method that makes the wisdom comprehending emptiness powerful in Tantra. It is specifical ly mentioned in the three 
lower Tantras that  it is the factor of method that makes the wisdom comprehending 
emptiness powerful. Therefore all of them assert that it is the factor of method that makes the 
wisdom comprehending emptiness powerful but the met hods posited are different.  
 With regard to that, someone says: It is unacceptable to explain that the disciples of Mantra do not need to train in the various limitless, clear divisions of generosity and so forth, because from the awakening mind up to trai ning in the conduct of the Six Perfections is the common 
path of both Great Vehicles.  
 Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion because only the gross body of practice which is the path for training in the awakening mind, the basis of conduct, and the conduct of the Six Perfections is common. Training in the various, limitless and specific divisions such as generosity and so forth, is different from the path of Mantra because this is stated in the Abbreviated Stages of the Path and in the Illuminating Lamp . (Pgs. 12 –  13 of the root text ) 
 
 
Lesson  13           Page 84 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The author said that there is no pervasion because from the awakening mind up to training in 
the conduct of the six perfections is the common path of both Great Vehicles but the need to 
train in the limitless divisions such as generosity and so forth, is not common to Mantra but only applicable to the  Paramitayana (Sutra).  
 There is the practice of generosity in both Sutra and Tantra but it is only in Sutra that one has to train:  
• in the limitless divisions of generosity  
• for a limitless time.  
In Sutra, there is an extensive discussion of the practice of generosity such as offering one’s body and so forth. This is not taught in Tantra.  
 
In both Sutra and Tantra, one must cultivate the awakening mind and the conduct of the six 
perfections but in Tantra, one does not have to train in   the limitless division s of the six 
perfections for a limitless amount of time.  
 Answer to question:  The awakening mind and the bodhisattva’s conduct of the six perfections 
are two things. The awakening mind (bodhicitta) is the basis for the bodhisattva conduct.  
 Question: We ha ve established that the bodhisattva’s conduct of generosity that is mentioned 
in Tantra is different from Sutra as in Sutra, there are the limitless divisions of generosity and the need to practise them for a limitless amount of time. How do we delineate t hese two 
different practices of generosity?  
Answer : There is some debate regarding this. That comes later in the text. In Sutra, the practise 
of generosity is not done in relation to deity yoga whereas in Tantra, it is done in relation to deity yoga.  
     Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
Lesson  13           Page 85 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 14   DATE: 7TH APRIL 2009  
 
As before, we will spend five minutes in silence to do some meditation. You can reflect on the 
two verses that we have just recited:  
 
Do not commit any non- virtuous actions,  
Perform only perfect virtuous actions,  
Subdue your mind thoroughly  
This is the teaching of the Buddha  
 A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,  
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud-  
See conditioned things as such!  
 
We have covered the explanations for the second verse up to a “ a drop of dew.” If it is not 
possible for you to reflect on these two verses, then you can meditate on whatever you wish 
but the point is to keep your mind alert and to try to transform the mi nd into a virtuous state. 
It is your responsibility to do this and is not something that is impossible for you to do. It is my responsibility as a teacher to tell you this and it is your responsibility as a student to do it.  
 Since you are here to listen to the teachings, you have to do this. You should not just sit there, doing nothing. You have to try. If you really cannot meditate for even five minutes, then in future you should not come to class in the beginning but you can come in at 8.00 pm.  
 
*************  
We will continue with the verse from The Diamond- Cutter Sutra . The analogy of “ a drop of dew”  
illustrates impermanence. The moment that things and events are produced or born, they are produced in the nature of impermanence and undergo change. This understanding is primarily used as a basis to examine the self and the aggregates and how they are impermanent by nature.  
 
The cause that produces an impermanent phenomenon is the same as that which produces a 
phenomenon having a momentary nature. Our attachment to our appropriated/contaminated 
body arises due to the grasping at that body as being perma nent. We have to stop that 
attachment and the way to do this is to realise that our body and aggregates are impermanent.  
 
The analogy of “ a bubble”  illustrates that the nature of cyclic existence is suffering. We are so 
attached to our contaminated physic al and mental aggregates which are actually in the nature 
of suffering. A water bubble arises from a body of water. When the bubble bursts, it dissolves back into the water. When we are born, our physical and mental aggregates are produced in the nature of suffering. When these aggregates disintegrate, they do so in the nature of 
suffering.  
 There are three types of sufferings:  
 
Lesson  14           Page 86 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
1. Suffering of pain  
2. Suffering of change  
3. Suffering of conditionality  
 
We all understand the suffering of pain. From the moment we are  born, we know what 
suffering is. We are born in the nature of suffering and we  disintegrate in the nature of suffering as well.  
 
We all look for pleasure and happiness but they are actually the suffering of change. But we do not know this. When the feel ing of pleasure arises, we do not know that it is in the nature of 
suffering. It is only when that pleasure ends that we realise this is so. But we are not aware that it is in the nature of suffering when it is first produced. We do not know instinctively that happiness and pleasure are in the nature of suffering but we can establish this through logic and reasoning. If the pleasure that is produced has the nature of happiness from its first moment, then it would be impossible for that experience to become suffering in the end. But, in reality, the very moment that pleasure is produced, it is produced in the nature of suffering. It is not produced in the nature of happiness and then, somehow along the way, that  nature changes to that of suffering. It is not like that.  
 The third type of suffering is the suffering of conditionality which primarily refers to our appropriated physical and mental aggregates which are the bases for us to experience all 
suffering. When we look at the nature of these aggregates, they are produced in the nature of 
suffering. Although we do not like suffering, problems and suffering arise naturally. Why is this so? This is because we have a contaminated body and mind.  
 Although we want happiness, we have to put in so much effort and  hard work to achieve it 
because of our contaminated bodies and minds. We have to experience aging, sickness and death on the basis of these contaminated bodies which we will not experience otherwise. We are so attached to our bodies, cherishing them and s eeing them as so precious. But if we ask 
ourselves, “What is the basic nature of this body?” our answer will be that it is in the nature of suffering. By understanding that the real nature of our aggregates is in the nature of suffering, we will then be able to overcome our attachment to them.  
 We may understand that our contaminated bodies are the source of all our sufferings and difficulties but we do not really recognise this. Instead we  do the opposite like someone paying 
the utmost respect and revere nce to an enemy. Our bodies are our enemies as they harm us 
and cause us to suffer.  
 
The superior beings, unlike us, perceive the suffering of change and suffering of conditionality to be in the nature of suffering, i.e., they perceive that the aggregates  and samsara are in the 
nature of suffering. The aggregates and samsara do exist in the way they are perceived by the superior beings. It is the truth as it appears to the superior beings. Therefore, it is called the noble truth because this is reality and this is how the superior beings perceive it. Whatever the 
superior beings perceive accords with reality.  
 This analogy of “ a bubble”  illustrates that the nature of samsara and aggregates is suffering and 
 
Lesson  14           Page 87 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
by our understanding this, it will help us to over come our attachment to them. It is extremely 
important for us to understand the suffering of change and suffering of conditionality because 
they form the foundation for our spiritual transformation and realisations. Without this understanding, nothing will  happen for us no matter what kind of profound practices (such as 
Tantra) we may do. We will go nowhere. Most of you may already be aware of this but there may be some people who are not.   I thought it would be beneficial for me to mention this again.  
 
************************  
In order to achieve enlightenment in the three lower classes of Tantra, does one need to accumulate merit for three great countless eons?  
 Again someone says: It follows that through the path of the three lower classes of tantra there is enlightenment without having to rely on three countless great aeons because in those three classes, there is a difference in the speed of the path in comparison with the Perfection Vehicle.  
 Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion because although in the three lower classes of tantra there is a mere difference in the speed of the path in comparison with the Perfection Vehicle, it is stated that there is no difference in the speed of attaining enlightenment in one lifetime or attaining enlightenment without having to rely on the countless aeons. (Pg. 14 of the root text)  
 Is the author saying that one has to go through three countless eons in order to achieve enlightenment in the three lower clas ses of Tantra?  
 Again, someone says: In the three lower classes of tantra, it is unacceptable to state that there is no method for producing the special object -possessor comprehending emptiness by means 
of taking desire as the path. This is because in the  three lower classes of tantra, (1) taking as 
the path, the bliss derived from oneself and the primordial awareness knowledge woman one meditates on, looking at each other, smiling, holding hands or embracing exists, and (2) that this is for the purpose of developing the special object possessor comprehending emptiness. 
(Pg. 13 of the root text)  
 This extract discusses whether in the lower classes of Tantra, the practice of taking desire into the path is for the purpose of developing the special object - possessor comprehending 
emptiness or not.  
 Ngawang Palden: The latter part of the reason (2) is not established because taking desire as the path for the purpose of generating the special object- possessor comprehending emptiness 
is an attribute of Highest (Yo ga Tantra) alone. This is because the Illuminating Lamp states:  
 Taking desire to pleasurable objects as the path for the purpose of generating a special object -possessor comprehending emptiness does not exist for anything other than the 
Highest (Yoga Tant ra). ( Pg. 13 of the root text)  
 
Lesson  14           Page 88 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
As discussed in the previous class, in order to make the wisdom realising emptiness powerful in 
the Paramitayana, the bodhisattva has to train in the limitless divisions of the six perfections for  a  limitless amount of time.  
 We have also examined the two things that make the wisdom realising emptiness powerful in the three lower classes of Tantra, which are:  
• the attainment of many common siddhis and  
• being taken care of and blessed directly by the buddhas and higher bodhisattvas .  
 The method that makes the wisdom comprehending emptiness powerful in Highest Yoga Tantra is the practice of taking into the path the desire that arises from the union of the two sexual organs.  
 When the author says, “ The latter part of the reas on (2) is not established,”  his position is that 
in the three lower classes of Tantra, the practice of taking the desire as the path is not for the purpose of developing the special object-  possessor comprehending emptiness.  
 His reason is “ because taking desire as the path for the purpose of generating the special 
object -possessor comprehending emptiness is an attribute of Highest (Yoga Tantra) alone. This 
is because the Illuminating Lamp states: Taking desire to pleasurable objects as the path for the purpose of generating a special object -possessor comprehending emptiness does not exist for 
anything other than the Highest (Yoga Tantra) .” 
 Again someone says: It follows that there is no comprehension of emptiness by the three types 
of bliss derived from looking, smiling and so forth, because taking those as the path is not for the purpose of developing the special object- possessor comprehending emptiness.  
 Ngawang Palden: This should be examined because although most followers explain those t o 
exist, one needs to research whether such is clearly stated in the explanations of the great Je Rinpoche. ( Pg. 13 of the root text ) 
 The author says that we should examine whether the practices of taking the bliss derived from looking, smiling and holding hands  into the path is for the purpose of developing the special 
object -possessor comprehending emptiness. “ Although most followers explain those to exist” 
means that most scholars assert that the bliss derived from such practices are used to realise emp tiness.  
 We have to analyse whether it is all right to say that the bliss derived from looking, smiling and 
holding hands with the visualised goddess is used to realise emptiness. I guess it is OK to say that as we are following what most masters say. But  is there any fault with saying that?  
 The practice of taking desire as the path does exist in the three lower classes of Tantra. If this is so, then there is no reason why that bliss derived from looking, smiling and holding hands (with the visualised goddess) cannot realise emptiness. We can say that this bliss can lead to the realisation of emptiness.  
 
Lesson  14           Page 89 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
But the author states very clearly here that that bliss, in the three lower classes of Tantra, 
cannot realise emptiness. It is only in Highest Yoga Tant ra that taking desire into the path can 
realise emptiness.  
 I think it is better to say that the bliss derived from taking desire into the path in the three classes of lower Tantra can realise emptiness as I cannot find any good reason to say otherwise. Although we say this, the author states very clearly that taking the desire as the path in the 
three classes of lower Tantra is not for the purpose of developing the special object- possessor 
comprehending emptiness. The author substantiates his reason by quo ting from the 
Illuminating Lamp which states : “Taking desire to pleasurable objects as the path for the 
purpose of generating a special object -possessor comprehending emptiness does not exist for 
anything other than the Highest (Yoga Tantra).”  
 
I think it is also all right to follow the author’s assertion that taking desire to pleasurable 
objects into the path in the three classes of lower Tantra is not for the purpose of generating a special object -possessor comprehending emptiness. This is because genera ting a special 
object -possessor comprehending emptiness, which refers to the fundamental innate mind of 
clear light, only exists in Highest Yoga Tantra.  
 This is my opinion. We can discuss further whether this is correct or not.  
 
Question by student : As stated by Ngawang Palden: “ This should be examined because 
although most followers explain those to exist, one needs to research whether such is clearly 
stated in the explanations of the great Je Rinpoche.”  Are the “ those”  and “ such”  referring to the 
speci al object -possessor?  
Answer : Here “those”  and “ such”  are referring to the same thing, i.e., the practice of taking 
desire as the path in the three classes of lower Tantra. If we interpret “ those ”  and “ such” to 
mean the special object -possessor, does that make sense?  
 Answer to question: Terminologies such as the subtle wind and subtle mind are only used in 
Highest Yoga Tantra and is not used in the lower classes of Tantra.  
 So go and read the text again – even it is one or two pages –  and bring the answer  to the next 
class. The question is: In order to achieve enlightenment in the three lower classes of Tantra, does one needs to accumulate merit for a period of three great countless eons? If one says one 
needs three great countless eons, it looks difficult. If you say you don’t need three great 
countless eons, then it is complicated. You need to find out the author’s position by reading pages 13 –  14 of the text. I will randomly pick one of you to give me the answer in the next 
class, so everyone must do th eir readings.  
 Other questions for further discussion:  
1. What makes the realisation of emptiness powerful in the Paramitayana, three lower classes of Tantra and Highest Yoga Tantra?  
 2. What is it that makes Tantra more profound than Sutra? What is it that makes Tantra a 
quicker path than Sutra?  
 
Lesson  14           Page 90 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
For this question, we need to understand what makes Tantra more profound than Sutra and what makes Tantra a quicker path than Sutra. We need to analyse this until we gain the ascertainment, “Yes, this is true.”  That will then benefit our minds for we will naturally 
generate faith that the Tantric path is indispensable for achieving enlightenment  
 3. If it is a path of any of the three lower classes of Tantra, is it necessarily one of the two yogas 
- Yoga with Si gns and Yoga without Signs?  
 
4. Is there a Yoga without Signs that is a Yoga of repetition?  
 We have already seen how the presence or absence of the meditation that accords with the aspects of the four complete purities of the resultant stage determines whether it is Tantra or Sutra. As Action Tantra is Tantra, it necessarily has the meditation that accords with the aspects of the four complete purities of the resultant stage. Since that is the case, by using the Nyung Na sadhana, try to determine which par t of the sadhana accords with the four complete 
purities of the resultant stage.   Knowing Action T antra, you perform  the self basis by generating yourself as the deity through 
the process of the six deities. When you know what are the meditations that ac cord with the 
aspects of the four complete purities of the resultant stage, then whatever Action Tantra 
sadhana you pick up, you will be be able to identify, “This is this” and “That is that.” The whole 
practice becomes richer in taste because of your unde rstanding and you know what to think 
about. You can see the benefits that can be derived from the practice when you know what 
you are practising. This shows that studying is not an obstacle to nor will it harm your practice. It assists your practice. It is  like singing a song. When you know the lyrics, singing it is more 
enjoyable. Without such understanding, when you read the sadhana, it is merely that, reading.  
     Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
  
 
Lesson  14           Page 91 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 15   DATE: 9TH APRIL 2009  
 
All of us have enough material to meditate on. We already know so many topics. The centre 
has been around for 20 years and we have been receiving so many teachings all this time. It is 
just that we are not used to meditating  regularly so we find it diffic ult to meditate. From our 
own side, we have to make the effort to start meditating.  
 
Meditation is simply mixing what we have learnt and what we know with our  mind. Meditation 
is like a mental exercise, thinking about and arriving at an ascertainment of what is mentioned 
in the text.  Meditation is experiencing the teachings and recognising that, “Yes, that is really true. It is like that.” It is difficult to see any positive change in our minds until we have this kind 
of experience.  But once we have exp erienced that kind of feeling in our hearts, change will 
definitely come.  
 
How do you bring about that feeling of, “Yes, the teachings of the Buddha are really great. 
Things are exactly like that (what is described in the teachings)?” That can only come through 
meditation. So, meditation is extremely important as it is only through meditation that we can 
achieve a positive transformation of our minds. When we first begin to meditate, we don’t have to do it for a very long time. We should start with small steps. We will meditate in silence for five minutes and try to place our minds in a virtuous state.  
 We should always remember and understand that we now have a human rebirth and we have met the teachings of the Buddha. On top of that, from our own side, we  have the interest to 
study the deeper teachings of the Buddha, specifically his tantric teachings. We have to understand that we are experiencing the fruits of the powerful virtues or merits that we had 
created in our past lives. Remembering this, we shou ld rejoice and be happy.  
 We are born in a developed country, living in a society where the lifestyle is very busy. Because of our financial situation, most of us have to work to earn a living. Despite all this, we actually put aside time at the end of the  day to come to class. I always have this thought, “How amazing 
it is that people come to class after a day of work.” I always rejoice that this is so.  
 
From your own side, you should also feel very fortunate to be able to do this.  You don’t learn if 
you don’t come to class.  Then whatever you do will only be for the happiness of this life and 
there will be nothing to hope for in your future lives. You need to work to earn a living but you 
are also able to do something for your future lives through studyi ng and practising. You should 
rejoice that you are able to do this.   The fact that you have the interest to study and practise in this life in spite of having so many obligations and responsibilities is the result of the many virtuous imprints planted in your previous lives. So, if you want your future lives to be better than this life, then you should try to place as many positive imprints as possible in this life. If you do that, then there is a real hope that your future lives will be better.  
  
The poi nt I am trying to make here is that we should be delighted and always keep a positive 
 
Lesson  15           Page 92 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
and happy mind when we are studying the teachings rather than treating this as a burden.  
 
***************************************  
 
According to the author of this text, in the three lower classes of tantra, is it possible to achieve enlightenment without taking three countless great eons?  
 
What is it that enables the person to achieve enlightenment quickly in the   three lower classes 
of tantra?   The two things that make  the wisdom realising emptiness powerful in the three lower classes 
of tantra are: (1) the attainment of many common siddhis and (2) being taken care of and blessed directly by the buddhas and higher bodhisattvas .  
 As for the three lower tantras, it is no t mentioned that one should train for a limitless time in 
the limitless clear divisions such as generosity and so forth, as in the Perfection Vehicle. Nor is it mentioned that one should train in the method of generating a special object- possessor 
comprehe nding emptiness as mentioned in Highest Yoga Mantra. Therefore, there is need to 
enhance the comprehension of emptiness through dexterity in methods such as the attainment of many common siddhis, being taken care of and blessed directly by Buddhas and higher Bodhisattvas. ( Pg. 12 of the root text )  
 In the three lower classes of tantra, does the bliss that is derived from taking  desire into the path realise emptiness? We should analyse this but it seems that it is better to say that this 
bliss does  realise emptiness.  
 It is also clearly stated in the text that the bliss that is derived from taking the desire into the path  in the three lower classes of tantra is not  for the purpose of generating the special object 
possessor realising emptiness.  
 “…because taking desire as the path for the purpose of generating the special object- possessor 
comprehending emptiness is an attribute of Highest (Yoga Tantra) alone. This is because the Illuminating Lamp states:  
 
Taking desire to pleasurable objects as the path for the purpose of generating a special 
object -possessor comprehending emptiness does not exist for anything other than the 
Highest (Yoga Tantra).( Pg. 13 of the root text ) 
 
According to Highest Yoga Tantra, this special object -possessor comprehending e mptiness 
refers to “the fundamental innate mind of clear light,” a term which is not even mentioned in 
the three lower classes of tantra, where there is no explanation of the realisation of emptiness by such a mind. From this, we can  decisively say that t aking desire into the path in the three 
lower classes of tantra is not  for the purpose of generating the special object possessor 
comprehending emptiness. That should be the conclusion.  
 What is this special object possessor comprehending emptiness? Does i t refer to the 
 
Lesson  15           Page 93 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
fundamental innate mind of clear light which can realize emptiness? When we analyze further, 
it is possible for more questions to arise.  
 Question: What is the difference between the mind of non- dual profundity and clarity realising 
emptiness and the fundamental innate mind of clear light realising emptiness?  Answer : One is a coarse mind, the other a subtle mind. The mind that is used to realise 
emptiness in the lower classes of tantra is necessarily a coarse mind.  
 Question:  What is then the purpose of generating bliss in the three lower classes of tantra?  
Answer : We can answer that question in many ways. We can say it is:  
• for the purpose of realising emptiness,  
• for the purpose of generating the Yoga with Signs, and  
• for the purpose of generating both the Yogas with Signs and without Signs.  
 If we say that in the three lower classes of tantra, through the practice of taking  desire into the 
path we generate bliss and that bliss realising  emptiness is posited to be the non -dual yoga of 
profundity and clarity, what are you going to say?  
 We must ascertain the difference between sutra and tantra. In sutra, there is no practice of taking desire into the path, but in tantra, there is such a practice even in the lower classes of tantra. When you take desire into the path, you generate bliss and then that bliss realises emptiness. In terms of subtlety, is there any difference betwee n that blissful mind realising 
emptiness and the mind that realises emptiness in the Paramitayana? It is not clear in the text but this is something that we can think about.  
 The blissful mind that realises emptiness in the lower classes of tantra is a co arse mind. The 
mind that realises emptiness in the Paramitayana is also a coarse mind. When we compare these two coarse minds, is one less coarse than the other?  
 It is clear that there is a difference in the power of the mind realising emptiness in the Paramitayana and the mind realising emptiness in the lower classes of tantra. We have to say 
that the mind that realises emptiness in the lower classes of tantra is more powerful than the mind that realises emptiness in the Paramitayana. But why is this so?  
  
Geshe -la: You say that it is due to deity yoga but what makes deity yoga more powerful?  
 
Again someone says: It follows that in the three lower classes of tantra, the path is no faster 
than in the Perfection Vehicle because with regard to their discernm ent comprehending 
emptiness, a difference in the strength by which one takes or does not take desire as the path is not explained.  
 Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion because the Stages of Mantra states:  
 
The difference in speed between the three lower classes of tantra and the Perfection Vehicle is (the fact that in the three lower tantras) one completes the enlightened conduct through dexterity in many methods such as attaining many common siddhis 
 
Lesson  15           Page 94 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
through relying on the might of deity yoga and repetiti on and from being directly taken 
care of by Buddhas and great Bodhisattvas and by being blessed.  
 
This states that there are quicker paths by means of the common siddhis. It does not state that they are quicker paths by merely the component of having a gre ater strength of discernment 
comprehending emptiness by means of taking desire as the path. (Pg. 13 of the root text )  
 
The author says that there is no pervasion and that the path of the lower classes of tantra is 
faster than the Paramitayana path. Howeve r, the reason for this is not  due to the practice of 
taking desire into as the path but rather it is due to:  
• the attainment of many common siddhis and  
• being taken care of and blessed directly by the buddhas and higher bodhisattvas .  
 
“…the enlightened conduct through dexterity in many methods,”:  The “ enlightened conduct ” 
refers to the bodhisattva’s deeds, i.e., primarily the practice of the six perfections. In the previous lesson, we have seen how bodhicitta is the basis of the conduct and the conduct refers to the six perfections.  
 Again someone says: It follows that through the path of the three lower classes of tantra there is enlightenment without having to rely on three countless great aeons because in those three classes, there is a difference in t he speed of the path in comparison with the Perfection 
Vehicle.  
 Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion because although in the three lower classes of tantra 
there is a mere difference in the speed of the path in comparison with the Perfection Vehicle, it is stated that there is no difference in the speed of attaining enlightenment in one lifetime or 
attaining enlightenment without having to rely on the countless aeons. The Stages of Mantra states:  
 Since the difference in the speed of attaining enlightenmen t not reliant on practice 
exceeding countless aeons is an attribute of Highest Yoga Tantra, a disciple of the lower classes of tantra relies on entering the two stages of Highest Yoga Tantra to attain that. It is not possible that they attain that merely by their path.  
 
Therefore, when debating the differences in speed of Mantra, one should not hold just (to the attribute of) attaining enlightenment in one life or attaining enlightenment not reliant on practice for countless aeons.  
 And:  
 
Attaining enlighte nment in this life is not established by merely practicing the paths of 
three lower classes of tantra because they do not excel the generation stage of the highest uncommon path of Mantra.  
 The author’s position is that in the three lower classes of tantra , one has to rely on three 
countless great aeons to achieve enlightenment. But earlier on, he had asserted that the path 
 
Lesson  15           Page 95 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
of the three lower classes of Tantra is a quicker path than the Paramitayana path.  There seems 
to be an internal contradiction.  How then is that path a quicker path than the Paramitayana (Perfection Vehicle) path?  
 The author is saying that in the three lower classes of tantra, one needs to rely on the three great countless eons to achieve enlightenment “ because although in the three l ower classes of 
tantra there is a mere difference in the speed of the path in comparison with the Perfection 
Vehicle, it is stated that there is no difference in the speed of attaining enlightenment in one 
lifetime or attaining enlightenment without having to rely on the countless aeons.”  
 He substantiates his reasoning by quoting from the Stages of Mantra i.e., by following the path 
of the three lower classes of tantra, one has to rely on three great countless eons to achieve enlightenment. That means one will not achieve enlightenment by simply relying on the path of the three lower classes of tantra as one must enter the path of the Highest Yoga Tantra.  
 One will not achieve enlightenment by depending on the Paramitayana path alone. One has to enter the tantric path. But one definitely cannot achieve enlightenment by depending merely 
on the path of the three lower classes of tantra. One must definitely enter the path of Highest Yoga Tantra.  
 This is similar to the assertions of selflessness in the four Buddhist tenet systems. One will not 
achieve enlightenment by realising the selflessness by the Vaibashikas (Great Exposition 
School). Likewise, one will not achieve enlightenment by realising t he selflessness taught by the 
Sutra, the Mind Only School and even the Autonomy Middle Way Schools. One can only 
achieve enlightenment by realising the selflessness that is asserted by the Consequence Middle Way School.  
  
So just as we must  realise the v iew of selflessness of the Consequence Middle Way School, in 
order to achieve enlightenment, we must enter into the practice of Highest Yoga Tantra.  
 Answer to student’s query : The meditation on the path that accords with the aspects of the 
four complete purities of the resultant stage is definitely taught in the three lower classes of tantra. But one cannot achieve enlightenment by depending on that meditation alone.  We need to understand:  
• Why one cannot achieve enlightenment by depending on Sutra alone.  
• Why it is necessary to enter the tantric path?  
• Why, to achieve enlightenment, one must definitely practice Highest Yoga Tantra and not 
tantra alone  
 When we know the answer to the first question, then we can say that we really know why tantra is more prof ound than Sutra.  
 When we know the answer to the second question, we will know why of the four classes of tantra, Highest Yoga Tantra is the most profound.  
 1. By merely depending on the three lower classes of tantra, can we achieve enlightenment?  
 
Lesson  15           Page 96 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
2. The Buddh a that we become by practising the three lower classes of tantra, is that a 
Buddha or not?  
3. The five paths and ten grounds taught in the three lower classes of tantra, are they all false?  
4. There is a state of enlightenment that is explained in the three lowe r classes of tantra, does 
that state of enlightenment exist?  
 
It is very clear that there is no way one can achieve enlightenment without entering into 
Highest Yoga Tantra. It is mentioned in the text. The state of enlightenment is characterised by 
the bo dy and mind of the Buddha which are  one entity at the time of the result. In order to 
achieve such a result, at the time of the path, the cause to achieve the result must be an inseparable union of the two causes that will lead to the attainment of such a  state, i.e.,  to 
achieve the truth body and the form body as one entity at the time of the result.  
 The three lower classes of tantra posit the cause for the attainment of that  union of method and wisdom as the yoga of non -dual profundity and clarity. T his is the cause to achieve 
enlightenment. This does not exist in the Paramitayana path. When the three lower classes of tantra look at the Paramitayana path, they said that that path does not have a real cause for achieving this state of enlightenment whi ch is the union of the two bodies. Therefore the 
Paramitayana path is less powerful and why the tantric path is superior to Paramitayana path. We have to analyse however whether the yoga of non -dual profundity and clarity is the 
substantial cause for the a chievement of those two bodies.  
 According to the view of Highest Yoga Tantra, the yoga of non- dual profundity and clarity 
explained in the three lower classes of tantra is not the cause for achieving the Buddha’s body 
and mind because this is a coarse mi nd and therefore it can never act as the cause for the 
Buddha’s body and mind.   We have to relate this to the death process. When we die, it is the subtle mind that moves to the next life because the coarse mind will already be dissolved during the death process. At the 
end it is only the subtle mind that moves from life to life and it is this mind that moves toward enlightenment. The coarse mind can never move to enlightenment.  
 This subtlest mind of clear light is only taught in Highest Yoga Tantra. It is not taught in the Paramitayana and the three lower classes of tantra. This is one of the reasons why one must enter into the path of Highest Yoga Tantra to achieve enlightenment.  
   Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  15           Page 97 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 16   DATE: 14TH APRIL 2009  
 
We have been using the term, “no pervasion” very often, with the assumption that we 
understand its meaning. But apparently this is not the case.  
 
Let us say someone makes a statement: “That person over there has a lot of attachment 
because he talks a lot,” i.e., the reason for believing that person has a lot of attachment is 
because he is very talkative. When we say, “There is no pervasion,” to that  statement, we are 
saying that the reason given –  his talkativeness is proof of his having a lot of attachment -  does 
not stand. “No pervasion” means “It is not necessarily so.” This is because being talkative is not 
necessarily the correct reason or proof  to show that a person has a lot of attachment.  
 
For example, we cannot say, “That person is a woman because that person walks like one.” 
This is not necessarily so because a person who walks like a woman is not necessarily a woman. Therefore we say “Ther e is no pervasion that person is a woman because that person walks like 
a woman”. Likewise, we cannot say, “That person is a man because that person walks like a 
man”.  
 
When we use the words “no pervasion,” we should understand that to mean that the reaso n 
being stated does not necessarily imply that such and such is true. If we say, “That person is a 
sentient being because that person has afflictions,” the reason given is that if you have 
afflictions, you are definitely a sentient being. This is necessarily so. In that case we can say, “There is  pervasion.”  
 This is to give you an idea of what “no pervasion”  and “there is pervasion” means.  
 
********************* 
In the previous lesson, we looked at whether in the three lower tantras, one needs to rely on three countless great eons to achieve enlightenment. The author, Ngawang Palden, says “Yes,” but he also says that the Mantric path is quicker than the Paramitaya na path.  
 
In texts composed by other masters on the tantric stages of the path, it is mentioned that in 
the three lower tantras, one does  not need to rely on three great countless eons to achieve 
enlightenment although the manner of progressing along the paths and grounds is similar to 
the Perfection Vehicle.  
  
These are the two different positions. To support his position, Ngawang Palden quotes from 
the Stages of Mantra.  
 
Since the difference in the speed of attaining enlightenment not reliant on practic e 
exceeding countless aeons is an attribute of Highest Yoga Tantra, a disciple of the lower classes of tantra relies on entering the two stages of Highest Yoga Tantra to attain that. It is not possible that they attain that merely by their path.  
 
 
Lesson  16          Page 98 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Therefore , when debating the differences in speed of Mantra, one should not hold just 
(to the attribute of) attaining enlightenment in one life or attaining enlightenment not 
reliant on practice for countless aeons.  
 And:  
 
Attaining enlightenment in this life is no t established by merely practicing the paths of 
three lower classes of tantra because they do not excel the generation stage of the highest uncommon path of Mantra. (Pg. 14 of the root text )  
 My personal opinion is that in the three lower classes of tantr a, one does  not need to rely on 
three great countless eons to achieve enlightenment. I think it is better to take this position because there is a difference in the speed of progressing on the path between the Paramitayana and the Mantric paths. The Mantric path is said to be quicker.  
  
This is my personal position but there are many scholars or masters who take different positions and they also have reasons for their stand. This is something we have to think about and analyse for ourselves.   1.2  THE WAY TO POSIT THE FIVE PA THS AND THE TEN GROU NDS FOR THEM  
 
The way to posit those (lower tantras) as five paths and ten grounds exists because there are 
three ways of positing the paths of Action, Performance and Yoga Tantras in five paths and ten grounds.  
 1.2.1  THE WAY OF POSITING THE PATHS OF ACTION TANTRA IN FIVE PATHS  AND TEN 
GROUNDS  
 The Action Tantra Path of Accumulation is the path (ranging) from producing the uncontrived experience of discernment pledging to attain enlightenment through the path of the Action Tantra, having obtained pure empowerment, up to (but not including) attaining insight comprehending emptiness through the strength of meditating on the absorption bestowing emancipation at the limit  of sound. (Pg. 14 of the root text ) 
 Here are  the paths of Action, Performance and Yoga Tantras. How does one initially enter 
those paths? If we look at Action Tantra, how does one initially enter the path of Action Tantra?  
 In the beginning, one needs to receive the pure empowerment in Action Tantr a. When one 
develops the uncontrived thought, “I will achieve enlightenment by depending on the path of Action Tantra,” one enters the path of Action Tantra. You have to know the boundary of when you enter the path of Action Tantra.  When you have the unco ntrived mind generation 
(bodhicitta) specific to Action Tantra that is when you enter the path of Action Tantra. From the time you enter the path of Action Tantra up to just prior to the attainment of the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of so und, that is the Action Tantra Path of 
Accumulation .  
 
Lesson  16          Page 99 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
The Action Tantra Path of Preparation is the path (ranging) from that insight, up to (but not including) perceptual comprehension (direct realization) of emptiness through the strength of having medita ted on that absorption. (Pg. 14 of the root text ) 
 The boundary of the Action Tantra Path of Preparation  starts from the attainment of the 
concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound up to just before the attainment of the 
direct realisation of emptiness.  
 
Question: By depending on the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound, one achieves the union of calm abiding and special insight. If that is the case, then the way you posit the Path of Accumulation should be different.  
 Answer :  The concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound is the union of calm 
abiding and special insight which is when you achieve the Path of Preparation. Prior to actualising the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound, the union of calm abiding and special insight has not  yet been achieved.  
 The preparation starts when you are meditating on calm abiding, that is,  before achieving calm abiding. The purpose of achieving calm abiding is to actualise special insight. You seem to be asking whether there is a gap between calm abiding and special insight. If there is a gap 
between these two, then we have to say that there is a gap between the Path of Accumulation and the Path of Preparation.  
 
When you achieve the concentration bestowing l iberation at the end of sound which is the 
union of calm abiding and special insight, you have already achieved calm abiding. But you need some time to achieve special insight. So that is the gap. That whole period of time, which is the concentration abidi ng in sound, is the Path of Accumulation.  
 The Action Tantra Path of Seeing is the path (ranging) from the perceptual comprehension of emptiness through that absorption, up to (but not including) the generation of the direct antidote to the great of the great afflictive meditation abandonment.  
 The Action Tantra Path of Meditation is the path (ranging) from the absorption at the limit of sound, which is the direct antidote to the great of the great afflictive meditation abandonment, 
up to the point preceding the enlightenment attained through the path of Action Tantra.  
 
The Action Tantra Path of No -More Learning is the enlightened path attained through the path 
of this tantra. ( Pgs. 14 -15 of the root text )  
 The Action Tantra Path of Preparation is a conce ptual realisation of emptiness,  not a direct 
realisation.  
 When the practitioner realises emptiness directly, that is when he achieves the Action Tantra 
Path of Seeing which is the path ranging from the direct realisation of emptiness through that absorption, up to but not including the generation of the direct antidote to the great of the 
 
Lesson  16          Page 100 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
great afflictive Path of Meditation abandonment.  
 
From those, the first ground is  posited as the Path of Seeing. The second ground is posited 
from the attainment of the direct antidote to the great of the great afflictive meditation -
abandonment. The third ground is posited from the attainment of the direct antidote to the medium of the  great. The fourth ground is posited from the attainment of the direct antidote 
to the small of the great.  
 The fifth, sixth and seventh grounds are posited from the attainment of the direct antidotes to the three cycles of medium affliction
26. The eighth g round is posited from the simultaneous 
attainment of the direct antidote of the three cycles of small affliction.27 Again from the eighth 
ground, great knowledge obscurations are abandoned.  
 
The ninth ground is posited from the attainment of the direct anti dote of the medium 
knowledge obscurations. The tenth ground is posited from the attainment of the direct 
antidote of the small knowledge obscuration. The direct antidote to the subtle small (knowledge obscurations) is posited as the primordial awareness of  the final continuum and so 
forth.  
 
It is necessary to accept these assertions in accordance with the Sutra Consequence system 
because the method of abandoning both obscurations in the three lower classes of tantra is 
not explained in any source to be different from the Perfection Vehicle. Nor is that established 
by logic. (Pg. 15 of the root text ) 
 We had previously covered the sutric paths and grounds in accordance with the Consequence 
Middle Way School in the last module. Before that, I had also taught a class on the paths and 
grounds.  
 With regards to the abandonment of the various types of afflictions and obscurations on the 
paths, what is mentioned in this text is different from what I had covered in those earlier 
lessons on the paths and grounds.  
 
This text explains that at the beginning of the eighth ground, the afflictive obstructions are not 
abandoned. This is different from the sutric paths and grounds where the afflictive obstructions are abandoned upon attainment of the eighth ground. This is an example of the 
difference in the assertions which happens because different scholars have different views regarding how one progresses along the paths and grounds.  
 
The reason for the different explanations is because it is unclear in the texts of the g reat Indian 
masters. There are no explicit explanations in the texts. For example, in Engaging in the Middle 
Way  by Chandrakirti, it states that the afflictive obstructions are abandoned “ from the eighth  
ground” but how are we to interpret this? We can interpret this to mean that the afflictive 
26 The three rounds of the medium: the great of the medium, the middle of the medium and the small of the 
medium.  
27 The three roun ds of the small: the great of the small, the middle of the small and the small of the small  
 
 
Lesson  16          Page 101 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
obstructions are abandoned upon attainment  of the eighth ground but it can also mean that 
the afflictive obstructions are abandoned after  one has achieved the eighth  gro und.  
  
Lama TsongKhapa also states in his Illuminating the Intent , which is a commentary on 
Chandrakirti’s text, that the big and medium of the path of meditation abandonments are 
abandoned from the second to the seventh grounds. Again, this statement doe s not explicitly 
mention when the afflictive obstructions are abandoned –  are they abandoned at the 
beginning of the eighth ground or on the eighth ground?  
We should understand that there are different ways of explaining this topic. It is not that this scholar is right and that scholar is wrong. These scholars are all experts but this happens due to 
the lack of explicit explanations in the texts of the great Indian masters.  
 According to this text, the grounds are attained by the uninterrupted paths.  Thi s is another 
point of difference from the sutric paths and grounds which states that only when one achieves the path of thorough release does one achieve that particular ground. In the sutric path, the second ground is achieved after one has achieved the path of thorough release of the second ground but here in the text, one achieves the second ground when one achieves the uninterrupted path of the second ground:  “The second ground is posited from the attainment 
of the direct antidote to the great of the gr eat afflictive meditation -abandonment.”  
 We should compare some of these differences from what we have studied earlier in the sutric 
path. Whether or not you understand what is being said in this particular text depends on 
whether you have a good understan ding of what we have covered earlier. You can then 
compare the differences between the two systems.  
 “It is necessary to accept these assertions in accordance with the Sutra Consequence system because the method of abandoning both obscurations in the thre e lower classes of tantra is not 
explained in any source to be different from the Perfection Vehicle. Nor is that established by logic ” means that the way of abandoning the obstructions to liberation and the obstructions to 
omniscience is the same in both the Perfection Vehicle and in the three lower classes of tantra.  
 1.2.2&3  THE WAY OF POSITING THE PATHS OF PERFORM ANCE AND YOGA TANTRA IN 
FIVE PATHS AND TEN G ROUNDS  
 The Paths of Accumulation of each of these two tantras are the paths ranging from producing 
the uncontrived experience of discernment pledging to attain enlightenment through the paths 
of each of these two, up to (but not including) attaining insight comprehending emptiness through the strength of having meditated on the Yoga without Si gns of each Tantra.  
 The Paths of Preparation of each of these two tantras are the paths ranging from the insight comprehending emptiness, which is the Yoga without Signs of each of these two, up to (but not including) the perceptual comprehension of emptiness. All the rest should be known by applying the former instances of a similar type. (Pg. 15- 16 of the root text ) 
 Entry into the path is similar for both Performance and Yoga Tantras:  
• We enter into the path of Performance Tantra:  
 
Lesson  16          Page 102 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
o when we have received pure initiation and  
o when we develop the uncontrived bodhicitta with the thought, “I will achieve 
enlightenment by depending on the path of Performance Tantra.”  
• We enter into the path of Yoga Tantra:  
o when we have received pure initiation and  
o when we develop the uncontrived bo dhicitta with the thought, “I will achieve 
enlightenment by depending on  the path of Yoga Tantra.”  
This is when one enters the Path of Accumulation . 
 To that someone says: Take as the subject the paths explained in the Perfection Vehicle such as love, compassion, bodhichitta and so forth, in the continuum of a practitioner on the Path of Accumulation of the lower tantras. It follows that they are paths of lower tantra because one accepts that method of positing the five paths and the ten grounds of these. That is unacceptable because these are not paths of Mantra because they are not uncommon paths of Mantra.  
 Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion. ( Pg. 16 of the root text )  
 We need to analyse whether the love, compassion, bodhicitta and so forth in the co ntinuum of 
a practitioner on the Path of Accumulation of the lower tantras is a sutric or tantric path or whether it is both, i.e., both a sutric and tantric paths.  
 Again he says: Take that subject, it follows that they are Perfection Vehicle paths becau se they 
are common Perfection Vehicle paths.  
 Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion because it is similar to the case where though the pristine awareness comprehending the sixteen aspects such as impermanence and so forth, in the continuum of a Bodhisattva is a common intermediate scope path, it is not an intermediate scope path. ( Pg. 16 of the root text)  
 Basically what the text is saying is that the love, compassion, bodhicitta and so forth in the 
continuum of a practitioner on the Path of Accumulation of the lower tantras is a tantric path 
but is not  an uncommon tantric path. It is not a sutric (Paramitay ana) path.  
 The love, compassion, bodhicitta and so forth in the continuum of a practitioner on the Path of Accumulation of the lower tantras is not the Perfection Vehicle path but are paths shared with the Perfection Vehicle.   If it is a path that is sha red with the Perfection Vehicle, is it necessarily a Perfection Vehicle 
path? No, “There is no pervasion because it is similar to the case where though the pristine awareness comprehending the sixteen aspects such as impermanence and so forth, in the conti nuum of a Bodhisattva is a common intermediate scope path, it is not an intermediate 
scope path”.  
 Therefore we can see that the tantric and sutric paths are different.  
• Does the text show that these two paths are mutually exclusive?  
 
Lesson  16          Page 103 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• Does the text show tha t these two paths have a common locus?  
The text is saying that these two paths are mutually exclusive.  
 
Question: Why is the bodhicitta in the continuum of a practitioner on the Path of Accumulation of the lower tantras a tantric path?  
Answer : Bodhicitta e xists in both the sutric and tantric paths. Here, the text says the bodhicitta 
in the continuum of a practitioner on the Path of Accumulation of the lower tantras is the path that is shared with both sutric and tantric paths. But this bodhicitta is not a s utric path.  
 Is the shared Paramitayana path and the Paramitayana path the same? Is the direct realisation of the 16 aspects of the Four Noble Truths in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior a path of the person of intermediate capacity?  
  
Is there a co mmon locus between the paths of the three lower classes of tantra and the path of 
Highest Yoga Tantra?  
 Question: What is the uninterrupted path? What helps the practitioner to accumulate merit 
that enables him to move from one ground to the next?  
Answer :  In the Paramitayana path, one accumulates the collection of wisdom during 
meditative equipoise. One then arises from that and enters the post -meditative session to 
collect merit . One then alternates between meditative equipoise and the post meditative 
(equipoise) sessions.  
 
During meditative equipoise, the bodhisattva superior focuses on emptiness and can only accumulate the collection of wisdom. He cannot accumulate the collection of merit. He has to arise from that meditative equipoise and enter the post -meditative equipoise session to 
accumulate the collection of merit.  
 We need to analyse whether we need to do that in the tantric path. In the tantric path, the tantric practitioner on the grounds accumulates the collection of wisdom and the collection of 
merit simultaneously . That being the case, there is no reason for that person to arise from 
meditative equipoise.  
 In the sutric path, method and wisdom are conjoined but are not conjoined inseparably. In the 
tantric path, method and wisdom are conjoin ed in one inseparable entity. I have not seen any 
explicit mention in the text of  the need for the tantric practitioner on the grounds to arise from meditative equipoise. My personal opinion is there is no need to do so because both the collection of wisd om and the collection of merit are accumulated together at the same time.  
    Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  16          Page 104 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
 There is n o transcript for Lesson 17  
 
Lesson  17          Page 105 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 18   DATE: 19TH APRIL 2009  
 
As before, we will spend five minutes in silent meditation. You can reflect on the meaning on 
some of the verses that we usually recite at the beginning of the class, such as:  
 
Do not commit any non- virtuous actions,  
Perform only perfect virtuous actions,  
Subdue your mind thoroughly  
This is the teaching of the Buddha  
 
Or you can meditate on the verse from the Diamond Cutter Sutra:  “A star, a visual aberration, a 
flame of a lamp…”  and so forth.   
 
There are many things you can reflect on. The point is to tr y to develop a virtuous state of mind 
with a positive motivation for listening to the teachings.  
 
Meditation is extremely important. But if you try to meditate when there is strong attachment 
(desire) or anger manifesting, it will not work because the min d is preoccupied with those 
manifest afflictions. That is why there is the  practice of meditating on the breath, concentrating on the inhalation and exhalation, which helps to bring the mind to a state of 
equilibrium. This is something you have to understand and keep in mind.  
 
At the beginning of your meditation, if you discover that attachment is manifesting strongly, you can get rid of it by reflecting on how the object of attachment is, by nature, unpleasant. If the mind is distracted by many wild disc ursive thoughts, then you have to meditate on the 
breath to stop them.  
 When the mind is in equilibrium and not distracted by the manifest afflictions, then it is much easier to meditate and whatever meditation you do will be successful.  
 It is good to r eflect on the meaning of the verse:  
Do not commit any non- virtuous actions,  
Perform only perfect virtuous actions,  
Subdue your mind thoroughly  
This is the teaching of the Buddha  
 This verse encapsulates all the teachings of the Buddha. The entire Lam Rim is in this verse. If we know how to reflect, it is all in this verse. In order to meditate, we have to know the subject of the meditation well. For example, in order to meditate on Lam Rim, we have to know the stages of the path to enlightenment well. When we know the Lam Rim well, we will be able to 
condense the entire Lam Rim into this verse and meditate on the entire Lam Rim.  
 When we do not know the entire Lam Rim well, it will be difficult to see how this verse encapsulates the entire Lam Rim. We will only be able to generate the thought, “I am not supposed to do anything bad and I am supposed to do only good.” That’s about it. There will be 
 
Lesson  18          Page 106 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
nothing much for us to think about no matter how hard we may try. From this, you can see the 
big difference betwe en knowing and not knowing the subject well.  
 This is something we have to understand as many people think that studying is an obstacle that interferes with our practice. That is wrong. If we really want to meditate, we have to know the subject well. If w e don’t want to meditate, then that is fine but if we really want to practise and 
meditate, acquiring knowledge through studying is the favourable condition that helps us in 
our meditation. We have to understand the importance of studying and then act on i t and put 
effort into our studies.  
 
I mentioned at the last class that at the end of every session, everyone should come up with a question. Since we are meeting for a discussion at 1.30pm today, perhaps everyone can think about how this idea should be implemented. Basically, we are looking at ways to improve the quality of our studies.  
 If people were to submit questions, how should those questions be addressed and handled? We can’t answer every question submitted. How should we answer the simpler queri es?  
 When I say, come up with a question, you shouldn’t submit a question simply for the sake of fulfilling that requirement. It should be a question that you are really interested to know the answer to but you have not been able to find the answer for yo urself. For example, someone 
may approach you with a question you cannot answer. You may submit such a question but it must be a question where you are interested to find out the answer. Otherwise, if there is no sincere interest from your side to ask a go od question and there is no interest from your side in 
the answer, there will be no benefit to this whole exercise. Because without genuine interest from your side, I can give you the answer but we will be back at square one. It is not going to work.  
 So keep this in mind. Squeeze your mind a little and formulate your question carefully and with 
some thought on something you really want to understand. If you can do this, I think it will be helpful.  
 The only reason I am bringing this up is to see how we ca n improve things. There is no other 
reason. And it is something that all of us have to think about –  how we can make things better.  
 
********************* 
To that someone says: Take as the subject the paths explained in the Perfection Vehicle such as love,  compassion, bodhichitta and so forth, in the continuum of a practitioner on the Path of 
Accumulation of the lower tantras. It follows that they are paths of lower tantra because one accepts that method of positing the five paths and the ten grounds of the se. That is 
unacceptable because these are not paths of Mantra because they are not uncommon paths of Mantra.  
 Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion. ( Pg. 16 of the root text )  
 
 
Lesson  18          Page 107 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The love, compassion, bodhicitta and so forth in the continuum of a practition er on the Path of 
Accumulation of the lower tantras -  are those minds a Paramitayana path or a Tantric path? 
Ngawang Palden asserts those minds are Tantric and not Paramitayana paths.  
  
The text is saying that these two paths –  the Tantric path and the Pa ramitayana path -  are 
mutually exclusive.  
 
If we were to say that those minds of love, compassion, bodhicitta and so forth in the 
continuum of a practitioner on the Path of Accumulation of the lower tantras are both Tantric 
and Paramitayana paths, what will be the consequence?  
 In the Chapter 4 of the Ornament for Clear Realisations , there is a section on knower of paths 
in which there are knower of paths that knows the hearers’ paths, the knower of paths that knows the solitary realisers’ paths and so forth.  Are these two Hinayana or Mahayana paths?  
 From this we can see how important it is, especially when we are studying these more advanced topics that, as we move from one subject to another, we do not forget what  we had 
covered earlier. The teachings are all interrelated. I am not saying you are not putting in the effort to study but this is a source of difficulty. When you can remember what you have studied earlier and as you learn more, you discuss the material further, then that discussion will be very fruitful. I am not saying you are not studying but I am highlighting to you one of the challenges 
due to the busy lifestyle here to the study of these deeper teachings.  
 
The way of attaining enlightenment reliant on those paths:  
If one is a basis for newly attaining enlightenment through the paths of the Perfection Vehicle 
and the paths of the three lower tantras, one must be a basis in the Akanishta Field because it is well known to be like that in the Perfection Vehicle. (Pg. 16 of the root text )  
 Question: Is the basis of Ngawang Palden’s assertion related to the motivation, i.e., the 
strength of the bodhicitta generated?  
Answer : This author is saying that the Tantric path and Paramitayana path are mutually 
exclusive. He also mentions that the path of a person of intermediate capacity and path of a person of great capacity are different and not the same.  
 Is there any difference in the bodhicitta of the Paramitayana path and the bodhicitta of the 
Action Tantric path?  
 
Is there any difference in the mind realising emptiness of the Paramitayana path and Tantric path?  
 Using the Sutric path as the foundation, is there any difference in the hearer’s direct perception of impermanence and the bodhisattva superior’s  direct perception of impermanence?  
 
 
Lesson  18          Page 108 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
When we look at this from one perspective, there may not be any difference. But when we 
discuss this from another perspective, then, there is a difference.  
 The bodhicitta in Tantra is the bodhicitta that is taught in Sutra. This bodhici tta is the main 
mind that is endowed with the two aspirations focusing on the welfare of others and one’s own enlightenment.  
 
It is the same with emptiness because the emptiness that is realised in Tantra is the emptiness 
that is taught in Sutra.  
 According to the Paramitayana, the basis for achieving enlightenment cannot be one in the desire realm but in the Akanishta Field. It is the same with the three lower classes of Tantra.  
 The way of attaining enlightenment in the Action and Performance Tantras:  
 It has already been explained as being similar to the Perfection Vehicle. According to Yoga Tantra, both the masters Shakya Shenyen and Sangye Sangwa explain that when Prince Siddhartha was in equipoise at the supreme limit of the fourth absorption by the bank of the river Neranjana, all the Buddhas of the ten directions awoke him by the sound of snapping their fingers and having inspired him, they took him to the Akanishta Field. There, after bestowing the crown empowerment, they made him meditate se rially on the five -fold mode of 
enlightenment
. At the completion of that process, he attained enlightenment as the Enjoyment 
Body. ( Pg. 16 of the root text)  
 Note: Shakya Shenyen is Shakyamitra in Sanskrit. Sangye Sangwa is Buddhaguhya in Sanskrit.  
 Ther e are three masters – Shakyamitra, Buddhaguhya and Anandagarbha –  who are experts in 
Yoga Tantra. They are well known in both India and Nepal.  
 
According to Shakyamitra and Buddhaguhya, Prince Siddhartha undertook  the practice of 
austerity for six years. At the end of that period, he attained the tenth bodhisattva ground, i.e., 
he was a fully qualified tenth ground bodhisattva. Sitting on the bank of the Neranjana River, 
he entered the meditative absorption called the supreme limit of the four con centrations. At 
that time all the buddhas of the ten direc tions gathered and roused him from that meditative 
stabilisation with the sound of their snapping fingers.  
 
They told him, "You cannot become com pletely and perfectly purified simply  through this 
meditative stabilisation alone.”  
 
He asked, "How then should it be done?"  
 
 
Thereupon, they brought him to Akanishta, leaving behind his coarse body on the bank of the 
Neranjana  River. He went to Akanishta with his mental body . After all the buddhas of the ten 
directions conferred on him the crown initiation, they caused him to cultivate serially the five 
manifest enlightenm ents. At the end of completing the five manifest enlightenments, he 
 
Lesson  18          Page 109 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
achieved enlightenment in the nature of Vairochana. This means that he newly achieved 
enlightenment in Akanishta.  
 
After achieving enlightenment, he taught the Yoga Tantras at the peak of  Mount Meru.  
 
Then, as a buddha, he returned to the bank of the Neranjana and re -entered his coarse body. 
He then performed the deeds of overcoming the maras and the deed of manifesting 
enlightenment.  
 
These are the assertions of these two great masters of Yoga Tantra, Shakyamitra and 
Buddhaguhya, but their assertions are incorrect:  
 
However since that is incompatible with the general system of the Great Vehicle, it is not 
accepted in our system. The St ages of Mantra states:  
 
The Stainless Light and the uncommon Secret Tantra state that our Teacher had 
attained enlightenment before this, and here he demonstrated the way of attaining 
enlightenment. Also the assertion by many other mantric explanations tha t that being is 
an emanation not newly enlightened is similar in both the Mantra and Perfection Vehicles. (Pgs. 16 –  17 of the root text )  
 
We do not accept their assertions and our position can be substantiated with the quotation from 
Lama Tsongkhapa’s St ages of Mantra.  According to our system, Prince Siddhartha was already 
enlightened even before he performed the twelve deeds, i.e., even before he was born. The 
common Mahayana explanation of Shakyamuni Buddha was that he was already a buddha even 
before c oming to this world and performing the twelve deeds.  
 
The Hinayanists assert that Prince Siddhartha was an ordinary being, not a buddha, before his 
birth. He achieved enlightenment only after meditating on and progressing along the paths. We 
tend to accept the Hinayanist assertion because this is what many people have seen. But this is 
incorrect.  
 The twelve deeds are:  
1. Abiding in the abode of Tushita  
2. Transferring from Tushita 
3. Entering the womb of the mother  
4. Being born  
5. The sports of a youth  
6. The deeds of a prince, enjoying the company of a princess  
7. Renunciation  
8. Undergoing austerities  
9. Conquering the maras  
10. Becoming enlightened  
11. Turning the wheel of Dharma  
12. Entering parinirvana  
 
 
Lesson  18          Page 110 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The first six are the deeds of a layperson. The last six are the deeds of a re nunciate, or ordained 
person.  
 
The reason why we do not accept the assertion of Shakyamitra and Buddhaguhya  is because 
their assertions do not accord with the general Mahayana presentation. The correct position is 
as follows:  
 
Thus the master Kunga Nyingpo states that one must accept the explanation that this Teacher 
in his final existence, having accumulated merit for three countless aeons, entered equipoise at the supreme limit of the fourth absorption in the Akanishta Field, and all the Buddhas of the ten directions woke him through the sound of snapping their fingers and so forth, because the Illuminating Lamp states:  
 In the root tantra ( Compendium of Principles ), it only states “When the Bodhisattva 
Siddhartha was seated ne ar the bodhi tree, the Tathagatas inspire him...” without 
clearly mentioning either the Akanishta Field or the Desire Realm. Also in the Vajra Peak, it is explained as being placed in the Dense Array Akanishta Field.(Pg. 17 of the root text)  
 Note: Kunga N yinpo is Anandagarbha in Sanskrit.  
We can understand why different masters will have different interpretations  due to the 
ambiguity in the Compendium of Principles .  
 
Someone says: This method of explanation teaches the method of attaining enlightenment through adding the path of Yoga Tantra at the end of the Perfection Vehicle path.  
 Ngawang Palden: This is unacceptable because in Highest Yoga Tantra it is clearly explained that there are two different ways to attain enlightenment through differentiating one’s own path and the path of others. In Yoga Tantra that is not clearly explained. The Illuminating Lamp states:  
 
As it is explained, one attains enlightenment in two ways. Through entering one’s own path in the system of Highest Yoga Tantra from the beg inning and attaining 
enlightenment in one life like a jewel -like disciple. Alternatively, one adds the mantric 
path at the end of the Perfection Vehicle.  
 In the system of Yoga Tantra applying that previously explained to the Perfection Vehicle through dif ferentiating one’s path and other’s paths does not appear and 
supplementing the way of attaining enlightenment at the end of one’s path does not clearly appear.  
 Therefore I wonder whether those explanations of one’s path such as attaining enlightenment through the Buddhas inspiring one, having completed the ground 
previously explained and so forth, are the system of Yoga Tantra. This should be well examined.  
 
 
Lesson  18          Page 111 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Therefore I wonder whether one should not assert that in the system of Yoga Tantra, our 
Teacher attained enlightenment through entering that path of Yoga Tantra from the beginning 
and it is not necessary to add the path of Yoga Tantra in attaining enlightenment in the Perfection Vehicle. ( Pg. 17 of the root text)  
 Summary of the correct explanation g iven by master Anandagarbha  
At the end of accumulating the collections for three countless great eons, Shakyamuni Buddha was 
already at the tenth bodhisattva ground. In Akanishta, he entered into the meditative 
absorption called the supreme limit of the fo ur con centrations.  
 
At that time, the buddhas of the ten directions gathered and roused him from that meditative 
stabilisation through the sound of snapping their fingers. They told him, "You cannot become 
completely and perfectly purified through this meditative stabilisation."  
He asked, "Then, how is it done?"  
 
Thereupon, all the buddhas of the ten directions conferred upon him the crown initiation, 
after which they caused him to cultivate serially the five manifest enlightenments.  
 
Upon completing them, he achieved enlightenment in the nature of Vairochana. He then 
proceeded to the peak of Mount Meru, where he taught the Yoga Tantras. He then descended 
into this world and was born as Prince Siddhartha and subsequently performed the twelve 
deeds.  
 
Here you can see that there is a difference between the assertion of Anandagarbha  and those of 
the previous two masters Shakyamitra and Buddhaguhya.  
 
There are five manifest enlightenments which can be considered:  
• from the perspective of the manner in which t he Buddha achieved enlightenment by 
looking at his life story and  
• from the perspective of what the trainees should practise.  
 
1. Prince Siddhartha was conferred the crown initiation by all the buddhas of the ten 
directions who imparted to him the mantra,  citta -prativedham karomi and made him meditate 
on its meaning.  By doing so, he directly realised the suchness (or the factor of natural purity) of 
his own mind in meditative equipoise.  
 
Arising from that meditative equipoise, in the post meditative equipoise, his realisation of the 
suchness of his own mind took the aspect of a moon disc at his heart and he gained the mirror-
like exalted wisdom , the entity of Akshobhya.  
 
Of the five enlig htenments, the name of this first manifest enlightenment is called the manifest 
enlightenment from the individual clear realisation of the mind.  
 
Trainees should also reflect on the meaning of the mantra, citta -prativedham karomi and through 
such reflection, they will come to realise the factor of natural purity of their minds. That 
realisation will likewise transform into the aspect of moon discs (at their hearts).  
 
Lesson  18          Page 112 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
2. Next, Prince Siddhartha was told to meditate on the meaning of the mantra om bodhicittam 
utpadayami. By doing so, in medita tive equipoise, he directly realised the suchness of his mind 
as devoid of adventitious defilements.  Arising from that meditative equipoise, in the post 
meditative equipoise, his realisation of the suchness of his mind took the aspect of a second 
moon disc at his heart and he gained the exalted wisdom of equality , the entity of 
Ratnasambhava. This second  manifest enlightenment is called  the manifest enlightenment 
from generating the mind of supreme enlightenment.  
 
 
Likewise, trainees utter the mantra, om bodhicittam utpadayami  and meditate to realise the 
emptiness of their minds as devoid of adventitious defilements. That realisation transforms 
into the aspect of a second moon discs at their hearts which rest on top of the first moon discs.  
  
3. The buddhas then made Prince Siddhartha meditate on the meaning of the mantra, tistha -
vajra.  By doing so, Prince  Siddhartha  vividly saw the previous all -good mind of enlightenment 
in the aspect of a white five -pointed vajra standing upright on the moon disc at his heart and 
he attained the exalted wisdom of individual analysis , the entity of Amitabha. This manifest 
enlightenment is called the enlightenment from the stable vajra.  
 
When applied to the practice to be done by trainees, the trainees utter tistha -vajra and meditate 
on the white five -pointed vajra at their hearts.  
 
I am not sure whether this white five -pointed vajra is on the second moon disc or the second 
moon disc transforms into the white five -pointed vajra. It is not clear here. My guess is that by 
meditating on the second moon disc, that  completely transforms into the white five -pointed 
vajra.  
 
4. All the buddhas of the ten directions then conferred the name ini tiation on Prince 
Siddhartha after which he was designated as Bodhisattva Vajradhatu. T hey then caused him 
to meditate on the meaning of the mantra, vajra -atmako ham . By meditating on that, the 
vajra -elements of the exalted body,  exalted speech and the exalted mind of all the buddhas 
entirely and manifestly entered into the white five -pointed vajra at his heart, and he di rectly 
saw that vajra as established from the minute vajra particles of all the Ones -Gone -Thus. He 
gained the exalted wisdom of achieving activities , the entity of Amoghasiddhi. This manifest 
enlight enment is called the manifest enlightenment from the vajra essence.  
 
When this is app lied to the practice of the trainees, they utter vajra -atmako ham  and meditate 
on the white five -pointed vajra at their hearts emitting rays of light in the ten directions, 
through which the vajra- elements of exalted body, the vajra -elements of exalted speech, and the 
vajra- elements of exalted mind of all the Ones -Gone -Thus entirely enter into the white five -
pointed vajra at their  hearts.  
 
5. All the buddhas of the ten directions caused Bodhi sattva Vajradhatu to meditate on the 
meaning of the mantra om yatha sarva- tathagatas tatha 'ham.  Through that meditation, the 
vajra and moons at his heart were thor oughly transformed and manifest as the Complete 
 
Lesson  18          Page 113 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Enjoyment Body, Ma havairochana, adorned with the thirty -two major marks and eighty signs, 
becoming completely and perfectly buddhafied. He attains the exalted wisdom of the sphere 
of reality , the entity of Vairochana. This manifest enlightenment is called the manifest 
enlig htenment from the equality of all the Ones -Gone -Thus.  
 
With regards to the trainees, they utter  om yatha sarva- tathagatas tatha 'ham   and the vajras as 
well as the moons at their hearts transform into the exalted body of Vairo chana. The trainees 
meditate  on this.  
 
According to the system of Yoga Tantra, this is how the Buddha achieved enlightenment. Within 
Yoga Tantra, we follow the assertion of Anandagarbha. The Buddha achieved enlightenment in 
Akanishta where he meditated and serially cultivated  the fi ve manifest enlightenments in the 
manner I have just explained.  
 
Looking at the five manifest enlightenments in a simplified manner, the process for achieving 
enlightenment in Yoga Tantra is:  
• One meditates on the emptiness of the mind  
• The emptiness of the mind then transforms into the aspect of the moon disc.  
• One then meditates on the emptiness of the mind as  devoid of the adventitious defilements.  
• That realisation transforms into the aspect of a second moon disc.  
• On top of that, one meditates on the wh ite five -pointed vajra at the heart  
• The white five -pointed vajra at the heart emits rays of light in the ten directions which then 
come back to the heart  
• Then the moon discs and the white five -pointed vajra transform into  the body of the deity.   
 
Name of  the manifest 
enlightenment  Mantra  Realisation  Aspect  Exalted wisdom & 
entity of deity  
1. Manifest enlightenment 
from individual clear 
realisation of the mind.  citta -
prativedham karomi  Realises the 
factor of natural purity of his mind  Moon disc at his 
heart  Exalted wisdom of 
mirror- like 
exalted wisdom, the entity of 
Akshobhya.  
2. Manifest enlightenment 
from generating the mind of supreme enlightenment.  om 
bodhicittam utpadayami  Realises the 
suchness of his mind as devoid of adventitious 
defilements.  Second moon 
disc at his  heart.  Exalted wisdom of 
equality, the entity of Ratnasambhava.  
3.Enlightenment from the 
stable vajra tistha -vajra  Saw just that 
previous all-good mind of enlightenment  White five -
pointed vajra standing upright on the moon disc 
at his heart  Exalted wisdom 
of individual analysis, the entity of 
Amitabha  
4. Manifest enlightenment 
from the vajra essence.  vajra -
atmako 
ham  Directly realises 
that vajra as 
established The vajra -
elements of 
exalted body, Exalted wisdom of 
achieving 
activities, the 
 
Lesson  18          Page 114 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Name of  the manifest 
enlightenment  Mantra  Realisation  Aspect  Exalted wisdom & 
entity of deity  
from the 
minute vajra 
particles of all the Ones -Gone -
Thus  exalted speech 
and exalted mind of all the buddhas entirely and manifestly enter into the white five-pointed vajra 
at his heart  entity of 
Amoghasiddhi  
5. Manifest enlightenment 
from the equality of all 
Ones -Gone -Thus.  om yatha 
sarva-tathagatas tatha 'ham  Completely 
and perfectly buddhafied  The vajra and 
moons at his heart were thor oughly 
transformed, manifesting as the Complete Enjoyment Body,  Mahavairoch ana 
adorned with the thirty -two major 
marks and eighty 
signs  Exalted wisdom of 
the sphere of reality, the entity of Vairochana  
 
Answer to student’s query :  According to the Autonomy Middle Way School and the schools 
below it, the emptiness of the mind is not a true cessation and is not an ultimate truth. It is a 
conventional truth.  
 
According to the Consequence Middle Way School, however, true cessation is none other than 
the emptiness of the m ind. When the emptiness (suchness) of the mind is purified of the 
adventitious defilements, that mind is true cessation.  
 
I am telling you this based on my personal observation. This is not based on any text.  Looking at 
the above process, the emptiness o f the mind and the emptiness of the mind devoid of the 
adventitious defilements are strongly connected. The first and second emptinesses of the mind 
are closely related and both become moon discs. If the first is a moon disc and the second a sun 
disc, ther e seem to be no connection between the two. True cessation is not something that is 
separated from the mind.  
 
The five manifest enlightenments also occur in Highest Yoga Tantra but their meaning is totally 
different from what we have discussed here. For example, restraining life -force exertion occurs 
in both lower Tantra and Highest Yoga Tantra but their meanings are totally different.  
 
Question: If Prince Siddhartha was already a Buddha and his spiritual journey was a display for 
our benefit, then how about the story of how the Buddha first generated compassion as a hell 
being? Was that also a display?  
 
Lesson  18          Page 115 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Answer : At that time, he was a truly qualified hell being and wasn’t a buddha then. This account 
shows how much hardship was endured and how hard he practised to become a buddha, the 
effort put into generating bodhicitta.  
 
If we were to assert that everything is a display, then that means that right from the very 
beginning, he was a buddha already. What is the problem with such an assertion? If that was so, 
then there is no need for practice because he is already a buddha.  
 
 
   
Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Tran scribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
 
Lesson  18          Page 116 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 19   DATE: 21ST APRIL 2009  
 
(Geshe -la taught this class in English in the absence of the interpreter )  
 
My main purpose for having this class is to give some kind of understanding to those of you who have not grasped the basic points (of what we  have covered so far). Maybe this class will 
be helpful for you, (using) my simple English to give you some simple understanding.   
 
After having been here for almost ten years, this is the first time in the Basic Program that I am 
trying to talk to you di rectly (in class). Due to my pronunciation or grammer, some of you may 
have difficulty in understanding me. In case you don’t understand what I am trying to say, you 
can ask. You are my guinea pig and I am your guinea pig!  
 
I am not going to cover anythin g new today so don’t expect any new information. I will be 
repeating some of the old material. But when I say that and if you don’t pay attention to what I 
am going to say, then there is no point to this. You must pay attention.  
 
You may close your eyes, thinking that you know all this. You shouldn’t do that as sometimes 
you can get some meaning even from hearing the same words. It is just like reading a book. When you read the Lam Rim  for the first time, you will get some meaning from it but when you 
read  the same page the second time, you will get a different meaning. The same applies to 
listening to the teachings.  
 If you really pay attention, you will get something from this session. Don’t think, “I know this stuff” and then shut off your mind. Such an attitude is  not so helpful. It is good to listen.  
 If I run out of things to say, I will see what we can do. If I don’t run out of things to say, I will continue. It is very difficult for me to plan what I am going to say. I cannot plan for an hour talk . 
I am very bad in that. I can think of what (I am going) to talk about for only ten minutes. After ten minutes, I don’t know what I am going to say. Some people are very good in their planning such as ten minutes on this (topic), ten minutes on that but f or me, I don’t have that kind of 
experience.  
 
In the sutra, Dependent Arising, Buddha Shakyamuni mentions that:  
Whoever sees dependent arising,  
That person sees the Dharma.  
Whoever sees the Dharma,  
That person sees the Buddha.  
 The dependent arising that Buddha Shakyamuni talks about here can be understood in many 
different ways, at the gross level and at the subtle level. Dependent arising is the very basis for Buddhism. For example, when the Buddha taught the Four Noble Truths -  the truth of suffering 
and the truth of cessation –  that is dependent arising at the very gross level.  All sufferings 
come from and depend on a cause. Cause and effect are related to each other. Because there is 
 
Lesson  19          Page 117 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
a cause, one gets the result (effect). You suffer because there is a cause. Dependent on that 
cause, you experience suffering.  
 When you understand the relationship between cause and effect, that they depend on each other, you will understand karma. The main thing is to understand karma. Through that understanding, you will try to engage in virtue and avoid negative actions. When you do that, you are purifying negative karma and creating merit. All virtuous things come from merit. We 
experience negative karma from the bad things. When we understand this, then we will put  
effort into practising virtues and avoiding negativities. And once we do that, we accumulate 
merit.  
 Here is one of the meanings of the line, “ Whoever sees dependent arising,/That person sees the 
Dharma.”  Dharma means understanding the law of karma. This line can be understood in that 
way. When you understand the Dharma, you understand how karma works and you will engage in the accumulation of merit. Through that, you achieve higher rebirth and the Buddha (buddhahood).  
 When we say, “Buddha,” that can als o be understood in different ways. The Buddha can be 
divided into the form body and the truth body. Here, when you relate it to merit, we can understand Buddha refers to the form body.  
 
When you understand dependent arising, then you see the Dharma. When you understand the 
Dharma, you achieve the Buddha. What that means is that when you understand dependent arising, you understand cause and effect and through that, you will understand karma. That 
means you understand the Dharma and through that, you achiev e the Buddha. Through the 
accumulation of merit, you achieve the form body  of the Buddha. That is one way to 
understand (dependent arising).  
 Another way you can understand dependent arising, at a deeper level, is that it is not only cause and effect. It is that all existing things are dependent on something else. They cannot exist by themselves. They must depend on something else to exist.  
 Even the result depends on the cause and the cause depends on the result. Why is there a cause? It is because of the result. Why is there a result? It is because of the cause. When you think about this, (you will see that) all existing things depend on something else other than 
themselves to exist. They cannot  exist by themselves.  
Whatever exists depends on imputation, how the mind labels it. For example, the mind gives 
the label, the name “Geshe Chonyi.” “Geshe Chonyi” doesn’t exist from its own side. If “Geshe Chonyi” exists from its own side, then when  I go to Orchard Road, everybody should recognise me as Geshe Ch onyi.  
 When you talk about dependent arising, that is the subtle dependent arising. When you understand that, then you understand the Dharma. That means you really understand the reality of existence and how things exist. That is the real wisdom and when y ou have that 
wisdom, then ignorance will definitely be removed.  
 
 
Lesson  19          Page 118 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Here, you see the Dharma means you see the reality of things, i.e., how they  exist. Once you 
understand that, you are accumulating wisdom which means that you are practising the Dharma and you will achieve the Buddha at the end of the day. Through that, you will achieve the truth body  (or the wisdom body) of the Buddha.  
 So here are two different ways to understand the verse:  
Whoever sees dependent arising,  
That person sees the Dharma.  
Whoever sees the Dharma,  That person sees the Buddha.  
Method and wisdom can be understood in that way.   We can also relate it to the two truths. Whatever exists is either a conventional existence (conventional truth) or ultimate existence (ultimate truth). They exist because the two truths are always there.  
 Because of conventional existence, therefore, there is good karma, bad karma, suffering and happiness. When you understand conventional existence, you can relate to it and accumulate merit.  
 When you look at conventional existence, at happiness or suffering and if you really search for 
what is happiness and what is suffering, you will not be able to find them. You can look deeply 
into them but you will not be able to find suffering or happines s and you cannot find the 
person. What you do find, in the end, is emptiness. That is the ultimate truth.  
 When you realise that suffering or happiness is merely imputed by  the mind (merely labelled by the mind), you will not find true suffering when you  search for it. That means you 
understand the reality of suffering and the reality of happiness. That is the wisdom that understands the reality of suffering and  happiness. Because of ultimate truth, you gain the realisation of wisdom and through that, yo u achieve the Buddha’s truth body.  
 When I explained the first meaning for “ Whoever sees dependent arising,/That person sees the 
Dharma,” I related that to karma. Understanding how karma works, we know we suffer 
because of bad karma. In exactly the same w ay,   other people suffer due to their negative 
karma. Through our understanding of karma, this helps us to generate some kind of 
compassion for others. Otherwise, it is very difficult for you to generate compassion for others 
when  you yourself do not understand how you suffer because of karma. When you really understand (the workings of) karma, then that really helps you to develop compassion for others, how they are the same as us, how they are suffering because of their karma.   
 When you relate to depe ndent arising in a subtle way, (you see how) all things exist not by 
depending on how you see them but they exist in dependence on how you label them. When you understand reality, you can see why other people have so much suffering. When you understand rea lity - how things exist -  then you can understand how all sentient beings are so 
ignorant, not being able to see the reality of the object but just believing in whatever they see and thinking that that is true.  When you understand subtle dependent arising , then you 
 
Lesson  19          Page 119 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
understand the reality of existence and from there, you can see how sentient beings suffer. 
Through that, you develop great compassion towards others Through the wisdom that realises reality, it helps you to generate compassion and make that com passion stronger.  
 In this way, wisdom and method support each other. Wisdom makes bodhicitta stronger. When your bodhicitta is stronger, your understanding of reality is also stronger.  
 
That is the most difficult thing to understand –  how things exist. When you understand the 
reality of the object, then there would be fewer problems and less suffering. We all suffer and 
are unhappy because we believe in what appears to us, in what we see. We don’t really understand reality. We don’t really understand the  person. We look at things in a (certain) way, 
believe in that and then decide that is the way (things are). All the problems start from there. When we understand the reality of all things including the person, it will make our life easier with less proble ms and suffering and more happiness.    
 Therefore, it is important to understand the two truths. Our understanding of reality is almost next to nothing. We don’t understand anything about the object at all. That’s why we suffer continually in samsara again and again and we create so much negative karma. Whatever we see, we believe it to be 100% true but we are, in fact, a 100% wrong. We suffer because we are following the wrong mind.  
 
Based on the two truths, there are two methods. Because of the two methods, we achieve the 
two Buddha’s bodies, the truth body and the form body.  
 
When the Buddha gave Hinayana teachings, he did not really mention buddhahood but he  talked only about nirvana. After nirvana, then that is the end of suffering. He did not explain that after the Hinayana Path, one has to enter the Mahayana path because the Buddha taught  according to the level of the students.   The Hinayanists want to be free of suffering and (to achieve that), they want  nirvana. They have this kind of attitude . The Buddha never mentioned to the Hinayanists that after nirvana, 
they have to enter the Mahayana path because he knows that they are not suitable for such Mahayana teachings. That is why, in the Hinayana teachings, the Buddha does not mention that after  one becomes an arhat, one has to enter the Mahayana path.  
 
But, in reality, whether one has to enter the Mahayana path or not, that is another question. 
This does not mean that one does not need to enter the Mahayana path just because the Buddha did not mention it in the sutras. In reality, an arhat has not yet achieved enlightenment 
and he has to enter the Mahayana path.   In the same way, with regards to the Sutra vehicle, the Buddha didn’t mention to the Sutra disciples that after one has achieved a ce rtain level, one has to enter the Tantric path. In reality, 
one has to enter the Tantric path after one has completed the Sutric path. Basically, what the Buddha teaches depends on the students’ level. He guides them on the path according to the kind of be liefs they have.  
 
 
Lesson  19          Page 120 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
It is important that everyone should know why you need to enter the Tantric path and why the 
Sutric path alone cannot lead to enlightenment. It is very important to understand this. We are so used to the Sutric path and it is difficult for us to accept that through the Sutric path, we cannot get enlightened. We must enter the Tantric path.  
 My point is that, here, today, one thing you must understand, with logic, is this very simple thing: Why you must enter  the Tantric path. Also, what  are the differences between Sutra 
and Tantra ? Today, I think my main message is these two (points).  
 As I have also mentioned before, (from your side) you must have some kind of interest to know, from your heart, so when someone explains this, it will re main in your mind for a long time. If 
you have studied here for 10 or 20 years and after having studied Tantra for six months, imagine someone asks you, “What is Tantra?” If you are unable to explain this in a simple way, how will you feel -  happy or unhappy? If you are happy with saying, “I don’t know,” then that is 
fine. But we should not be happy with that. That is my point. We should understand this simple thing. This is my purpose of deciding to teach these two classes without a interpreter  as I 
though t it may be helpful for those who want to learn this simple thing.  
 We think that by practising the Sutric path, we can get enlightened. We can get the two bodies through the collection of merit and wisdom. Why do we need Tantra?  
 
● When we talk about emptiness, we talk about the understanding of the reality of things. That 
understanding and explanation of reality, as explained by Nagarjuna in the Sutric vehicle, is 
exactly the same in both Sutra and Tantra. There is no difference.  
 ● Bodhicitta is also exactly the same in both the Sutric and Tantric vehicles: it is to achieve 
enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings.  The entity of bodhicitta and emptiness is the same in both the Sutric and Tantric vehicles. It is the co mmon practices for both the Mahayana Sutra and the Mahayana Tantra vehicles to 
practise bodhicitta and to realise emptiness.  
 
• In both the Sutric and Tantric paths, in order to achieve the form body and truth body, we 
must have the two collections of method and  wisdom.  
 
• Generating bodhicitta and the practice of the six perfections are also the same in both Sutra 
and Tantra.  
 In the Sutric path, it is mentioned that the collection of merit is achieved through the generation of bodhicitta and the practice o f the six perfections accompanied by strong prayers. 
Through this accumulation of merit, we achieve the Buddha’s form body.  
  
How does one achieve the truth body? Through meditating on emptiness and realising emptiness directly.  Through that, the mind ca n transform into the truth body. When the 
Buddha meditates on emptiness, he sees reality without any dualistic appearance. In order to achieve that kind of buddha mind, you must have the cause. In Sutra, there is a wisdom directly realising emptiness that doesn’t have dualistic appearance, i.e., there is no differentiation 
 
Lesson  19          Page 121 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
between the subject and object. They become one. The Sutra explains it in that way. That kind 
of mind can be the cause to achieve the Buddha’s truth body.   The wisdom realising emptiness  can be a cause for the Buddha’s truth body. But in Sutra, they 
cannot clearly explain the real cause of the form body. The question is whether the generation of bodhicitta and the practice of the six perfections coupled with strong prayers can become the cause of the form body?  
 Tantra offers a deeper and better explanation of the cause of the form body, which Sutra is unable to do. The practice of deity yoga (in Tantra) where we visualise ourselves as the deity, this meditation is a similar  cause for achi eving the Buddha’s form body. You see the method is 
different – practising deity yoga is a similar cause to get the Buddha’s form body but Sutra does 
not have that, the same kind of cause to achieve the form body.  
 All bodhisattvas wish to reach enlighten ment for the sake of others. When we talk about the 
truth body and the form body, the bodhisattvas’ main aim is to achieve the form body so that he can help numberless sentient beings. The truth body cannot do that as sentient beings are unable to see it.  
 So the main goal in both Sutra and Tantra is to achieve the form body but Tantra offers a better cause and explanation on how to do this, i.e., the practice of generating oneself as the deity. 
The method of achieving the form body is different in Sutra a nd Tantra. Tantra is more 
profound. The details are much clearer in Highest Yoga Tantra.  
 
When we talk about the form body, it is also not so clear in the lower classes of Tantra even 
though there is the practice of deity yoga. Even in Highest Yoga Tantra , there is the appearance 
of the deity during the generation stage but it is not clear whether this deity is the cause of the form body or not.    
The real cause of the form body can be explained only  by the completion stage when you 
achieve the illusory body (in Highest Yoga Tantra). I am not going to talk about this today but in Highest Yoga Tantra, the explanation about this is very clear. That is the reason why, finally, you must  practise Highest Y oga Tantra to achieve enlightenment.  
 What is the difference between Mahayana Sutra and Mahayana Tantra? Both have the same 
goals for achieving the form body but the method  for achieving  the form body is different. 
Why is there deity yoga in Tantra? Beca use that is the cause for achieving the form body. It is 
very important you understand this and keep this in mind.  
 
Also, in Sutra, when we talk about wisdom and method, it cannot be explained how they can exist within one mind. (In Sutra), wisdom and met hod are separate minds and cannot be 
combined within one mind although they do support one another.  
 Tantra explains how wisdom and method can be combined in one mind. Why is this so important - to have wisdom and method in one mind?  If you separate them , what will be the 
problem? Because when you achieve buddhahood, the Buddha’s form body and truth body are 
 
Lesson  19          Page 122 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
one entity. Therefore when one gets enlightened, the body and mind become one entity. In 
order to achieve that, you must have a cause (similar to the  result).   
 So we need to understand this:  
• That Tantra has a better method that provides a cause (similar to the result) for achieving 
the form body; and  
• Tantra shows how method and wisdom can be combined within one mind.  
These two points are a simple w ay of understanding the difference between Sutra and Tantra, 
why we need deity yoga, why the Sutra Path alone cannot achieve enlightenment and why we must practise Tantra. So my answer is there. Now you should have a clear idea of the necessity of entering  the Tantric path and why you must practise Highest Yoga Tantra to achieve 
enlightenment.   
 What is Tantra (or mantra)? “Mantra,” in Sanskrit means the mind. “Tra” means “protection.” Tantra or mantra literally means protection of the mind. What are we protecting the mind from? We are protecting the mind from ordinary appearance and grasping.  
 There is the explanation of deity yoga in Tantra, the generation of yourself as a deity. The question may arise: Can you transform yourself into a deity? When we th ink about the reality 
of the person and based on that understanding, actually there is nothing there – the person is 
empty. From  my side, when I look at Geshe Chonyi, I cannot find it. It is empty. But within emptiness, there are different manifestations at different levels – a monk, a geshe and so forth. 
Therefore, within emptiness, one can appear as a deity.  
 
Tantra explains that to clear your ordinary appearance is the method to generate yourself and other beings as deities. It is only through the stro ng  appearance of oneself and others as 
deities that we can stop our ordinary appearance and grasping.  
 It is helpful for us to develop that kind of attitude and that kind of mind. All problems arise because we see everyone as ordinary, as worse than us. We don’t see other people as perfect. When we see others as perfect, we will not get angry or upset. Once we generate ourselves and others as deities, we develop clear appearance of all sentient beings and that can stop suffering.  
 For the same reason, Tantra explains meditating on our environment as a pure land or Buddha’s palace and seeing the reality of desire objects as good objects. When we meditate in this way, our environment will not give us any problems, our sense enjoyments will not be sources of  problems but instead, transformed into something that can give us some real 
pleasure and happiness. It is also explained that whatever things we use, we should think of them as how Buddha would experience these things.  
 
There is another practice related to how the Buddha helps sentient beings. When we meditate and recite the mantra, we can visualise light rays radiating from ourselves and touching all sentient beings and purifying their negative karma. Then we absorb the light rays back into ourselves. Th at practice also helps to create the cause for enlightenment and to be able to help 
all sentient beings.  
 
Lesson  19          Page 123 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Everything is very detailed in Tantra. Everything comes from the mind. Nothing comes from outside. When we see an object and we label it with our ordi nary mind, when we label it as bad, 
that is how we will experience it and we suffer. When we label it as good, we have some kind of happiness. But that is how we label things, not using our wisdom but with our deluded minds. We only see part of the object and not the whole picture. We may see only 1% of that 
object but we believe in  what we see with our (deluded) minds. We do not understand reality 
and we really suffer due to this lack of understanding.  
  
In Tantra, the method is to understand the reality of the object and its ultimate truth. When we 
understand the ultimate truth, our minds can manifest in different ways. When the mind is good, then everything becomes good. What we see depends on what kind of mind we have. It 
is difficult to see all objects as blissful objects because at our level, we do not have that kind of mind to see them as such. For us, it is only at the level of imagination. If we really practise Tantra, particularly Highest Yoga Tant ra that (has the practice of) generating great bliss and so 
forth, etc, when we have this kind of wisdom, we will see things in a different way. It will be  possible to see all objects as blissful. For us, at this moment, we do not see them like that becau se we do not have that kind of mind.  
That is why Tantra explains how to meditate on oneself as a deity, how to meditate on one’s environment as a pure land, how to think that all objects are blissful and how to help others before one gets enlightened. Tantra teaches the four complete purities  so that one can 
meditate on them before one gets enlightened. That is Tantra. But you won’t find this of method of meditating on yourself as a deity in Sutra. That is the difference between Sutra and Tantra.  
 What I w ant you to know today is:  
• Why you need to enter Tantra to get enlightened  
• Why Tantra is better than Sutra  
 When we get to the next section on Highest Yoga Tantra, we will explain all this in greater detail. We will then have a better understanding of how  deity yoga leads to the form body in 
Highest Yoga Tantra in its discussion of the illusory body -  where it comes from, what it looks 
like and so forth. Now, it is difficult to understand how deity yoga can lead to the form body. Even the three lower class es of Tantra cannot really explain how deity yoga is the cause of the 
form body as they cannot explain this in terms of the subtle winds and subtle mind.  
 Sutra never talks about using the attachment (desire) and transforming it into the path. In Hinayana, the three poisons are to be totally abandoned. In the Mahayana Sutra vehicle, anger and ignorance are seen as not being beneficial but although attachment is to be abandoned, it is not totally bad as it can be helpful in some ways when put into the practice.  
 In Tantra, attachment is not only helpful but can be transformed into the path. Buddha does not teach Tantra to everyone but only to those who are capable of managing it. He does not teach Tantra to (practitioners of) the Hinayana or Mahayana Sutra but only to the special 
disciples who can transform desire into the path. So, for the Buddha to teach Tantra, there must be special students who are capable of transforming desire into the path. Perhaps, we are 
 
Lesson  19          Page 124 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
not such suitable students.  
 
Historically, King Bimbisara requested the Buddha, “I cannot abandon my entourage. I have to look after them but I also want to get enlightened. Is there any method for me to do so?”  Buddha gave him the method, Tantra. Buddha manifested the form of a Highest Yoga Tantra deity with  consort and taught the king how to practise Tantra. From the king’s side, he was a suitable disciple. With this tantric practice, the king can still keep his wives and children, take 
care of the kingdom and also get enlightened.  
 
It is importa nt to study Highest Yoga Tantra to get some understanding of it. Unless we do this, 
it will be difficult for us to explain how desire can be transformed into the path.  
     Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  19          Page 125 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 20   DATE: 23RD APRIL 2009  
(Geshe -la taught this class in English in the absence of the interpreter )  
 
As usual, we will do five minutes of silent meditation. If you think you have nothing to meditate 
on, it is good to review what was covered in the last class. This is just a sugges tion.  
 
• In the last class, I had mentioned that:   
Whoever sees dependent arising,  
That person sees the Dharma.  
Whoever sees the Dharma,  That person sees the Buddha.  
It is important to understand the meaning of this verse. When you think about it, it can be 
explained in many different ways.  
• In the last class, I also talked about the differences between Sutra and Tantra which you 
should remember.  
• You also need to know why, in order to get enlightened, you need to practise Highest Yoga 
Tantra.  
You should un derstand these three very basic things.  If someone were to ask you about them, 
you should be able to answer that person.  
 
An easy answer for the difference between the Sutra and Tantra is that in order to get 
enlightened, there are different methods and Tantra and Sutra are differentiated by method, 
not by wisdom. Tantra has a better method than Sutra.  
 
All sentient beings have the potential to get enlightened. In the Hinayana tradition, it does not 
mention that everyone has the potential to be liberated - some can and some can’t. However, 
when we look at the Mahayana vehicle, it is clearly stated that every  sentient being has the 
potential to get enlightened. In Tantra, this is definite.  
 So it is important for us to understand the potential we have and how all sentient beings 
possess this potential for enlightenment. What is that potential and when did it begin? As soon 
as sentient beings exist, the potential was there.  
 In the previous m odule on the Tathagata Essence , we discussed buddhanature. In Sutra, it is 
mentioned that buddhanature is the potential to get enlightened. Every sentient being 
possesses this buddhanature and there is no sentient being who cannot get enlightened. Sutra 
explains that the clear mind is the potential to get enlightened.  
What does the clarity of mind means? We can understand this in different ways. The clear mind has a kind of energy (that is) clear and knowing. One way to understand that is that the mind its elf is empty and not inherently existent. The mind itself is clear. Its nature is emptiness. 
We should understand two things here:  
• every sentient being has this clear mind and  
• the nature of that clear mind is emptiness.  
 
 
Lesson  20          Page 126 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Based on the two truths, the mind is the conventional truth and its emptiness is the ultimate 
truth. These two exist whenever sentient beings exist. That is the basis or the seed for one to 
attain enlightenment.  
 The clear mind then slowly transforms into the wisdom truth body –  the Buddha’s mind. When 
we talk about the Buddha, there are many different things -  the Buddha’s mind, the Buddha’s 
body, the Buddha’s speech and so forth. When we talk about true cessation, the Buddha 
possesses true cessation that is free of negative karma. What is the cause for that? It is the 
emptiness of the mind that transforms into the Buddha’s true cessation.  
 Mahayana Sutra explains the buddha potential in each sentient being in that everyone possesses the clear mind and the emptiness of that clear mind. Th ese two are the causes to 
achieve enlightenment as one transforms into the Buddha’s mind and the other transforms into the Buddha’s true cessation.  
 From the Tantric viewpoint, the question arises as to what does the Sutric vehicle posit to be the cause o f the Buddha’s body? The Sutric vehicle has no clear explanation for that as it can 
only explain the clear mind and its emptiness transforming into the Buddha’s (mind).   But the Buddha has two bodies: the truth body and the form body. Sutra can only expla in the 
cause of the truth body but not the cause of the form body. Do all sentient beings possess the 
cause for the form body? It is difficult to say this is so from the Sutric point of view. In Tantra, 
however, especially Highest Yoga Tantra, each and eve ry sentient being has the causes for the 
Buddha’s form body and truth body.  
 What is the cause for the form body from the Tantric viewpoint? Amongst the (classes of) Tantra, only the Highest Yoga Tantra gives the final view that explains that all  sentient beings 
have the subtle wind and subtle mind. The subtle wind is the cause for the form body. The Sutric (view) cannot explain clearly how all sentient beings possess the cause for the form body. That is the reason why Tantra is more profound as it can exp lain how each and every sentient 
being possesses the cause for the form body and truth body. Only the Highest Yoga Tantra can explain this very clearly. Even the three lower classes of Tantra cannot explain so clearly the cause for the form body. That is w hy Highest Yoga Tantra is the best.  
 What does receiving an initiation really mean and how do we do so? What is the point of 
receiving initiations? What difference does it make whether one receives an initiation or not?  
As explained earlier, we all have the potential to get enlightened. An initiation is like planting a 
seed in the field for it to grow. The field alone is not enough. We already have the potential but 
in order for that to grow, we need to put in the seed by leaving an imprint in the mental continuum. That is the meaning of initiation, i.e., leaving an imprint on the mental continuum and also to awaken the clear mind.  
 When we talk about the lower classes of Tantra, such as Action Tantra, we have two initiations: the water initiation and the  crown initiation. Sometimes, five initiations are given: the water, 
crown, vajra, bell and name initiations but normally only two initiations are given.  
 
 
Lesson  20          Page 127 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
When the vajra master gives the water initiation, the vase is placed on your head and you drink 
the water from the vase. At that time, when you are drinking the water, you need to think, “By 
drinking this water, I am receiving the blessing,” and generate great bliss and a happy mind. This is one type of initiation which transforms your mind into a happy one (through the action of drinking the water and having the vase placed on your head). If you experience that, that means you have received some kind of initiation.   
At the same time, the happy mind leaves an imprint in the mental continuum. That is another 
initiation.  
 As mentioned in the text, when the master gives initiation to 100 people, those 100 people will receive 100 different kinds of initiations. Not everyo ne receives the same initiation. From the 
master’s side, he is giving one initiation but what kind of initiation the disciples receive depends totally on the mind of the disciple, i.e., if one does not generate any bliss or pay attention (during the initia tion), one does not receive any initiation (at all).  
 For one to receive an initiation, one must have some kind of a joyful mind. Very good students or disciples can generate real bliss in their minds during an initiation. That is the real initiation, the real path to enlightenment.  
 For us, we just imagine by thinking, “I have received (the initiation)” and have a happy mind. By 
transforming your mind into a happy state at that moment –  that is the initiation and at the 
same time, it leaves an imprint in  the mental continuum. If you don’t think of anything and 
from your heart, there is no devotion, no faith, then you do not receive the initiation simply by 
drinking the water or having the vase touch your head.  
 
So in order for you to receive the initiation or leave some imprint in your mind, from your side, you must have full devotion. In order to practise Tantra, you need to leave some imprints in your mind. That is one of the reasons you need to receive an initiation. It is not enough that you have the potential (clear mind) to get enlightened. You need to have some imprints in that 
clear mind. In Tantra, you need to have an initiation to attain enlightenment. `  
  As explained in Action Tantra, when the water initiation is given, it purifies your negativ e 
emotions and leaves an imprint in your mental continuum to achieve the Buddha’s truth body 
and also gives you the permission to practise the Tantric path.  
 
When we talk about the lower classes of Tantra, we have two paths:  
• the Yoga with Signs and  
• the Yoga without Signs.  
By receiving the water initiation, it allows you to practise the path of Yoga without Signs.  
 After that, the crown initiation will be given. When the vase touches your head, you generate a happy mind. This is how you receive the initiation. The crown initiation leaves the imprint in your mental continuum to achieve the Buddha’s form body and it also gives you the permission to meditate on the path of Yoga with Signs.  
 
Lesson  20          Page 128 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Sometimes the vajra, bell and name initiations are given in the lo wer classes of Tantra. You 
then receive a total of five initiations.  
• When the vajra initiation is given, it leaves an imprint in the mental continuum to achieve 
the Buddha’s wisdom body.  
• When the bell initiation is given, it leaves an imprint in the mental continuum to achieve the 
Buddha’s perfect speech.  
• When the name initiation is given, it leaves an imprint in the mental continuum to achieve 
the Buddha’s perfect name. (The Buddha’s perfect name means that by reciting that Buddha’s name, it can purify eons of negative karma).  
 The purpose of receiving an initiation is to leave an imprint in our mental continua. We have the clear mind but we do not have the imprints.  It is just like having a nice field without any seeds in it. We need to have the seeds in order to have crops. But just leaving imprints in our 
mental continua without doing anything else is also not enough. We will need to wait for eons and eons to get enlightened.  
 What should we do after having received the initiations? We need to make the imprint function just like we need to cultivate the crops. That is the reason for the paths of Yoga with Signs and Yoga without Signs. In order for the seeds to grow to give you nice fruits for you to enjoy, you need the field, water, manure, the sun a nd other conditions. It is the same thing 
here. You need to practise with many conditions, such as Yoga with Signs and Yoga without 
Signs, after having the imprint in your mental continuum.  
 
How do you practise Tantra after having received the initiation? By generating yourself as a 
deity. How you do that? Whenever you look at a Tantra text such as the Tara sadhana, it mentions that from the letter TAM, it manifests into Tara or in the Chenrezig sadhana, it mentions the letter HRI manifesting into Chenrezig . When we make offering, by reciting OM, 
we manifest this and that. There are many syllables in the practices. What is the reason for this? Tantra always emphasises emptiness in the beginning. So here whatever letter or syllable is mentioned, be it TAM, HR I or so forth, we need to understand that the syllable is the word and 
(its function) is for us to understand that everything -  whatever things we enjoy, whatever 
offerings we make, even we ourselves - are all labelled by name, labelled by the mind. That is 
the meaning behind having the syllables (or letters).  
 In order to practise Tantra well, you must understand emptiness.  Whenever we see the 
mantra, “ Om svabhava -shuddhah sarva- dharmah svabhava- shuddho ham, ” that means to 
understand emptiness, that every thing is empty. Only through understanding emptiness will 
your Tantric practice become powerful. Otherwise your Tantric practice is nothing when you 
don’t understand emptiness.  
 If you generate yourself as the deity without understanding emptiness, the question arises as to whether that can be the antidote to your self -grasping? It is almost impossible for that 
(practice) to be an antidote to the self- grasping. It may even increase it. It definitely will not 
help. But if you understand emptiness and then y ou generate yourself as the deity within 
emptiness, then that can be the antidote to the self- grasping (the delusions and negative 
 
Lesson  20          Page 129 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
emotions).  
 
As mentioned earlier, the quality of your practice in Tantrayana depends on how good you are in Sutrayana. Witho ut understanding the Sutrayana, your Tantric practice will not become 
powerful. So whenever you generate yourself as a deity, at the beginning, think about the emptiness of yourself and the deity that you are going to meditate on. Analyse how you and the deity exist. Do this until you have reached the conclusion that your existence depends on 
others and you cannot exist without depending on others. Similarly, the deity also exists by 
depending on others.   Ultimately, you and the deity are equal and of the same nature as both of you do not exist inherently. Within emptiness, you and the deity are not different but the same. Conventionally, you and the deity are different but ultimately you are both the same. Amongst the six deities, the mind that understands  this reality is called empty deity (ultimate deity). This mind with its 
understanding of reality transforms into a moon disc (which, in reality, is your mind).  
 We can then visualise the sound  deity  on top of the moon disc by thinking of the sound of the  
mantra of the deity in space. In reality, this is the deity in the aspect of sound.  
 The sound then comes down to the moon disc and sits on the moon disc in the aspect of letters. That becomes the letter deity . From those letters, light rays radiate out into different 
directions and touch each and every sentient being,   purifying their negative karma. The light rays then absorb back into the letters. Again the light rays radiate out into the different buddhas’  pure lands and makes extensive offerings to the buddhas and bodhisattvas. The light 
rays then absorb back into the mantra. The letters and the moon disc then transform into the shape of the Buddha. Initially, the shape is not clear but it becomes clearer later, with more details. It is like when a human being is conceived in the mother’s womb, the shape of the foetus during the early months of the pregnancy is not so clear but the shape becomes clearer when it nears the ninth month of pregnancy. The shape of the deity is the form deity . We 
meditate on that.  
 In the lower classes of Tantra, we then bless the five different points of our bodies -  at the 
crown, throat, heart, right and left shoulders. This is the seal deity (mudra deity) .  
 After having a cle ar vision of the deity, we meditate on that as long as we can and try to have a 
very clear appearance of the deity in our minds with a strong concept, “This is the deity”. That is the sign deity .   
 After that, we recite the mantra by thinking of the moon disc and the mantra garland at the 
deity’s heart. We recite as many mantras as we wish to accomplish the required number of mantras.  This is how we do the retreat in Action Tantra based on the sequence of the six 
deities.  
 In the beginning, it is important to understand the reality of the object – yourself and the deity. 
Within that, then you generate yourself as a deity. That is the way to do it. You cannot immediately meditate on the deity’s body.   
 
Lesson  20          Page 130 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
If you want to meditate on the front generation, you ca n look at sadhanas such as the Nyung -
na sadhana. From your heart the white syllable BHRUM radiates out five -coloured light rays in 
front of you, where you then visualise the mandala. The mandala is not outside but comes from your heart. The mandala has fou r doors. Inside the mandala there is a cushion. Visualise 
the deity inside the mandala. Then from the sadhana, we do the practice which includes the seven -limb practice.  
 In fact, the front generation comes from your heart and is not separate from you. That is why the Buddha’s mandala is Buddha, the Buddha’s body is Buddha, the Buddha’s eyes are Buddha and the Buddha’s ears are Buddha. In order to have (that unity as) one, you need to meditate that the mandala comes from your heart. That is the practice. I n fact when one gets 
enlightened, it all becomes one. We can say the Buddha’s pure land is Buddha, the Buddha’s palace is Buddha. In the Hinayana tradition, they do not say the Buddha’s body is the Buddha. In Mahayana, they say the Buddha’s body is the Buddha. In Tantra, it is definitely so.   
 The main point of practising Tantra is to achieve enlightenment. In order to get enlightened, you need to achieve calm abiding and special insight. This is the same in Sutrayana.  
 How does Action Tantra explain the development of calm abiding? It is through generating yourself as a deity (self -generation) and the front generation. From the front generation deity, 
you meditate on the deity, the moon disc and mantra garland without me ntal distraction for as 
long as possible. You can do the mantra recitation at the same time but your mind should focus on the three objects (the deity, the moon disc and mantra garland). This helps you to achieve 
concentration.   
 When you are good at this  concentration, you then move to the second level which is based on 
yourself as the deity and switch the objects (of focus) to the moon disc and mantra garland at your heart. You only focus on the moon disc and mantra garland, not the (self- generated) deit y. 
Then, you recite the mantra without any mental distraction.  
 When you are good at this, then you move to the subtler level of just focussing on the sound of the mantra, not even thinking of the letters or anything else. Up to this point, this is the practice of the recitation developing calm abiding.  
 
When you are good at this meditation, you move up to the next level of concentration without 
recitation. Based on the self generation, think of a flame of a butter lamp at your heart. Inside this flame is  the sound of the mantra. In this meditation, you focus on that flame of the butter 
lamp and the mantra garland without recitation for as long as possible.  
 When you are good at this, then you move up to a different level. Visualising yourself as the deity, at your heart, there is a moon disc within which there is another small deity. At the heart 
of this small deity,   there is a tongue of flame, inside of which there is the sound of the mantra. Here, y ou only concentrate on the sound, i.e., you only hear  the sound and nothing else. If you 
are able to meditate on that for three to four hours without any distractions, that means your mind is stable and you have achieved calm abiding. So up to here is the practice of Yoga with 
 
Lesson  20          Page 131 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Signs. All of this practice is combined with emptiness but most of it entails focussing on an 
object. That is why it is called Yoga with Signs.  
 Up to here when you have achieved calm abiding, you have completed Yoga with Signs.   
 We then move on to  Yoga without Signs. Within that sta te of concentration, you again 
meditate on emptiness and understand  emptiness. At the time of realising emptiness within 
that meditation, you achieve special insight and it means you have achieved Yoga without Signs. Why is it called Yoga without Signs? Th is is because the main object of this practice, although it 
is combined with deity yoga, is emptiness.  
 
• By practising Yoga with Signs, we create the cause to achieve the Buddha’s form body and 
the Buddha’s speech.  
• By practising Yoga without Signs, we crea te the cause to achieve the Buddha’s truth body. 
Yoga without Signs is the non -dual yoga of profundity and clarity. That is the main cause for 
achieving the Buddha’s truth body.  
 As mentioned earlier, even the three lower classes of Tantra cannot explain c learly the cause 
for the Buddha’s form body. But in Highest Yoga Tantra, there is a very clear explanation of the causes of the form body and truth body.  In the three lower classes of Tantra, although it mentions deity yoga but, in reality, whether that i s the cause of the form body or not is not so 
clear.  
 To summarise:  
• We all have buddha potential but that alone is not enough.  
• We need the seed and that is the reason why we need to receive initiations in order to leave 
imprints in our mental continua.  
• By just leaving imprints in our mental continua is also not enough.  
• We need to develop that by engaging in the path through deity yoga and by cultivating calm 
abiding and special insight. That can help us achieve enlightenment.  
• How do we perform deity yo ga? Through the six deities.  
 
Having gone through the above process, how do we dissolve ourselves to become ordinary 
beings again? In the front generation, the deity disappears (absorbs into) and becomes the letters at the heart. The letters then dissolve  into the moon disc which then dissolves into the 
self-generation.  
 The self -generation then dissolves into the letters at one’s heart. The letters then disappear 
into the sound of the mantra. The last remaining object is the sound. Then again you meditat e 
on emptiness and think about how that sound exists. When we meditate on sound, it is easy to understand that there is nothing concrete there. The sound is empty from its own side and is merely labelled. Other than that, there is no sound. So the last par t is to  meditate on the 
sound and meditate on emptiness.  
 Again, within the state of emptiness, you arise as an ordinary being, your conventional self. If 
 
Lesson  20          Page 132 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
you (wish to) continue with your deity yoga, within emptiness, you can arise as a deity. For 
example, when you visualise thousand -armed Chenrezig (within session), during the break 
times, within emptiness, you can visualise yourself as two -armed Chenrezig. You can do 
whatever you want in your daily lives. Here you see yourself as illusory and not real, that there 
is no concrete ‘I’. It helps if you understand that in your daily life.  
  
 
  Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
Lesson  20          Page 133 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 21   DATE: 23RD JUNE 2009  
 
It is important to set a pure motivation for listening to the teachings. We have had a long break 
and it is quite normal that when we come back (to class), we may experience some difficulty in 
the beginning. It is the same for me. When classes have stopped for a while, I find it difficult to 
teach again in the beginning.  
 
Geshe -la: For me, when there is a break, at the first teaching (after that), there is almost no 
mood to teach. Once the classes continue, then I don’t feel that kind of difficulty. But once there 
is a break, the first two to three classes, it will be like that.  
 
But this should not be the case. We should feel energised to study or teach again after such a 
long break. But somehow this is not the case for us.  
 There is a Tibetan proverb that says: “You offer a kilo of butter in order to take (your) leave.” 
When is this proverb used? Usually, at the beginning of a project, one is excited and makes 
(many) promises. But somehow, in the middle of the project, one changes one’s mind and 
(begins t o) make excuses. That is when this proverb is used.   
 In our case, everyone here wants to study. That is the reason why you are here. Therefore, it is 
important to complete one’s studies by putting up with any difficulties that may come along.   
 
There is  a story behind this proverb. In Tibet, there was this notorious person called Aku 
Tongpa. One day he lost his cow. He went around looking for his cow but could not find it. He lost his way and became hungry and thirsty. He didn’t know what to do.  
 
Suddenly, at a distance, he saw a big house. He decided to go to that house, thinking he could get some food there. When he arrived at the house, he made some noise to make his presence felt. The lady owner heard him shouting and took a peek through the window.   Aku Tongpa saw that this lady had a goitre and out of shock, he said, “I guess you don’t need to 
cut away your goitre.”  
 
This lady who was quite wealthy had wanted to remove the goitre but when she heard what 
Aku Tongpa said, she thought, “He must be a doctor.”  
She invited him into the house and offered him a feast. As Aku Tongpa ate,  he wondered, 
“What should I do to remove the goitre?”  
 After Aku Tongpa had finished eating, the woman asked him, “What tools do you need to remove this goitre?”  
 Aku To ngpa replied, “Just give me a cup of water and a very rough towel.” He then placed the 
woman’s head on his lap, soaked the rough towel in the water and then started to rub the goitre. The more he rubbed, the goitre got redder and more sore.  
 
Lesson  21          Page 134 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
   
In pain, the lady asked Aku Tongpa, “How many goitres have you removed so far?”  
 
He said, “Not many. Just two. One died and the other asked to be excused.”  
 Upon hearing this, the lady decided to excuse herself. She asked, “What should I do to excuse myself from this operation?”  
 (Aku Tongpa’s) answer was, “You can offer (me) a kilo of butter in order to be excused.”  
 So the next time when you cannot come to  class and want to be excused,  you should know 
what to do! There are many stories about Aku Tongpa. He is  said to be a very intelligent person. Here, he used his intelligence to get some food. This proverb is usually used when one wants to be excused fro m a project that one has already undertaken.  
 
****************  
SUMMARY  
 Today I will summarise what we have covered previously. We will start Highest Yoga Tantra in the next lesson.  
 
Since we are studying Tantra, it is extremely important to know the diff erences between Sutra 
and Tantra. This is something that you must keep in mind all the time. How do we distinguish 
Tantra from Sutra? The distinction is made by either the absence or presence of a meditation 
that accords with the aspects of the four comple te purities that exist at the time of the result. 
The four complete purities are:  
1. the Buddha’s form  
2. the Buddha’s abode  
3. the Buddha’s enjoyments  
4. the Buddha’s activities  
These four things exist on the buddha ground.  
 Tantra is the practice of the path which is the meditation on the aspects that accord with these 
four complete purities at the resultant stage. The texts that teach such a path are Tantric scriptures. The Sutras do not teach such a path.  
 How is such a meditation done? In Tantric practice,  
• one visualises oneself as the deity  
• one visualises one’s environment as the inestimable mansion of the deity  
• one purifies the offerings into emptiness and from that state of emptiness,   the offerings 
are generated as pure divine substances which one visualises oneself partaking  
• one practises the emanation and withdrawal of light rays, working for the benefit of  
sentient beings and so forth  
These are the meditations that accord with the aspects of the four purities. These are Tantric 
practices which do not exist in the Sutric vehicle. This is the reason why Tantra is sometimes 
called the resultant vehicle becaus e one can meditate on the aspects of the resultant stage (in 
 
Lesson  21          Page 135 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
the present time).   
 
Tantra has four divisions:  
1. Action Tantra  
2. Performance tantra  
3. Yoga Tantra  
4. Highest Yoga Tantra  
Why is this so?  All four classes of Tantra teach the meditations that accord wit h the aspects of 
the four complete purities of the result. They are the same in this regard.  
 One of the differences between Sutra and Tantra is that Tantra is the practice of taking the desire into the path. The four classes of Tantra are differentiated by the way in which this is done:   
• In Action Tantra, one takes into the path the desire that arises from looking at the visualised goddess.  
• In Performance Tantra, the practice becomes subtler, i.e., one takes into the path the 
desire that arises from smiling at the visualised goddess.  
• In Yoga Tantra, in addition to what is mentioned above, one takes into the path the desire 
that arises from holding hands with the visualised goddess.  
• In Highest Yoga Tantra, the practitioner has the ability to take into the path  the desire that 
arises from the union of the two sexual organs.  
 One can also see how there is a difference in the way the practice is done by looking at the names of the four classes of Tantra.  
• Action Tantra is so called because there is an emphasis on external activities versus the internal activity of meditative stabilisation.  
• In Performance Tantra, both external and internal activities are balanced.  
• In Yoga Tantra, the emphasis is on internal activity.  
• In Highest Yoga Tantra, internal activity  is most important. That is why it is called Highest 
Yoga Tantra or literally, the unsurpassed Tantra.  
So, these are the reasons for the four classes of Tantra.  
 Both Action and Performance Tantras are divided into three lineages:  
1. the Tathagata lineage  
2. the Lotus lineage  
3. the Vajra lineage  
 In general, there are five lineages but here, only three are mentioned. The other two lineages are subsumed into the three lineages.  
 There are so many deities in these two classes of Tantra. How does one identify the l ineage of a 
particular deity? One way to do this is by looking at the lord of the lineage, which is mentioned in the sadhana, the ritual text of the particular deity. For example:  
• in the text of Chenrezig’s practice, there will a line that mentions, “…are crowned by Amitabha.” This indicates that Chenrezig belongs to the Lotus lineage.  
 
Lesson  21          Page 136 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• Manjushri’s practice belongs to the Tathagata lineage because the sadhana mentions he is 
crowned by Vairochana.  
• In the sadhana of the practice of Vajrapani, it is mentioned  he is crowned by Akshobhya, 
which shows that Vajrapani  belongs to the Vajra lineage.  
 In order for one to do the practice of Action Tantra, one has to undertake the approximation (sometimes translated as retreat) of the Action Tantric deity. (The word “ approximate” means 
to get closer, i.e., to get closer to the deity and to the deity’s enlightenment). Before one can do that, one has to receive the initiation of that deity. When one receives the initiation, one has to protect the bodhisattva vows. In Action Tantra, tantric vows are not taken.  
 In order to engage in the approximation of the Action Tantric deity, there is the practice of 
meditating on the aspects of the four complete purities of the resultant stage. One generates 
oneself as the deity (self- generation) through the process known as the six deities. One then 
visualises, in the space in front, the inestimable mansion within which is the front generation deity. On this basis, one engages in the practice of repetition called the four branches of repetition.  
 The four branches of repetition are:  
1. the Self basis  
2. the Other basis  
3. the Mind basis  
4. the Sound basis  
In order to perform the repetition:  
• one generates oneself as deity (self -generation)  
• one generates the deity in front (front generation)  
• one visualises a moon disc at the heart of oneself as deity and at the heart of the front 
generation  
• one visualises the mantra garland of the deity on both these moon discs  
When these four branches are completed, one then engages in the repetition.  
 The pract ice of approximation can be divided into (1) the concentration with repetition and (2) 
the concentration without repetition.  
 The concentration without repetition has three parts:  
1. the concentration abiding in fire  
2. the concentration abiding in sound  
3. the co ncentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound  
In order to develop calm abiding, one meditates on the concentration abiding in fire and the concentration abiding in sound. One achieves calm abiding at the end of the concentration abiding in sound. On e achieves the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound 
when one achieves the special insight focusing on emptiness.  
 In the case of Action Tantra, the whole path is subsumed into the four yogas, all of which function to bring one closer to the deity:  
 
Lesson  21          Page 137 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
1. Deity yoga -  one meditates on oneself as the deity  
2. Empty yoga -  one meditates on emptiness  
3. Wind yoga -  one practises restraining the life -force exertion which is the practice of 
stopping the movement of the wind energy as one engages in the co ncentrations.   
4.  Repetition yoga -  one recites the mantra of the deity  
 
When these four yogas are condensed, they can be subsumed into two yogas:  
(1) the conventional deity yoga and (2) the ultimate deity yoga. There are these two yogas because the final objects of attainments are the two bodies: (1) the conventional body of the Buddha and (2) the ultimate body of the Buddha. The wind yoga can be subsumed into both  
conventional and ultimate deity yoga while repetition yoga can be subsumed into conventio nal 
deity yoga.  
 Another essential point of Tantra that one must understand is the inseparability of method and wisdom. In the context of Action Tantra, the path is divided into two:  
1. Yoga with Signs  
2. Yoga without Signs  
In Action Tantra, we talk about the non -dual yoga of profundity and clarity which basically 
refers to the Yoga without Signs. The non- dual yoga of profundity and clarity is extremely 
important in Action Tantra because according to the path of Action Tantra , this is the main 
cause of achieving enlightenment. Here, profundity refers to emptiness and clarity refers to the 
clear appearance of oneself as the deity.  They are unified and are to found in one mind. It is a 
mind that while appearing in the form of t he deity, at the same time ascertains its emptiness.   
 
What is the state of enlightenment? At the buddha ground (enlightenment), the Buddha’s body and mind are in one inseparable entity. Therefore in order to attain this state, at the time of the cause, o ne must have a cause that has both method and wisdom unified as one. This is 
another essential point that one must understand. Such a cause, i.e., a path that is the inseparability of method and wisdom unified in one mind, is only taught in Tantra, not in Sutra. This makes Tantra more profound than Sutra because in Tantra, there is one mind that unifies both method and wisdom. Tantra teaches a more profound cause for achieving the Buddha’s body. You must keep this point in mind. Tantra is superior to Sutra because it has the profound method of actualising the Buddha’s holy body.  
  
With respect to the non -dual yoga of profundity and clarity, there is (1) the non- dual yoga of 
profundity and clarity that is conceptual consciousness and (2) the non -dual yoga of profundity 
and clarity which is non -conceptual consciousness. For the non- dual yoga of profundity and 
clarity which is conceptual consciousness, the conventional deity’s body appears to that 
consciousness and that consciousness also realises emptiness. Whe n that consciousness 
transforms into a non- conceptual consciousness, i.e., it becomes a direct perceiver, that 
consciousness is still a non -dual yoga of profundity and clarity but the deity’s body does not 
appear to that consciousness. Put in another way: If it is a deity yoga, the deity’s holy body does not necessarily have to appear to that consciousness.  For example, (when we talk about the four yogas), empty deity is not form.  
 
 
Lesson  21          Page 138 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
In the Perfection vehicle (Mahayana Sutra), without any doubt, method and w isdom are very 
important. Wisdom here refers to the wisdom directly realising emptiness which is the antidote 
to the obstructions to liberation and the obstructions to omniscience. In the Perfection vehicle, what is it that makes this wisdom directly realising emptiness powerful?  
 It is bodhicitta together with the (practice of the six) perfections. In the Perfection vehicle, one engages in limitless ways of practicing these perfections for a very long time and these 
practices make the wisdom directly realising emptiness so powerful that it can overcome the 
obstructions to liberation and the obstructions to omniscience. According to Mahayana Sutra, this is how one achieves enlightenment.  
  
In the three lower classes of Tantra (Action, Performance and Yoga Tantra), it is the non -dual 
yoga of profundity and clarity that makes one achieve enlightenment.  
 One has to say that the Tantric path is quicker than the Sutric path. What makes the three lower classes of Tantra a quicker path than the Sutric path? That is where the attainments (siddhis) come in. One engages in approximation and actualises the common attainments. They come to a point when through one’s practice, one is able to perceive the Buddha and bodhisattvas directly and receive directly their blessings. This is what makes the non -dual yoga 
of profundity and clarity powerful. What makes the wisdom directly realising emptiness powerful in Highest Yoga Tantra? It is the bliss that arises from the union of the two sexual 
organs. That bliss results in one ’s mind becoming very subtle and one uses that subtle mind to 
realise emptiness. This subtle mind realising emptiness makes the Highest Yoga Tantric path 
very quick and powerful in overcoming delusions.  
 
In the three lower classes of Tantra, one newly att ains enlightenment in Akanishta. But 
according to Highest Yoga Tantra, this is not necessary as one can achieve enlightenment in the desire realm in one body and in one life - time.  
    Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien  Ng 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
Lesson  21          Page 139 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 22   DATE: 25TH JUNE 2009  
 
When we recite with our speech the Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha at the beginning of the class, 
we should visualise Guru Shakyamuni Buddha and put our palms together. We can put our 
bodies, speech and minds to (good) use during these 10 to 15 minutes of our preliminary 
prayers before class. We will be able to accumulate an immeasurable amount of merit in a very 
short time. This is something we should always remember.  
 
It is the same when one makes the mandala offering to one’s guru with whom one has a 
Dharma  connection. It is said that if one visualises one’s guru as inseparable from the Buddha 
when one makes the mandala offering, one will accumulate an immeasurable amount of merit. 
(Alternatively), one can offer the mandala by simply visualising Shakyamuni B uddha. All these 
are opportunities to accumulate merit.  
 
There are some people who do not hold Guru Shakyamuni Buddha in high regard, thinking that 
he does not have as much power as certain tantric deities such as Tara, Vajrayogini, Guhyasamaja or Yamantaka. They think tantric deities are more powerful than Shakyamuni Buddha. If one thinks in such a way, then this is a big mistake. This shows that these people don’t have any real understanding of what the state of enlightenment is.  
 
The very famous practice of Guhyasamaja, the practice that we will study soon, was actually 
manifested by Guru Shakyamuni Buddha. Deities like Guhyasamaja are the manifestations of Buddha Shakyamuni. Since that is the case, these deities are inseparable from Guru 
Shakyamuni Bud dha. Therefore, (one should) never entertain any doubts by thinking that 
praising  and making prostrations to Shakyamuni Buddha have no benefits. Never ever think like that.  
 
When we are doing these prayers in class, if we are able to do them well with sincerity, 
definitely we will rejoice and feel happy. We understand that even in a short 10, 15 minutes, we can accumulate so much merit.  
 
This happiness which comes from inside, within our minds, in our hearts, is something that only 
we can create for ours elves. It is never going to come from external  factors. It depends 
basically on our mental perspective. By adopting a certain mental outlook, we experience 
happiness in our hearts. By  adopting another kind of mental perspective, we create problems 
and un happiness for ourselves. Therefore, it is said that everything depends on our minds and 
how we think.  
 There is a Tibetan proverb which says, “A needle can make someone happy; mere words can make someone unhappy.” The proverb is telling us that the human mind is very changeable. From one point of view, the mind is very variable as the mind can be changed by  the slightest 
thing. Yet from another angle, the mind seems to be very hard and difficult to change.  
 
Lesson  22          Page 140 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Basically when applied to our situation here, whether you feel happy coming to class or not depends on your mental perspective. All of us have received,  many times, teachings on the 
Lam Rim , the stages of the path to enlightenment. When we look at the Lam Rim , in the 
beginning, there is the meditation on the human life of leisures and endowments, the perfect human rebirth. The whole point of doing this me ditation is to instil confidence and courage in 
our minds. It is to instil a sense of joy and happiness because without this confidence and joy, 
we will not be able to achieve any of our spiritual goals.  
 
We have the opportunity to receive the (tantric) i nitiations and we have the interest to study 
the tantric teachings and put them into practice. We should realise how fortunate and lucky we are to be in such a situation. The point is to think about positive things, about those things that will encourage u s to continue our studies. As much as possible, we should eliminate those  
thoughts that distract or hinder us from coming to class and (applying ourselves to) our studies.  
 We should always remember the positive side of things, the good things, the favourable conditions we have rather than thinking of the negative. We shouldn’t be putting ourselves down. Rather we should think about those positive things -  our good qualities, the good things 
about ourselves - that will uplift the mind and instil a sense o f confidence and determination in 
us. This is what we need. It is not for the sake of developing pride. If pride arises as a result of this way of thinking, then that is a mistake. That is wrong.  
  
*********************************  
HIGHEST YOGA TANTRA  
 
2 The way to progress on the path of the Highest Yoga Tantra  
has two (parts):  
1 The general system of Highest (Yoga Tantra)  
2 The system of Kalachakra.  
 
2.1 THE GENERAL SYSTEM O F HIGHEST (YOGA TANT RA) 
The system of the general Highest (Yoga Tantra) has four:  
1 Becoming a vessel suitable to meditate on the path 
2 Keeping the vows and commitments pure  
3 How to practice the path  
4 The way to manifest the results of practice  
 
2.1.1  BECOMING A VESSEL SU ITABLE TO MEDITATE O N THE PATH  
One becomes a vessel suitable for meditating on the path, through entering any suitable mandala of Highest (Yoga Tantra) explained (bshad) from within the authentic divisions of 
tantra (rgyud sde) and elucidated (bkral) by a qualified (tshad Idan) maha siddha (drub chen), 
 
Lesson  22          Page 141 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
and by obtaining empowerment. Further, from the perspective of fully (rdzogs par) practicing 
of the path, one must obtain the fourth empowerment. ( Pg. 18 of the root text ) 
The system of Kalachakra is a Highest Yoga Tantra but it is treated  as a separate section 
because it has a slightly different way of positing the paths and practising the stages of the paths.  
 The text says, “ From the perspective of fully practising the path, one must obtain the fourth 
empowerment ,”  but, in general, to practise the entire path of Highest Yoga Tantra, i.e., both 
the generation and completion stages, we  need to receive four complete initiations which are:  
1. the vase empowerment  
2. the secret empowerment  
3. the wisdom knowledge empowerment and  
4. the wo rd empowerment  
 In general, there are four (types of mandalas). Regarding the mandala where one obtain the vase empowerment (bum pa’i dbang) there are three mandalas: (1) the printed, (2) the coloured particle and (3) the body mandala, and for some special disciples (gdul bya) there is 
also (4) the absorption/ concentration mandala (bsam gtan dkyil ‘khor). (Pg. 18 of the root text )  
 “For some special disciples there is also the absorption/concentration mandala”:  For disciples 
who have already attained stab le concentration, the vase initiation can be conferred using this 
absorption mandala.  
 
(Interpreter ’s comment : There seems to be a big chunk of words missing from this translation).  
 Amongst the four types of mandalas, there is a mandala known as the body  mandala.  
 
 Initiation into the 
body mandala of the 
deity  The practice of the  
the deity has the body 
mandala practice  
Practice of Heruka Chakrasamvara of 
the Ghantopada tradition  Yes Yes 
Practice of Yamantaka  No No 
Practice of Guhyasamaja  No Yes 
 I believe I have talked about the meaning of the body mandala before. The practice of the body 
mandala is not simply visualising some deities on  certain parts of the body but rather it is a practice where we  visualise certain parts of the body generated in to the entity of the deity. 
You may wonder why a particular deity has the body mandala practice while others do not and why there are some deities that has the body mandala practice but there isn’t an initiation into the body mandala of the deity. I think it is quite difficult to give you an answer. I don’t know why.  
 Geshe -la: If any one of you has an answer to this, let me know!  
 
 
Lesson  22          Page 142 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
There are four types of mandalas where we attain the vase initiation. Which mandalas are used 
to confer the three higher initia tions (the secret, wisdom knowledge and the word initiations)?  
• The secret initiation is conferred in the conventional bodhicitta mandala. One obtains the 
secret initiation by experiencing or tasting the bodhicitta of the guru’s father and mother.  
• The wisd om knowledge initiation is conferred in the bhaga mandala. The bhaga mandala 
refers to the secret place of the mother.  
• The word initiation is conferred in the ultimate bodhicitta mandala. The initiation is conferred through introducing the disciples to the meaning of the unification of no more 
learning. I guess one can say that the ultimate bodhicitta mandala refers to the unification of no more learning.  
 
Type of initiation  Type of mandala in which the initiation is conferred  
Vase  (1) Printed mandala (2) Coloured particle mandala (3) Body mandala (4) 
Absorption mandala (only for special disciples)  
Secret  Conventional bodhicitta mandala  
Wisdom 
knowledge  Bhaga mandala  
Word  Ultimate bodhicitta mandala  
 The mandala does not necessarily refer to the sand mandala or the cloth or painted mandala inside the mandala house. (As I have mentioned before) the meaning of mandala is to take the essence.  
 
In order to be a suitable vessel to meditate on the Highest Y oga Tantric path in its entirety, i.e., 
to practise the generation and completion stages, one must receive the four complete 
initiations. When one obtains the initiation of Highest Yoga Tantra, there are many vows and commitments that one takes after which  one has to keep them purely.  
 2.1.2 KEEPING THE VOWS AND  COMMITMENTS PURE  
If one meditates on the path with effort to guard (srung ba) the commitments and vows taken (kas blangs pa’i dam tshig dan sdom pa) at the time of the empowerment, one establishes the actual siddhis. Though one makes exertion (‘bad) for many aeons yet neglects the vows to be 
guarded (siting sdom) not only will one not establish the siddhis, it is stated that even a mere 
good migration will be hard to find.  
Therefore, having understoo d the advice given immediately on becoming a vessel through the 
empowerment, one needs to guard commitments and vows at the risk of one’s life (srog dang bsdos).(Pg. 18 of the root text)  
 “Immediately after becoming a vessel through the empowerment” means that immediately 
after receiving the initiation, one must know and guard all the vows and commitments that one 
has undertaken and one must know what advice was given during the initiation. In order to guard those vows and commitments, one  must first under stand and know what they are. 
Without knowing what the vows and commitments are, how is one going to keep those vows 
 
Lesson  22          Page 143 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
and commitments purely? From this point alone, one can understand the importance of study 
in order to achieve enlightenment.  
Especially, one should make strong exertion not to be affected (gos) by root downfalls and 
make exertion not to be affected by other downfalls. However, if they occur one should restore them by confession (bshags sdom) according to the rite. That is becaus e it is stated that one 
will establish the supreme (state) within seven or sixteen lives though one does not meditate on the path if one guards oneself from being affected by downfalls having obtained complete 
empowerment. It is stated that one will fall t o the bad migrations however much exertion one 
makes in other (practices) though neglecting the vows to be guarded. (Pg. 18 -19 of the root 
text)  
This is a very important point. It is not sufficient just to take the initiation but after having done 
so, one must protect all the vows and commitments. If one fails to do this but instead puts one’s effort into this or that practice, one can forget about achieving realisations or attainments because even getting a good rebirth will be difficult.  
These should be extensively known from the Explanation of the Fifty Verses of Guru (Devotion) and the explanation of the root downfalls and The Cluster of Siddhis (dngos grub snye ma). (pg. 19 of the root text )  
(Interpreter ’s correction: These should be extensively known  from the Explanation of the Fifty 
Verses of Guru (Devotion) and The Cluster of Siddhis (dngos grub snye ma) which is the explanation of the root downfalls ). 
 
It said that we should study these texts, The Explanation of the 50 Verses of Guru Devotion (and the Cluster of Siddhis ) which is the commentary on the root downfalls and commitments, both 
of which are available in English.  
 When one receives the Highest Yoga Tantric initiation, one takes the bodhisattva vows and tantric vows. The tantric vows include  the individual commitments of the five buddha lineages 
of which there are 19. (It is usually translated as the five Dhyani Buddhas but for now we stick to the five buddha lineages).  
 
Five buddha 
lineages  Commitments/ Samayas  
Vairochana  Practising the three types of morality:  
(1) the ethics of refraining from non– virtue  
(2) the ethics of gathering virtuous Dharma  
(3) the ethics of benefiting sentient beings  
Keeping the three commitments:  
Going for refuge to the (1) Buddha (2) Dharma  ( 3) Sangha  
Akshobhya  There are the four 4 commitments of the  
(1) Vajra  (2) Bell  (3) Mudra and (4) Guru  
Ratnasambhava  Practising the four types of giving:  
(1) Material (2) Dharma (3) Fearlessness (4) Love  
 
Lesson  22          Page 144 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Five buddha 
lineages  Commitments/ Samayas  
Amitabha  Upholding the entire Buddhadharma:  
(1)  the outer samaya refers to Action and Performance Tantras  
(2)  the secret samaya refers to Yoga and Highest Yoga Tantra  
(3) the three vehicles refer to the hearer, solitary realiser and  bodhisattva 
vehicles  
Amoghasiddhi  (1) To uphold all the vows, i .e., the bodhisattva and tantric vows  
(2) Make as many offerings as one can, i.e., one should strive in making 
offerings.  
 
From here, you can see that taking a Highest Yoga Tantric initiation is not an easy thing 
because after doing so, one has to learn  and train in the entire Buddhadharma: both Sutra and 
Tantra, the hearer, solitary realiser and bodhisattva vehicles and the four classes of Tantra, 
Action, Performance, Yoga and Highest Yoga Tantra.  
 These are the 19 individual commitments of the five bud dha lineages. Then there are the 
general commitments which are avoiding the 14 root downfalls and many heavy transgressions. (Interpreter ’s comment: “Bompo” is sometimes translated as secondary transgressions which 
don’t convey the actual meaning. “Bompo” means heavy. I think it should be heavy 
transgressions).  
 If one transgresses the tantric vows, what should one do? “I f they occur one should restore 
them by confession (bshags sdom) according to the rite .”  There is a specific way of confessing 
the degene ration of tantric vows.  
 
• The ordination vows which apply to monks and nuns are taken in the presence of the 
Sangha. Therefore, they are restored in the presence of the Sangha.  
• Since bodhisattva vows are taken in the presence of the buddhas and the bodhisattvas, confession of transgressions and the restoration of these vows are made in the presence of the buddhas and bodhisattvas.  
• Since tantric vows are taken from the guru and t he deity in the mandala, any confession 
and restoration the tantric vows should be done in their presence.  
 
To purify any transgressions of tantric vows, one has to perform a self - initiation but the self-
initiation can only be performed by those who have  completed correctly the approximation of 
the deity. If one has done that, then one can perform the self -initiation. Otherwise, one has to 
take the initiation again. I guess this is one of the reasons why it is good to take initiations over and over again because it helps to purify and restore any transgressions of one’s tantric vows.  
 After obtaining initiation, one has to keep the vows and commitments purely and on that basis, 
one has to practise the path. How does one practise the path and what are the paths that one 
has to meditate on?  
 
 
Lesson  22          Page 145 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
2.1.3  HOW TO PRACTICE THE PATH  
There are two:  
1 The method of meditating on the two stages ( rim gnyis )28 
2 The practice swiftly producing (bogs ‘byin pa’i spyod pa) these two  
 
2.1.3.1   THE METHOD OF MEDITA TING ON THE TWO STAGES  
(This) has two  
1 The way to meditate on the generation stage (bskyed rim)  
2 The way to meditate on the completion stage (rdzogs rim) 
 
2.1.3.1.1  THE WAY TO MEDITATE ON THE GENERATION ST AGE  
Panchen Lozang Chokyi Gyaltsen states that the definition of the generation stage is: ‘A yoga 
that does not occur from entry, abidance and dissolution of the winds in the central channel by the strength of meditation, but which matures the continuum for the completion stage, its 
result, and which meditates on any of the three: birth, death, and the intermediate state 
through discernment newly investigating any of their compatible aspects’ (ci tigs dang rnam pa 
mthun par).  
Ngawang Palden: I think he intends the main generation stage because it is not pervasive that the generation stage meditates on any of the compatible aspects of birth, death and the 
intermediate state.  (Pg. 19 of the root text)  
 
When you look at the definition of the generation stage given by Panchen Lozang Chokyi 
Gyaltsen, what should a generation stage be? What are its defining characteristics?  
 First, it is “ a yoga that does not occur due to the entry, abidance and the dissolution of the 
winds in the central channel by the strength of meditation.”  When the winds enter, abide and 
dissolve in the ce ntral channel through the force of meditation, that practice belongs to the 
completion stage so it  doesn’t happen at the generation stage. This is the first (characteristic) you must ascertain.  
• What is the external sign indicating that the winds are entering the central channel? The exhalation, i.e., the movement of the winds from both nostrils, is balanced. Usually 
for us, there is a difference in the strength of the winds coming out from our no strils. 
One is always stronger than the other.  
• What is the sign that the winds have entered and are abiding in the central channel? 
When one stops breathing and the stomach doesn’t move. Usually our stomach is moving  
 
• When the winds dissolve in the centra l channel, there are the signs of dissolution, 
starting from the mirage up to clear light.  
28 Two stages: the stage of generation and the stage of completion.  
 
Lesson  22          Page 146 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
During the generation stage, the entry, abidance and dissolution of the winds in the central channel don’t happen through the force of meditation. When they happen through the force of 
meditation, then that is the completion stage. That is the first point.  
 Secondly, the generation stage ripens the mind for the completion stage, its result.  
 
The third point is that (the generation stage) is the meditation “ on any of  the three: birth, death 
and the intermediate state through discernment newly investigating any of their compatible 
aspects.” This meditation is done at the level of visualisation. Here it says, “ through 
discernment newly investigating the compatible aspec ts of the birth, death and the 
intermediate state .” This means that it is not (actually) happening. It is not the real birth, death 
or the intermediate state (bardo) but rather the mind meditating on the compatible aspects of those three (at the level of v isualisation). This is the main practice of the generation stage. It is 
visualising or meditating on the compatible aspects of birth, death and intermediate state.  
 The generation stage is the practice where one trains in visualising the purification of these three states: ordinary death, ordinary bardo (intermediate state) and ordinary birth.  
 There are different definitions of the generation stage. We won’t be covering the debate on this (in the text). Our purpose here is to gain an understanding of wha t is the generation stage.  
 Just to show that there are different views on or definitions of the generation stage, we continue with the text. The author says in response to the definition by Panchen Lozang Chokyi 
Gyaltsen.  
Ngawang Palden: I think he intends the main generation stage because it is not pervasive that the generation stage meditates on any of the compatible aspects of birth, death and the intermediate state. That is because (1) yogas prior to (man chad) union with a knowledge consort (rig ma ‘ du bya ba) do not meditate on any of the compatible aspects of the three: 
birth, death and intermediate state; and (2) meditation on the protection wheel (bsrung ‘khor) is not meditation on any of the compatible aspects of these three. The first (part of t he reason) 
is established because rnam gzhag rim pa’i  rnam bshad extensively states:  
Those (yogas) prior to union with a knowledge consort (rig ma ‘du bya ba) are applied (sbyar) in the context of attaining Buddhahood, but are not applied on the ordinary (srid) (generation) 
stage..etc. (Pg. 19 of the root text)  
 
Rnam gzhag rim pa’i rnam bshad is a text by Je Rinpoche, Lama Tsong Khapa which in English 
can be translated as The Explanation of the Stages of Presentation. There is a text called The 
Stages of the Presentation composed by Nagabodhi to which Lama Tsong Khapa composed this 
commentary.  
 
The text says, “ not applied on the ordinary (srid) (generation) stage..etc.”  I think it is definitely 
not referring to the generation stage. (Lama Tsong Khapa) is talking about the cycle of 
 
Lesson  22          Page 147 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
existence: birth, death and bardo. These things are not applied on the ordinary stage. So, the 
word “(generation)”  shouldn’t be there as it may give you the idea that this is related to the 
generation stage.  
The second (part of the reason) is established because that (text) states:  
The protection wheel is meditated on during (Itar) the ordinary (srid) generation stage and 
since it is just a requisite or preliminary (state) to the actual basis of the generation stage, it is not ne cessary that dharmas compatible with the ordinary (srid) (generation) stage are applied 
to them. ( Pg. 20 of the root text)   
 I am going to summarise this whole discussion in simpler words. When you read this section again at home, check what the text is saying. Basically this is a debate about the generation stage. Panchen Lozang Chokyi Gyaltsen has one definition but Ngawang Pa lden said that it is 
not necessarily so. He points out as an example the practice of the meditation on the protection wheel. In the practice of the generation stage, before the actual practice of taking the three bodies into the path, there is a meditation  on the protection wheel. He says that this 
meditation on the protection wheel is part of  the generation stage but it does not meditate on 
the compatible aspects of death, bardo and birth. That is the crux of the whole disagreement.  
 Ngawang Palden is say ing that the meditation on the protection wheel is the generation stage 
but it is not the main generation stage. For it to be a main generation stage, it has to be the 
meditation on the compatible aspects of  death, bardo and birth. But for it to be a gene ration 
stage, it doesn’t necessarily have to be a meditation on the compatible aspects of death, bardo 
and birth.   He is saying that the meditation on the protection wheel, although it is not the main generation stage, is still part  of the generation stag e. I think this discussion arises because of 
the need to divide the practice of the generation stage into different parts. When you look at a Highest Yoga Tantra sadhana,  the text is quite long so one needs to break up the text into different sections in order to describe the various stages of the practice and to understand the practice.  
 When we were studying Yoga Tantra, we talked about the three meditative stabilisations:  
1. the meditative stabilisation of the initial preparation,  
2. the meditative stabilisa tion of the supreme royal mandala and  
3. the meditative stabilisation of the supreme royal activity.  
 This whole discussion is about the generation stage: (identifying) which is the first meditative stabilisation of the initial preparation and so forth. The meditation on the protection wheel is included in the meditative stabilisation of the initial preparation. If you are interested in the details, you can refer to the middle paragraph on page 20. If you are not interested, at least you should have a rough i dea of what is a generation stage.  
(To reiterate), a generation stage:  
• is a not a yoga that occurs from the entry,  abidance and dissolution of the winds in the 
central channel through the force of meditation.  
 
Lesson  22          Page 148 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• ripens the mind for the completion stage, it s result.  
• is a meditation on the compatible aspects of birth, death and the bardo state.  
 
As mentioned before, it is your responsibility to listen and try to get something out of (this class). You must know  (the following):  
 
• What are the initiations that are conferred in Highest Yoga Tantra? How many initiations 
are there and what are they?  
• After receiving the initiation and you are practising Highest Yoga Tantra, what are the two 
stages?  
• What is the generation stage?  
 
 
  Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
Lesson  22          Page 149 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 23   DATE: 30TH JUNE 2009  
 
For the next two to three minutes, I will give you a topic to think about. See if you can come up 
with anything. You should not be reading the text. It is all right, however, for you to write down 
your thoughts if you can't do this mentally.  
 
It seems that although a lot of information has been presented, somehow it is not being 
absorbed. I don’t see any benefit if we are to continue like this.   (I hope) this exercise will help. 
See whether you can answer these questions:  
 
Q1. What are the four initiations/empowerments?  
Q2. How many types of mandalas can be used in bestowing the vase initiation?  
 Geshe -la: Just recall (the answers) in your mind. Some people are reading (the text). This is not 
the point. (This is to) see whether  you can remember or not. Everything had been taught. If you 
cannot remember but you really want to learn, make sure you go back and read the text and/or 
transcripts this (weekend). If you know (the answers), that is wonderful.  
 
Q3. What are the different  types of mandalas that are used in bestowing the three higher 
initiations?  
Q4. If the tantric path is condensed into two, what are they?  
Q5. What is the definition of the generation stage?  
 
***********************  
When the path of Highest Yoga Tantra is condensed into two, there are two stages: the generation stage and the completion stage. The generation stage is defined as:  
A yoga that does not occur from entry, abidance and dissolution of the winds in the central channel by the strength of meditation, but which matures the continuum for the completion 
stage, its result, and which meditates on any of the three: birth, death, and the intermediate state through discernment newly investigating any of their compatible aspects’ (ci tigs dang rnam pa mthun par ). (Pg. 19 of the root text)  
One should know not only the words in the definition but the essential point is to understand what they are saying. The generation stage is essentially a yoga that does not happen “ due to 
the entry, abidance and dissolution of the winds in the central channel by the strength of 
meditation.” From the perspective of being a main generation stage, it also needs to be a yoga 
that meditates on birth, death and the intermediate state “ through discernment newly 
investigating any of the ir compatible aspects.” The main practice of the generation stage is to 
take the three bodies into the path. The definition refers to the meditation on the aspects of birth, death and the intermediate state. This is something that you must understand.  
 When we talk about the three bodies, there are:  
• the three bodies of the basis  
• the three bodies of the path and  
 
Lesson  23          Page 150 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• the three bodies of the resultant stage (three resultant bodies)  
 
The three bodies of the basis  are: 
• the dharmakaya of the basis.  
• the sambhogakay a of the basis.  
• the nirmanakaya of the basis.  
 
The dharmakaya of the basis can be taken to mean the clear light of death. At the time of death, all our consciousnesses will dissolve and finally the clear light of death, the most subtle mind, will manifest.  In short, the dharmakaya of the basis refers to the most subtle mind at the 
time of death.   Next is the sambhogakaya of the basis. What happens after the clear light of death? We have to take rebirth, but before that, we  enter the intermediate state. Our body in the intermediate state is referred to as the sambhogakaya of the basis.   From the intermediate state, we then take rebirth. Rebirth is posited to be the nirmanakaya of 
the basis.  
 
These are the three bodies of the basis but here we are not talking about the actual three bodies – the dharmakaya, sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya -  of the Buddha but nevertheless 
they are given that name.   What about the three bodies of the path? These wil l come later in the text but (we can) have a 
rough understanding of them now:  
• the dharmakaya of the path is the example clear light and the meaning clear light. (As to what the example clear light and meaning clear light are, these will be explained later  when 
we look at the completion stage in detail).  
• the sambhogakaya of the path are the pure illusory body and impure illusory body. (Again, we will learn what these are when we study the completion stage).   
• the nirmanakaya of the path refers to the coarse  body that arises that is other than the 
pure and impure illusory body.  
 The three bodies of the resultant stage  are the three bodies of the Buddha.  
 
The Basis  The Path  The Result  
Dharmakaya of the basis – clear 
light at the time of death  Dharmakaya of the path – example 
clear light and meaning clear light  Buddha’s truth body  
(Dharmakaya)  
Sambhogakaya of the basis  - 
intermediate state being (bardo 
being)  Sambhogakaya of the path – pure and 
impure illusory bodies  Buddha’s enjoyment body 
(sambhogakaya)  
Nirmanakaya of the basis – 
rebirth  
 Nirmanakaya of the path – the coarse 
body that arises that is other than the 
pure and impure illusory bodies.  Buddha’s emanation body 
(nirmanakaya)  
 
 
Lesson  23          Page 151 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
These are the illustrations of the three bodies of the basis, path and the result to help you have 
a rough idea of what we are referring to. It is important to know them.  
 The human being of this southern continent is one that is born from the womb,   possessing the six constituents (elements). There are different ways of counting these six constituents.   
• One way of counting them is the four elements (earth, water, fire and wind),   the channels 
and drops.  
• Another way of positing them are the three that we receive from the father (bone, marrow 
and semen) and the three received from the mother (blood, flesh and skin).  
This is said to be the best body (best basis) for engaging in the practice of  Highest Yoga  Tantra 
and through that path to achieve enlightenment.  One cannot practise Highest Yoga Tantra without such a basis. As stated in the section on the human life of leisures and endowments in 
the Lam Rim , this is one of the reasons that makes our lives so precious.  
 
This body possesses three main channels: the central channel and the left  and right channels. In general, there are 72,000 channels in the body. What happens when a human being of the southern continent born from the womb and possessing the si x constituents, die? What 
happens during the death process?  
 When the death process starts, all the winds in the 72,000 channels of the body gradually gather into the right and the left channels. The winds in the right and left channels then gather into  the central channel. Gradually, the winds in the central channel gather and dissolve into the indestructible drop  at the centre of our chest.  
 
The coarse winds start to dissolve and become subtler. Likewise, the coarse consciousness starts to dissolve an d the subtle consciousness becomes manifest. As the consciousness 
becomes subtler and subtler, the mind gradually culminates and becomes the most subtle mind.  That is the mind at the time of death which is also known as the clear light of death.  
 That is  real death, i.e., when the most subtle level of mind (the clear light of death) manifests is 
when death actually occurs. When this most subtle level of mind is manifesting, nothing else appears to that mind. When we say  nothing appears to this clear light of death except emptiness, the emptiness referred to here is not the emptiness of true existence but rather it is mere emptiness, like the empty sky or simply nothingness.  
 It is said in the teachings that an ordinary individual can abide in the state of the clear light of 
death for up to three days. Yogis/practitioners can abide in the state for many days because they are of a different level. This clear light of death is the dharmakaya of the basis and is also referred to as the mother clear light. This  is something that you must know. This happens to 
everyone. When we die, the mother clear light manifests.  
 Whether we say the mother clear light or the clear light of death or the dharmakaya of the basis, we are referring to the same thing. Is this mothe r clear light the actual clear light? The 
answer is no.  
 
 
Lesson  23          Page 152 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
When we talk about clear light, we have to understand that we can look at clear light in terms 
of it being an object or a consciousness:  
• The objective (object) clear light refers to emptiness which is the mere negation of true 
existence.  
• The subjective (subject) clear light refers to the subtle wisdom which has emptiness as its object.  
 When a human being of the southern continent born from the womb and possessing the six constituents dies, all th e coarser winds and consciousnesses start to dissolve and become 
subtler. Eventually, when they all dissolve, the most subtle level of consciousness manifests.  This is the clear light of death.  
 
When one moves from the clear light of death, one enters the intermediate state where one 
has to take rebirth without choice. The problem lies in our inability to stop actual death, i.e., the clear light of death which means we cannot stop ourselves from e ntering the 
bardo/intermediate state which means we cannot stop rebirth. The whole point then is to stop, to purify and to overcome ordinary death. The practices for doing so come in the generation stage followed by the completion stage.  
 Let us take the generation stage practice of Guhyasamaja as an example. When we look at the sadhana, in the beginning, one visualises oneself as the principal deity and one visualises the 32 deities on different parts of the body. One then visualises the gradual dissoluti on, in stages, of 
these various deities.   
 
At the same time as one is performing these visualisations, one visualises that the death process is happening, i.e., one sees the signs of death and so forth. One trains the mind in this. 
Gradually, all the deit ies on the body and the body of oneself as the deity dissolve. Finally, 
oneself as the principal deity also dissolves into clear light. At that time, one concentrates 
single -pointedly on emptiness. This is the practice of taking death into the path of the 
dharmakaya.  
 Of course, the actual signs of the dissolution are not happening. During the generation stage, one is simply visualising.  Therefore, the generation stage is the yoga that meditates on birth, death and bardo “ through discernment newly investigating any of their compatible aspects .”  
 This is to give you a general idea. In order to know the details, you will have to look at the actual sadhana and following that, you go through the practice. Only then will things become clearer but this is not what we are going to do here.  
 The practice of meditating on the aspects of death known as taking death into the path of the 
dharmakaya in the generation stage is not  the actual thing that purifies ordinary death. What 
actually purifies ordinary dea th occurs at the completion stage. Specifically, it is the example 
clear light and the meaning clear light, which only happen during the completion stage, that 
actually purify ordinary death.   
 
Lesson  23          Page 153 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Returning back to ordinary death, the death process culminates  in the clear light of death. 
When this stops, in the next moment, one enters the bardo as an intermediate state being 
(bardo being):  
• The substantial cause of the mind of the intermediate state being is the clear light of death.  
• The substantial cause of the body of the intermediate state being is the most subtle wind 
which is one entity with the mind of the clear light of death.  
• The intermediate state being is born miraculously in various type of births   (miraculous 
births).  
• All the five senses are est ablished simultaneously.  
• The body is said to be very subtle and does not possess obstructiveness.  
 
Once one is in the intermediate state, one has to take rebirth. If one is to be reborn as a human 
being, one will enter the intermediate state of a human b eing. There are (two) schools of 
thought with regards to this:  
• According to  the Lower Abhidharmakhosa, once one has entered into the intermediate 
state of a particular rebirth that cannot be changed.  
• But, according to the Compendium of Knowledge  there is no pervasion.  
 
One arises in the intermediate state from the clear light of death. In order to overcome this state, on has to purify it. In the generation stage there is the practice called taking the intermediate state into the path of sambhogakaya. In this meditation (on the aspects of the intermediate state), one goes through the five manifest enlightenments and then arises as the primordial protector. This is very clearly stated in the sadhana of the deity.   
Taking the intermediate state into the path of sambhogakaya during the generation stage is for 
the purpose of purifying the ordinary intermediate state. It is a practice that is done on the level of visualisation alone. That is not the actual method to overcome the ordinary intermediate state which only happens with the attainment of the two illusory bodies at the completion stage.  
From the intermediate state, one has to take rebirth. This process happens as one’s consciousness and winds become coarser culminating in one taking rebirth. As the meditation on the aspects of rebirth in the generation stage is to purify that, one visualises oneself arising 
as Vajrasattva from the primordial protector.  
 
This is a rough presentation of the generation stage meditating on the  aspects of the three bodies. T here is no way you can understand them in detail now. We do not have much time.  
 At the very minimum, you should understand:  
• what are the three bodies of the basis  
• what are the three bodies of the path and  
• what are the three resultant bodies.  
• what happens during the generation stage  
 The generation stage is the meditation on the aspects of these three things –  death, 
intermediate state and rebirth and consists of :  
 
Lesson  23          Page 154 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• the meditation on the aspects of death  
• the meditation on the aspects of interme diate state and  
• the meditation on the aspects of rebirth.  
 
   
 
  Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
Lesson  23          Page 155 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 24   DATE: 2ND JULY 2009  
 We are now studying the Tantric paths and grounds, in particular, (the paths and grounds of) Highest Yoga Tantra. The path o f Highest Yoga Tantra can be  condensed into two stages: the 
generation stage and the completion stage. The whole point of studying this is to have an understanding of what these two stages are.  
 We have received many Sutric teachings. You all must have received teachings on the Three Principal Aspects of the Path: renunciation, bodhicitta and right view. Even though we don’t have these actual realisations in our minds, at least intellectually, we understand what renunciation is, what bodhicitta is and wha t the correct view of emptiness is.  
 But when it comes to Tantra, in particular, the generation and the completion stages of Highest Yoga Tantra, there are people who know these words but I think it is very rare to find someone who has a good understanding of what these two stages are.  
 The purpose of receiving an initiation into Highest Yoga Tantra is to allow us to practise the generation and completion stages of Highest Yoga Tantra and in order to do that, we first have to understand what they are. Fro m the point of view of the practice to be done, an 
understanding of these two stages is indispensable.   
 When we are able to attain a correct understanding of the generation stage and the completion stage of Highest Yoga Tantra, we will definitely accumulate a great amount of merit. 
Why is that so? First, the coming of the Buddha into the world is a rare phenomenon. On top of that, the Buddha revealing the Tantric teachings is an even rarer phenomenon. On top of that, it is even rarer  to have the opportunity to meet and to practise the ultimate Tantric practice, Highest Yoga Tantra, specifically both the generation and completion stages. We should always remember how fortunate we are to have the opportunity to study and to reflect on this text that shows the practices of the generation and completion stages.  
 Even if we are unable to practise them, even if we are unable to develop these two paths in our mental continua but, at the very least, we can place imprints of them in our minds. We are not talking about placing just any kind of imprints but placing very stable and strong imprints of these two stages in our minds. In order to do that, we must engage in the threefold activity of 
listening to and reflecting and meditating on these two stages.  
Rememberi ng our good fortune to have met these Tantric teachings is not enough. We must 
strive from our own side to place stable and strong imprints of these teachings in our mental 
continua. That is a personal responsibility. Do imprints really help? Does it really matter whether we have imprints or not? Of course it does. We can tell from our (own)experience how important virtuous imprints are.  
 I started memorising the definition of the generation stage about 12 years ago. 12 years have past and now I have to te ach this text. When I read the definition in the text, (the recall) comes 
almost immediately. This is due to my having memorised the definition 12 years ago, the imprints which I had placed in my mind then without which I doubt the recall would come.  
 
Lesson  24          Page 156 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
In this life, we can see that when we place an imprint in the continuum, somehow it helps us in 
the later part of our life. We can see the usefulness of  imprints. From that, we can also infer that the imprints placed in this life will affect us and make a di fference in our future lives.  
 When I talk about placing imprints in our mental continua, I am not only  referring to imprints that are left on the mind through listening to the  teaching alone. That is not enough. We have 
to reflect on the teachings and then gain an ascertainment of th em. Only then will the imprints 
be very stable and strong. That is the kind of imprints I am talking about, the kind of imprints 
we need.  
 
*******************  
We have started to look at the definition of the generation stage. First, you must memorise the definition and then try to gain an understanding of (what it means). You must do this. If you don’t even know the words (of the definition), how are you going to understand anything, how are you even going to recall anything? Your understanding of the gene ration stage is like your 
working capital, so to speak. If you don’t even know the words, it is like trying to start a business without any money. The definition of the generation stage is there in the text and I am not going through that again. Please loo k it up on your own. In essence, (you should know) 
what happens during the generation stage practice.  
  
The generation stage involves the meditation known as taking the three bodies into the path. This is the essence of the generation stage:  
• We have the p ractice of taking death into the path of the dharmakaya. In order to really 
understand this practice, we have to examine the sadhana, the self generation rite of the deity without which, it is quite difficult to understand this subject. Essentially, this p ractice 
is a meditation on the aspects that are compatible with ordinary death, where during the death process, certain things happen. The meditation of taking death into the path of the dharmakaya is done to purify ordinary death.  
 
• The practice of taking  death into the path of the dharmakaya is followed by the practice of 
taking the intermediate state into the path of the sambhogakaya. This is a meditation on 
the aspects that are compatible with the way in which the intermediate state comes into being and  is performed in order to purify the ordinary intermediate state.  
 
• After that, there is the meditation of taking birth into the path of the nirmanakaya which is 
a meditation on the aspects that are compatible with birth. That meditation is done to 
purify ordinary birth.  
 
The meditation of …  This meditation is done to..  
taking death into the path of the dharmakaya  purify ordinary death  
taking the intermediate state into the path of the 
sambhogakaya  purify ordinary intermediate state  
taking birth into the  path of the nirmanakaya  purify ordinary birth  
 
 
Lesson  24          Page 157 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The meditation of taking the three bodies into the path is essentially the  meditation on the 
aspects that are compatible with death, the intermediate state and birth. But this meditation is mentally fabricated. As the definition states, “… meditates on any of the three: birth, death and 
the intermediate stage through discernment newly investigating any of their compatible aspects.”  
 Does this meditation of taking the three bodies into the path actuall y purify ordinary death, the 
intermediate state and birth immediately? The answer is that it does not. What the meditation does is to ripen the mind for the completion stage. Therefore, this is one of the components of the definition of the generation stag e.  
 Although the generation stage does purify those three - ordinary death, the intermediate state 
and birth - it is not the actual purifier of those three. It is the path of the completion stage that 
directly purifies (i.e., overcomes, stops) ordinary de ath, the intermediate state and birth. But 
through the practice of the generation stage, one receives the blessings of the deity, one is 
able to purify the obscurations and negativities and accumulate vast amounts of merit which then makes it easier for th e practitioner to develop the completion stage. The generation stage 
is a meditation on the aspects that are compatible with the completion stage and therefore ripens the mental continuum for that practice.  
 When you look in detail at each and every singl e word of the definition, it (helps to) eliminate a 
lot of wrong understanding or wrong concept along the way. At the end of that process, the understanding you gain is very pure and correct. That is the reason why we have discussion sessions as part of th e Basic Program. If you don’t want to discuss, you don’t want to study, you 
don’t want to think about or reflect on it, then there is no way you can gain correct understanding. It is very important to have doubt.   The m editation on the aspects compatible with death, the intermediate state and birth  is done 
not for the purpose for establishing death, the intermediate state and birth  as even without 
any meditation, these things are going to happen to us but they are things we do not want. Death, the intermed iate state and birth are the origins of all our suffering. Therefore, we do 
this meditation to purify them.    
It is very clear that the practice of the main generation stage is taking the three bodies into the path to purify death, the intermediate state and birth. It is very clearly explained later in the 
text how the completion stage actually  purifies these three, but the question will then arise: 
How does the generation stage purify death, the intermediate state and birth?  
 During the generation stage practice, when one is meditating on the aspects that are compatible with ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary birth, in relation to each of these states, there are the two elements of (1) ordinary appearance and (2) ordinary concept (gr asping).  These are the two objects of abandonment of the generation stage.   
 There is an appearance of death as  being ordinary. There is an appearance of the intermediate state as being ordinary. There is an appearance of birth as being ordinary. The ge neration stage 
(works to) suppress the ordinary appearance of and ordinary grasping at these three states.  
 
Lesson  24          Page 158 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
What the generation stage seeks to do is to stop the consciousness to which such (ordinary) 
appearances arise. The way to overcome ordinary appearan ce and ordinary concept is:  
• to develop divine pride of oneself as the deity (which is the antidote to ordinary concept) 
and  
• to have clear appearance of oneself as deity (which is the antidote to ordinary appearance).  
 
When one’s divine pride of oneself as the deity is strong and stable as is one’s  clear appearance of oneself as the deity, then ordinary appearance and ordinary concept will not manifest, i.e., they are suppressed. (This will be explained later in the tex t).  
 Here, we are talking about ordinary appearance and ordinary concept in relation to the mental and not sense consciousness. The practice of generation stage to eliminate ordinary 
appearance and ordinary concept is done with the mental and not sense co nsciousness, i.e., 
we are not stopping ordinary appearance and ordinary concept to the sense consciousness but 
rather to the mental consciousness. One does so by developing divine pride and the clarity of oneself as a deity. Then ordinary appearance and or dinary concept do not manifest in one’s 
mental consciousness. In this way, one suppresses the ordinary appearance of death, the intermediate state and birth and our ordinary concept of them.  
 Question: In the definition of the generation stage, is there a ny significance to the word 
“newly " as in “through discernment newly investigating any of their compatible aspects”? 
Would it affect the meaning of the definition if this word is omitted?  
Answer : I think the word “ newly ” here has the connotation of initia lly rather than being 
indicative of the notion of time. At the beginning of the generation stage, when you first 
meditate, you do it just through visualisation. (It implies that). If we take this word to mean “initially,” is there a fault?  With regards to  omitting this word, I haven’t seen any texts 
commenting on this. This is something to be further investigated.  
 Question:  Is there a difference in the usage of the term, “birth” vs. “rebirth”?  
Answer:  I don’t see anything wrong in using the two terms interchangeably. ( Interpreter ’s 
comment: For the purpose of translation, we only use the word, “birth”).  
 Question: Does the subjective clear light that Geshe -la mentioned in the last class, does that go 
on to become the omniscient mind of the Buddha?  
Answer : Yes.  
 Question: In the generation stage, the entry, abidance and dissolution of the winds in the central channel does not occur because one is using only the mental awareness. Does that mean that the s ense awareness does not occur at all, i.e., (the sense awareness occurs) only in 
the completion stage?  
Geshe -la: Generation stage is mental. Completion stage, then it becomes real.  
 The definition of the generation stage talks about meditating on the comp atible aspects of the 
death, the intermediate state and birth which is done to purify those three things but the important thing to understand is how  does this happen? The text is not explicit with regards (to 
this point). From my point of view, w e should relate it to stopping ordinary appearance and 
 
Lesson  24          Page 159 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
grasping (ordinary concept) of these three through developing divine pride and the clarity of 
oneself as a deity. This is only my idea and I could be wrong. You must think whether there is any problem with this . 
 Question:  How does one move from the generation stage to the completion stage and when 
will we know we are ready to move to the next level?  Answer:  This will come later in the text. Basically, it is the opposite of the generation stage. The 
generation stage is “ a yoga that does not occur from entry, abidance and dissolution of the 
winds in the central channel by the strength of meditation.”  When, through the strength of 
meditation, the time comes when the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central c hannel, 
then that is the beginning of the completion stage.   If you wish to study this in more detail, there is a debate in the text regarding what constitutes a generation stage. In short, the author is saying that if  it is a generation stage, it doesn’ t 
necessarily have to be the meditation on the compatible aspects of death, the intermediate state and birth. That is the conclusion. If you are not interested in (understanding this topic) more deeply, you can forget what I have just said.   If you just w ant a (basic) understanding, then just know this: The generation stage is the 
meditation on the compatible aspects of death, the intermediate state and birth.  
You must know the answer to these questions:  
• What  do you meditate on during the generation stage? The answer: You meditate on 
aspects compatible with death, intermediate state and birth.  
• Why do you want to meditate on these aspects? The answer: It cannot be to create 
death, intermediate state and birth but to overcome/purify birth, death and the intermediate state.  
• How  does meditating on these aspects purify these three things? You should think 
about your own answer through reading or discussion  
 Regarding that one says: The protection wheel and yogas prior to union with a knowledge consort (rig ma ‘du bya ba) are not the actual generation stage because it is pervasive that the 
generation stage meditates on taking any of the three bodies as the path. That is because it is not pervasive that the path in the  continuum of one on the stage of generation is the stage of 
generation.  
 Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion (to your assertion), however (your) reason is 
established because there are many common paths of the Perfection Vehicle and the lower 
Tantras in  their continuum. (Your initial assertion) is unacceptable because it would contradict 
the explanation of the bonds (ching ba) of the four requisites of sadhanas (bsnyen sgrub), and 
the four yogas, and the six requisites, and the three concentrations in th e classification of the 
general bonds subsumed in the generation stage. These should be extensively known through the Stages of Mantra.(Pg. 20 of the root text).  
 Those of you who are really interested and wish to discuss, you should read more. If you do not understand what you are reading, you can ask me.   
 
Lesson  24          Page 160 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The actual practice of the generation stage is the meditation of taking the three bodies into the 
path. Prior to the actual practice, there are preliminaries. You should look at the sadhana of the High est Yoga Tantric deities. In the beginning, as a preliminary, there is always the practice of 
the protection wheel in order to prevent any obstacles from arising during the actual practice.  
   
 
Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
Lesson  24          Page 161 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program   Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
LESSON NO: 25  DATE: 7TH JULY 2009 
 
W
e have now obtained the precious human rebirth and we all have some faith in (the workings 
of) karma, the law of cause and effect. On top of that, we have the opportunity to study, reflect 
and analyse the tantric teachings which lead to the final attainment of buddhahood. All this is 
the result of the ripening of virtuous karma that was  accumulated in the past.  
W
hile we are still able to make use of this opportunity, we should try as much as possible to 
place as many imprints as we can in our minds through studying, reflecting on and analysing 
these teachings by generating  determinati on and courage.  
W
ith respect to studying the tantric teachings, especially the teachings on Highest Yoga Tantra, 
we should not procrastinate, thinking we can do this in the future. Rather, while we now have the time and opportunity, we should try our best to study as much as possible.  
W
e should remember what Guntang Rinpoche said:  
Perhaps twenty years of remembering that  
One should do a practice,  
Perhaps twenty years of being forever  
About to do a practice,  
Perhaps another ten years of saying,  
‘I never did a practice’ –  That’s the story of an empty and wasted human life
29. 
W
hen you think about this, all of us are like that. We should remember this piece of advice 
from Guntang Rinpoche so that we do not procrastinate but, instead, engage in the  Dharma 
immediately.  
Que
stion:  What is the substantial cause of the example clear light and meaning clear light?  
Answer : As we had studied (during the module) on buddha nature, the nature of the mind is 
clear light. This ultimately refers to (the extremely) subtle mind, the fundamental innate mind of clear light that we all have. There is also the (extremely) subtle wind which is of one entity with that fundamental innate mind of clear light. We have had this (extremely) subtle mind and 
wind since beginningless time.  
We can only find the explanation of this extremely subtle mind in the teachings of Highest Yoga 
Tantra. Such explanations cannot be found in the teachings of the three lower classes of Tantra 
29 Pg. 348, Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand  by Pabonka Rinpoche, Wisdom Publictions  
L
esson  25 Page 162 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
or the Paramitayana. That is why they are unable to explain such a mind.  
 
As long as the “I” or “person” exists, the extremely subtle mind together with the extremely subtle wind will exist. These are the bases for one to accomplish the two bodies of the Buddha. This is the reason why we say all sentien t beings can achieve enlightenment. Literally, we are 
“suitable” for  achieving enlightenment.  
• The extremely subtle mind (the fundamental innate mind of clear light) is the substantial 
cause for actualising the dharmakaya.  
• The extremely subtle wind (whic h is of one entity with that extremely subtle mind) is the 
substantial cause for actualising the rupakaya (the form body of the Buddha).  
 
With regards to the question:  
• this fundamental innate mind of clear light is the substantial cause for the example cle ar 
light and the meaning clear light and   
• the extremely subtle wind is the substantial cause for the illusory bodies (i.e., the impure and pure illusory bodies).  
 
Question: The meditations that we are doing on emptiness, are they the substantial cause for  
the truth body?  
Answer : Your point is that besides the mind of clear light, all the meditations that we do in 
relation to deity yoga should also be the substantial causes for dharmakaya.  
 When you investigate deeply, what exactly goes on to enlightenment? When you say the mind goes on to enlightenment, which mind goes on to enlightenment? This has to be analysed.  
 What is the real substantial cause for the dharmakaya? What is the real substantial cause for the rupakaya? This is the same as analysing which mind moves on from life to life. Do all the consciousnesses that we have go on to the next life?   The conclusio n is that the extremely subtle mind is the substantial cause for actualising the 
dharmakaya, which refers here to the wisdom truth body. The extremely subtle wind is the 
substantial cause for actualising the rupakaya, the form body of the Buddha. This is v ery clearly 
explained in Highest Yoga Tantra.  
 
Question from student : (inaudible)  
Answer : The three lower classes do teach the meditation on the deity’s body but is that the 
substantial cause for actualising the form body of the Buddha? Using the explanati on offered 
by Highest Yoga Tantra as the benchmark, is the explanation offered by the three lower classes of Tantra correct or not?  
  When your questions are well considered, after having reflected on what you have read, such questions will benefit everyone rather than just asking questions randomly.  When you get the answers to such well considered questions, then it will really affect your mind and you get (something out of it). But random questions are quite pointless. Don’t you think this is so?  
 
 
Lesson  25          Page 163 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
It is analogous to having high regard for the medicine that helps you to recover from a serious 
illness. Having recovered, you will really appreciate the value of that medicine. Likewise, when 
you put effort into your studies and doubt arises and someone comes along who clarifies those doubts, that makes it very meaningful, isn’t it? Only then does one fully appreciate the value of the teacher or the Dharma friend who helps you (in this way).   
 This is how real faith in your guru or teacher arises, when he has really helped you to learn and 
understand (the teachings). Then a special kind of faith arises from the heart. That is real faith. 
It is the same as a patient’s respect for the doctor, the patient having complete confidence in the doctor’s ability and know ledge to cure his illness.  
 
****************  
We had been looking at the definition of the generation stage. You must understand what exactly the generation stage is. On that basis, if you were  asked, “What is the main practice that is done during the gene ration stage?” the answer would be, “The practice of taking the 
three bodies into the path.”  
 “Why do you meditate on taking the three bodies into the path?” The answer:  “To purify ordinary death, intermediate state and birth.” How do we do this?  We hav e talked about this before.  
The first (part of the reason) is established because rnam gzhag rim pa’i  rnam bshad 
extensively states:  
Those (yogas) prior to union with a knowledge consort (rig ma ‘du bya ba) are applied (sbyar) in the context of attaining Buddhahood, but are not applied on the ordinary (srid) (generation) 
stage..etc. ( Pg. 19 of the root text )  
 (Interpreter ’s corrections:  
• “Those yogas prior to …” should be amended to “Those yogas up to and including….”  
• “….in the context of attaining Buddha hood” should be amended to “…in the context of the 
buddha activities.”)  
The second (part of the reason) is established because that (text) states:  
The protection wheel is meditated on during (Itar) the ordinary (srid) generation stage and 
since it is just a requisite or preliminary (state) to the actual basis of the generation stage, it is not necessary that dharmas compatible with the ordinary (srid) (generation) stage are applied 
to them.  
Regarding that one says: The protection wheel and yogas prior to union with a knowledge consort (rig ma ‘du bya ba) are not the actual generation stage because it is pervasive that the 
generation stage meditates on taking any of the three bodies as the pat h. That is because it is 
not pervasive that the path in the continuum of one on the stage of generation is the stage of generation.  
Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion (to your assertion), however (your) reason is 
 
Lesson  25          Page 164 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
established because there are many commo n paths of the Perfection Vehicle and the lower 
Tantras in their continuum. (Your initial assertion) is unacceptable because it would contradict 
the explanation of the bonds (ching ba) of the four requisites of sadhanas (bsnyen sgrub), and 
the four yogas, and the six requisites, and the three concentrations in the classification of the 
general bonds subsumed in the generation stage. These should be extensively known through the Stages of Mantra. (Pg. 19 –  20 of the root text)  
With relation to the sadhana ( the self- generation rite), the generation stage can be divided into 
three meditative stabilisations (or the three concentrations):  
1. The meditative stabilisation of the initial preparation (or initial union).  
2. The meditative stabilisation of the supreme victory mandala (or supreme royal mandala)  
3. The meditative stabilisation of the supreme victorious activity (or supreme royal activity)  
 There are four yogas:  
1. Yoga  
2. Subsequent yoga  
3. Sublime yoga  
4. Great yoga  
There are different ways of dividing these four yogas i n relation to the three meditative 
stabilisations. According to the Arya tradition of Guhyasamaja (or the practice of Guhyasamaja according to Nagarjuna), these four yogas are included in the first meditative stabilisation of initial preparation. When we add the meditative stabilisations of the supreme royal mandala 
and supreme royal activity to these four yogas, that makes up the six branches (or six 
requisites).  
 (Interpreter ’s correction: “ Bsnyen sgrub” is translated here as “ the four requisites of sadhanas.”   
This is usually translated as the four branches of approximation and attainment.)  
 The four branches of approximation and attainment are:  
1. The branch of approximation  
2. The branch of proximate attainment  
3. The branch of attainment  
4. The branch of great attainment  
 At the moment, it is sufficient for us to know the classifications, to understand how the self -
generation rite of the generation stage is broken up into different parts. In order to understand 
this well, we need to know the self -generation rite sadhana very well. We are not going into 
that here.  
 
To summarise the debate discussed in the text, basically there is a position that states there is the practice of visualising the protection wheel and the practice of entering into the union with a knowledge conso rt during the self -generation rite. According to some scholars, these are not  
included in the generation stage. According to Ngawang Palden, however, these are part of the generation stage. It is just that they are not the practice of taking the three bodi es into the 
path.  
(Interpreter ’s correction: “ The protection wheel and yogas prior to union with a knowledge 
 
Lesson  25          Page 165 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
consort…”  should be “The protection wheel and yogas up to and including union with a 
knowledge consort……”)  
 
(Geshe -la checked with the class how m any of us had read the text as he had instructed and 
also the number of times we had done so.)  
 Geshe -la: His Holiness has mentioned that he has read the Lam Rim (Chen Mo) over a hundred 
times. There is something there. So when you tell me you have read that page three times, it is not enough.   Texts are interesting, you know. When you read a second time, you get one understanding. When you read a third time, you have another understanding. When you read ten times, then again different understanding. So it  almost seems like never ending.  
 (Lama Zopa) Rinpoche mentioned before that the blessing of the text that enters your mind depends on how often you read (the text). That’s why Rinpoche says the text is not ordinary. It is the manifestation of your own ro ot guru. He always describes it like that. When you read the 
text, there is some kind of understanding. Each time (you read), you will have a different understanding and get more knowledge. Therefore, Rinpoche described all the thangkas and texts as the ma nifestations of the root guru.  
If the Generation Stage is classified there are two:  
1 The yoga of coarse single recall ( rags pa dran pa gcig pa’i rnal ‘byor ) 
2 The yoga of subtle investigation ( phra ba rtog pa’i rnal ‘byor ) 
 2.1.3.1.1.1  The yoga of coarse  single recall  
is equivalent to the coarse generation stage (bsked rim rags pa) because the Bud of Precious 
Certainty (mtha’ gcod rin po che’i myu gu) states:  
 It is not called ‘single recall’ because it recalls a deity on a single occasion (thebs gcig) or recalls 
just a single deity but (because) it recalls the deity singly, or recalls oneself and the deity as one. Though in general it engages in meditation on both the subtle and coarse, here it is the deity yoga of the coarse supporting (mandala) and supp orted (deities). ( Pg. 20 of the root text)  
 The Bud of Precious Certainty  is a text composed by Lama Tsong Khapa. Single recall does not 
mean recalling the deity on a single occasion nor does it mean recalling just a single deity. 
These two are not the me aning of single recall. “I t recalls the deity singly ” means one does not 
recall anything else but focuses (only) on the deity. Another meaning of a single recall is 
recalling  “oneself and the deity as one,”  i.e., oneself and the deity are one entity, not separate. 
These two (single recalls) appear in both the subtle and coarse generation stages.  
 In this context of the yoga of coarse single recall, it refers to the deity yoga of the coarse supporting and su pported mandala. This extract is used to prove that the yoga of single recall 
and the coarse generation stage is (one and) the same.  
 
 
Lesson  25          Page 166 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
And:  
When one trains in the generation stage, concentration to which the coarse clearly appears is generated because it is prior (man chad) to the supreme victory mandala (dkyil ‘khor rgyal mchog).(Pg. 20 of the root text)  
(Interpreter ’s correction: Again here, “prior” should be corrected to “ up to..”  
 The generation stage is divided into two:  (1)  the coarse generation stage (also known as the yoga of coarse single recall) and  
(2) the subtle generation stage (also known as the yoga of subtle investigati on).   
 Single recall means:  
• recalling  the deity singly, i.e., remembering the deity single -pointedly without distraction, 
or  
• recalling  oneself and deity as one  
 The coarse generation stage occurs in the first and second meditative stabilisations. The s ubtle 
generation stage occurs in the third meditative stabilisation:  
 
Coarse generation stage  • The meditative stabilisation of initial preparation  
• The meditative stabilisation of the supreme royal mandala  
Subtle generation stage  The meditative stabilisation of the supreme royal activity  
 
2.1.3.1.12  The yoga of subtle investigation  
is equivalent to the subtle generation stage (bskyed rim phra ba) because that (text) states:  
 
In order to train in that, one trains in conceptual yogas such as meditating on the mandala inside a subtle drop (thig le phra mo) and so on.  
 The yoga of subtle investigation is mutually inclusive with the subtle generation stage.  
 “In order to train in  that, .. ”: The meaning of “ that” is that after one has trained well in the  
coarse generation stage, then one proceeds to train in “ conceptual yogas such as meditating 
on the mandala inside a subtle drop (thig le phra mo) and so on.”   
 Although conceptual  or investigative yoga is the general name of the generation stage, in this 
context, it is given the general name of ‘subtle yoga’. ( Pg. 20 of the root text ). 
 The generation stage is generally known as investigative or conceptual yoga. But here we have said that the subtle generation stage is the same as the yoga of subtle investigation. In this 
context, it is given the name ‘subtle yoga.’  
 The practice of taking the three bodies into the path falls under the first  meditative 
stabilisation of initial preparation.  Usually when one is doing the long sadhana of a Highest 
 
Lesson  25          Page 167 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Yoga Tantric deity, such as Guhyasamaja, the minimum that one must do is the practice that 
includes the first meditative stabilisation because all the  essential points of the generation 
stage are included there. It will be good if one can (also) do the practices of the second and the third meditative stabilisations.  
 Question: Does that mean the second and third meditative stabilisations are not part o f the 
main practice of the generation stage?  
Answer : The generation stage covers three meditative stabilisations but the second and third 
of these are not the main generation stage because the generation stage is defined as the yoga which meditates on aspe cts compatible with any of the three: death, intermediate state and 
birth.  
 Question: When is calm abiding achieved on the generation stage?  
Answer: Fully qualified calm abiding is achieved when one obtains a little control over 
primordial awareness.  
 (From this class), one  must know:  
• The divisions of the self generation rite into the three meditative stabilisations  
• That the generation stage is divided into two: coarse and subtle  
• That the meditation on the coarse generation stage occurs at the first two me ditative 
stabilisations and the subtle generation stage occurs at the third meditative stabilisation.  
• What do the coarse generation stage and subtle generation stage mean?  
•  
•  
•  
•  
• Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
• Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
• Edite d by Cecilia Tsong  
• Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  25          Page 168 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 26   DATE: 9TH JULY 2009  
 
(As usual), we will start with five minutes in silence to do some practice meditation to make the 
mind alert and generate the mind into a virtuous state. There are many ways to do that. Even if 
you are not familiar with these methods, at the very least, you ca n visualise clearly Shakyamuni 
Buddha and then do the seven- limb practice.  
  
Close your books and get ready with a sheet of paper and your pen. For those of you who don’t 
have a strong desire to study but is content with whatever comes along the way, then you 
don’t have to do anything. You can just sit there and relax.  
 
Geshe -la: If you are those type of people, then no stress. You can relax.  
 
But for those of you who really want to study and learn, then we have to do something. There is no choice. There a re those who tell me they want to study, they want to learn but they are 
stuck. So I have been thinking for a while what we can do. I know you are all very busy and 
have your own difficulties, but I still have to think of some way to improve things. So wha tever 
exercise we are going to do is not intended to be negative (in any way).  
 All of us are the same isn’t it? When we don’t meet with difficulties or suffering, somehow we 
don’t do anything. Whatever practices need to be done are not done. But when pra ctitioners 
meet with difficulties or come down with some serious illness, only then will they start to recall 
and remember the Dharma and practise the Dharma. When things are going well and we are healthy, somehow we don’t remember the Dharma.  
 
It is the same with our studies. When we don’t meet with problems or difficulties or there is no one to push us a bit, then nothing happens.   Geshe -la: When there is no one there to pinch you, then nothing improves. You need someone 
there to pinch you.   
This is really very difficult as all of us are like that because we are all so habituated to thinking 
in such a way. What can we do? What should we do?  
When I say read the text before coming to class, even one or two pages, it should be 
understood that I a m (addressing) those people who really want to study. This is not for those 
who don’t want to study or who do not have any interest in studying. This must be made very 
clear.  So if you want to study, you must follow (the instructions, i.e., to read the te xt). 
So I am going to ask a few questions. If you don’t know the answer, it’s fine. If you know the answer, that is good.  
  
1. What is the definition of the generation stage?  
2. What is the main practice done during the generation stage?  
3. Why is that practice d one?  
4. It is said that all sentient beings possess in their mental continua the substantial 
causes for actualising the form and truth bodies. If so, what are they?  
 
Lesson  26          Page 169 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Geshe -la: So now, next what you do is go home and mark your own papers. If you don’t do good,  
give yourself a zero. If you do good, then give yourself a 100 marks! All the answers have been given to you. I heard when you play golf, you must be very honest with yourself. Is this true? I heard something like that.  
 I thought this may be helpful to improve (things). I will do this not every lesson but once in a 
while I will do this. If you think this is important, then go back, read, try to remember. Maybe 
same question will come back. Not sure. So this is some method to help you study.  
 
*******************  
Question: Now, do those training in the Generation Stage move to the latter (focal circle) when they obtain stability through meditating on the former focal circle (dmigs skor) as in the Completion Stage, or is it through meditating on the entire sadhana from beginning to end, in a 
single session? ( Pg. 21 of the root text)  
The question is asking the way of training in the generation stage similar to the completion stage where we only move on to that practice when we have achieved stability in the generation stage. In other words, how do we train in the generation stage?  
(In answer) to that, there are four (types of practitioners, differentiated) by means of the time that the path is generated in their continuum (lam rgyud la skye ba):  
1. Beginners (las dang po ba)  
2. Those attaining a little primordial awareness (ye shes cung zad ‘bab ba)  
3. Those obtaining a little control over primordial awareness (ye shes la cung zad dbang thob pa) 
4. Those obtaining perfect control over primordial awareness (ye shes la yang dag par dbang 
thob pa’i gang zag).  
One should know what is stated (about) differentiating how they meditate and on what they meditate. (Pg. 21 of the root text)  
(Interpreter ’s comment: “ Primordial awareness ” is usually translated as “wisdom.”)  
 You need  to memorise (the four types of practitioners). When you don’t even know the words, 
then there is no basis for any further analysis or discussion.  
 1. In the context of the first, (a beginner) must fully meditate on all the rites of the 
generation stage occur ring in the sadhana. Further, all (practitioners) from those first 
meditating on the generation stage, up to but not (including) those capable of (generating) in an instant (yud tsam) the clear appearance of all (the elements) of the coarse mandala, are called ‘beginners’. (Pg. 21 of the root text ) 
The beginner must meditate on the entire rite of the self generation in accordance with the sadhana. The entire sadhana is divided into the three meditative stabilisations:  
4. The meditative stabilisation of initial  preparation (or initial union)  
 
Lesson  26          Page 170 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
5. The meditative stabilisation of the supreme victory mandala (or supreme royal 
mandala)  
6. The meditative stabilisation of the supreme victorious activity ( or supreme royal 
activity)  
 
“Mandala” here refers to both the supporte d and supporting mandala.  
 
When the practitioner starts to meditate on the generation stage in accordance with the rite of 
the sadhana, he gradually meditates on the coarse supported and supporting mandala (i.e., the 
coarse deity and the coarse inestimabl e mansion) and is able to induce a clear appearance of 
them. But he is still unable to produce that clear appearance in an instant, like switching on a 
light switch. That practitioner is known as a beginner.  
2. Those attaining a little primordial awareness are capable of (generating) clear and 
stable appearance of all the main (yan lag) and secondary (aspects) all at once (dus cig) when visualising (gsal btab) the inestimable mansion (gzhal yas khang) and all the  coarse deities 
arranged within it, but are not yet capable of doing that for the deities of the bases (skye mched kyi lha)
30 such as Kshitagarbha and so on. ( Pg. 21 of the root text )  
(Interpreter ’s correction: “ Main and secondary aspects ” should be amended to “main and 
secondary limbs.” I prefer to translate “ deities of the bases ” as the “deities of the sources ”).  
 Those attaining a little primordial awareness are able to have a clear and stable appearance in 
an instant of the coarse supported and supporting mandala and are able to see all the major 
and minor limbs clearly. But this practitioner is still unable to do this with regards to the deities of the sources such as Kshitagarbha and so on.  
 In the case of the Guhyasamaja practice, one visualises oneself as a deity with 32 different deities at the various parts of the body. When this practitioner focuses his mind on these 32 deities on his body, he is able to gradually gain a clear appearance (of them) but he is unable to have a clear appearance of them in an instant.  
There is a difference in the method of realizational (mngon rtogs) meditation between beginners and those attaining a little primordial awareness. Beginners must meditate by visualising (gsal btab pa) the entire supporti ng (mandala) and supported (deities) slowly (dal 
bus) and in stages. Those attaining a little primordial awareness recall the coarse (aspects) all at 
once (dus cig du) and after that they must meditate by visualizing the subtle (aspects) (24) such 
as the deities of the bases in stages.  
30 The deities of the bases: visualising the eight bodhisattvas and the five goddesses on the internal and external 
bases. The bodhisattva Kshitigarbha (Heart of the Earth) is visualised in the eyes, in union with the goddess 
Rupavajra (Vajra Form); the bodhisatt va Vajrapani is visualised in the ears, in union with the goddess Shabdavajra 
(Vajra Sound); the bodhisattva Akshagarbha (Heart of Space) is visualised in the nose, in union with the goddess 
Gandhavajra (Vajra Smell); the bodhisattva Lokeshvara is visualis ed in  the tongue, in union with the goddess Vajra 
Ishvari (Vajra Sphere of Dharma); the bodhisattva Sarvanirvaranaviskambini (Eliminator of Obscurations) is 
visualised in the secret place, in union with the goddess Sparshavajra (Vajra Tactile Object); the  bodhisattva 
Samantabhadra is visualised in the joints and the bodhisattva Maitreya is visualised in the crown.  
 
Lesson  26          Page 171 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
3. Those obtaining a little control over primordial awareness are all those capable (of 
generating) clear and stable appearance of the coarse (aspects) all at once (dus cig) as well as 
all the main and secondary (aspects) of the  subtle deities of the bases, up to but not (including) 
those capable of obtaining perfect control. ( Pg. 21 –  22 of the root text)  
(Interpreter:  “mngon rtogs ” means sadhana or method of achievement.)  
 Those obtaining a little control over primordial awareness are not only able to generate a clear 
and stable appearance in an instant of the entire coarse supported and supporting mandala 
but they are also able to do this for the subtle deities of the sources.  
 The boundary of such a practitioner is up to but not including those capable of obtaining perfect control. However, the qualification of those capable of obtaining perfect control is not defined clearly here.  
It is said that for those obtaining a little control over primordial awareness both the genera tion 
and completion stage exist.  
When one reaches this (level), since it is said that it is not necessary to differentiate (so gcod) the session and post session (thun mtshams), it is permissible to do a single (self) generation each day without engaging multiple meditation (sessions) newly activating the realization (mngon rtogs) (of oneself as the deity etc). ( Pg. 21 of the root text )  
 Those obtaining a little control over primordial awareness are those able to generate clear and 
stable appearance in an instant of both the coarse supported and supporting mandala and the subtle deities of the sources. As the practitioner is already very stable, he does not have to sustain this pr actice over four sessions as is normally done in a retreat. He only needs to   do 
his practice once a day to maintain his realisation.  
Just by reaching this stage, the stage of generation is not consummated (mthar phyin pa) 
because the Mantric Stages stat es: 
Still one must consummate the stage of generation and then meditate on the stage of completion.  
4. It is said that one part (phyogs gcig) of obtaining a little control over primordial 
awareness is the completion stage and obtaining perfect control over primordial awareness is reaching the higher levels of the completion stage. ( Pg. 21 of the root text)  
(Although) it says here, “ obtaining perfect control over primordial awareness is reaching the 
higher levels of the completion stage ,” that boundary is not clearly defined. My personal 
opinion is that those obtaining perfect control over primordial awareness are those who have 
reached the completion stage level known as the isolation of mind.  
 
Question: Aren’t these supposed to be the four types of practitio ners of the generation stage? 
How come the third type of practitioner also practises the completion stage ? 
Answer : It is clearly (stated) in the text that these four types of practitioners are not necessarily 
 
Lesson  26          Page 172 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
practitioners of the generation stage because those obtaining perfect control over primordial 
awareness belong to the completion stage and for those obtaining a little control over 
primordial awareness, some belong to the generation stage and some belong t o the 
completion stage.  
 I am not sure as to why the fourth type of practitioner (i.e., those obtaining perfect control 
over primordial awareness) is included here but this may be for the purpose of positing the 
boundary of the third type of practitioner,  which is up to but not including those capable of 
obtaining perfect control.  
 As for the fourth type of practitioner, there isn’t any explanation on its boundary.  
 Question: How do the four types of practitioners correlate to the four yogas we learnt in the 
last class?  
Answer : The four yogas and the four branches of approximation and attainment are just ways 
of dividing the rite of self- generation into various parts. Here we are not discussing the 
divisions of the sadhana but rather the types of practitio ners that practise the sadhana and 
how they meditate on the supported and supporting mandala, the level of realisations achieved and so forth.   What we have been discussing so far is the coarse generation stage. We have not yet discussed 
the subtle genera tion stage.  
 
Of the four (types of) practitioners, the first three are related to the coarse generation stage. 
When does one meditate on the subtle generation stage? When one has obtained a little control over primordial awareness.  
 There are those have obtained stability  with respect to the coarse generation stage and there 
are also those have obtained control  with respect to the coarse generation stage. These (two) 
are different.  
 In some texts, it is said that those have obtained control with respect to the coarse generation stage are those who have consummated the coarse generation stage. However in other texts, this is expressed differently: those have obtained stability with respect to the coarse generation stage and those who have consummated the c oarse generation stage. (But in 
essence) these two manner of expressions are referring to the same thing (i.e., control and consummation mean the same thing.)  
 Those have obtained stability with respect to the coarse generation stage are  able to have a clear and stable appearance in an instant of the coarse supported and supporting mandala 
together with all the subtle deities of the sources without excitement and laxity. Those (practitioners) can maintain that entire visualisation clearly for four hours. That is the measure (criteria)   of having obtained stability with respect to the coarse generation stage.  
 If the practitioner can maintain that entire visualisation clearly for a month, a year, then this practitioner has consummated (or have control over) the generation stage.  
 
Lesson  26          Page 173 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
In summary, one must know (the following):  
• that the generation stage is divided into the coarse and subtle  
• that there are four different ways of meditating on the generation stage.  
• what are they and what they mean: beginner, t hose attaining a little primordial awareness, 
those obtaining a little control over primordial awareness and those obtaining perfect 
control over primordial awareness  
 
 
    Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
Lesson  26          Page 174 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 27   DATE: 14TH JULY 2009  
 
In Highest Yoga Tantra, who are the four types of practitioners  differentiated by means of the 
time that the path is generated in their continua?  
 
****************  
1. Beginners are those who when fully meditating on the self -generation (rite) are able to gain 
a clear appearance of the coarse mandala.  
2. Those attaining a little primordial awareness  are those practitioners who have a clear 
appearance of the coarse mandala and the principal deity and their retinue deities but are 
unable to gain (a clear) appearance of t he subtle deities of the sources.   
3. Those obtaining a little control over primordial awareness are those practitioners who have 
clear appearance of not only the coarse mandala and the principal deity and their retinue deities but are also able to gain (a clear) appearance of the subtle deities of the sources.   
4. Those obtaining perfect control over primordial awareness are those who have reached the 
“higher levels of the completion stage. ” Whether it is correct to posit that this can be taken to 
refer to  attaining the level of the completion known as the isolation of mind is something that 
we can investigate further.  
 
As to what constitutes “ an instant ( yud tsam )”, it may be the same as the measure of time 
stated in the Abhidharmakosha:  
• There, one finger snap is made of 65 parts.  
• 1/65 is the shortest moment of time.  
• 120 x 1/65 parts of the finger snaps make up the measure of time known as “ teh ge she 
ma ” which literally means “instant of that.”  
• 60 x “ teh ge she ma” make up one “ thang chig”  
• 30 x “ thang chig ” make up one “ yud tsam ” (translated here as “as instant”). Therefore 
one “yud tsam ” = 120 x 1/65 x 60 x 30  
• 30 x “ yud tsam ” make up one full day = 24 hours  
• Therefore a “ yud tsam ” = 0.8 hours = 48 minutes  
 
In terms of the measure of time, it is mentioned  that the beginners are not capable of 
generating in an instant (yud tsam) the clear appearance of all the elements of the coarse 
mandala. A “ yud tsam ” is not the shortest moment of time but in accordance with 
Abhidharmakosha, it is 48 minutes.  
 
The uncommon objects to be abandoned (thun mong ma yin pa’i spang bya) on the generation 
stage are (1) (generating) the appearance of oneself as ordinary and (2) conceiving oneself as ordinary (tha rnal pa’i snang zhen).  
(1) Ordinary appearance is not the appearance of the environment and its inhabitants (snod 
bcud) to sense awareness (dbang shes) but the ordinary appearance of the environment and its 
 
Lesson  27          Page 175 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
inhabitants to mental awareness (yid shes). The antidote to that appearance is the appearance 
dawning as th e pure supporting (mandala) and supported 31 (deities). (Pg. 22 of the root text)  
 Ordinary appearance and ordinary concept happen to both the sense and mental 
consciousnesses but what is being discussed here is ordinary appearance and ordinary concept 
in relation to the mental consciousness. The uncommon objects of abandonment on the 
generation stage are the ordinary appearance of the environment and its inhabitants to the 
mental consciousness together with conceiving them as ordinary in the mental conscio usness.  
 
(2) The antidote to conceiving oneself as ordinary is meditating on the pride of being the pure 
supported (deity) in the supporting (mandala). (Pg. 22 of the root text)  
 We live on planet Earth which is the world supporting us. So the world is “supporting” and we, 
its inhabitants, are “supported” by the supporting. Likewise, in terms of the inestimable 
mansion, it is supporting the deities inside the inestimable mansion. The deities are the  
supported.  
Further, divine pride is said to be the main (practice) whilst the meditation on appearances is said to be a (secondary) branch of that.  
Through great familiarity, alternate appearances do not arise for eye awareness etc., when in equipoise on deity yoga. It is stated:  
By consciousness being attach ed to alternate objects,  
potency is lost, alternate objects (appear) because (the pure) is not held.  
Accordingly, through mental awareness strongly engaging alternate objects, the potency of the immediate condition (de ma thag rkyen) to generate (pure) eye awareness and so on 
degenerates, those are temporarily (re zhig) not generated and the generation stage does not 
stop (ordinary) appearance to sense awareness. ( Pgs. 22 –  23 of the root text) 
When the mental consciousness is strongly meditating on the generation stage, there will come a time when ordinary appearance and ordinary concept do not appear to the mental 
consciousness and also do not appear to the sense consciousness.  
 “Through great familiarity ” means through great familiarity with the meditation of (generating) 
divine pride of oneself as the deity, the clear appearance of that and the environment as the 
mandala. Other appearances (also) do not arise to the sense consciousness such as the eye consciousness.  
 
Due to the mental awareness strongly engaging the alternate objects (in this instance, divine 
pride and clear appearance), the potency of the immediate preceding condition for generating 
the pure  eye awareness and so forth degenerates. They are (therefore) “temporarily (re zhig) 
31 Supporting and the supported: the residence and the resident, refers to the inestimable mansion and the deities 
residing in it.  
 
 
Lesson  27          Page 176 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
not generated and the generation stage does not stop (ordinary) appearance to sense 
awareness.”   
 
Is the stopping of ordinary appearances to that eye consciousness due to the force of meditation on the generation stage? The answer is “No.” This is due to the (fact that  the) 
power (potency) of the immediately preceding condition for generation of the sense consciousness is weakened because the mental consciousness is completely focussed on divine 
pride and clear appearances –  “through mental awareness strongly engaging alternate 
objects .”   
 
As we have covered previously in (the module on) Lorig , this is the similar to an awareness to 
which an object appears but is not ascertained. For example, when the mind is attracted to an object such as a beautiful form, even though at the same time the ear consciousness may be hearing something, it is not aware of what it is hearing.  We are not saying this is the same but (this example) will give you some idea of what we discussing here.   
 Here, when the mental consciousness is str ongly engaged in (generating)  divine pride and 
clear appearance, the potency of the immediately preceding condition for the generation of the eye consciousness degenerates (weakens). The eye consciousness is not generated and since that is so, there is no  ordinary appearance to that eye consciousness.  
 
Therefore, if one obtains the potency (nus pa) to stop ordinary appearance for mental 
awareness through exalted (khyad par can) appearance, the need for that is established. The 
Mantric Stages states:  
Though  phenomena have not turned into deities, still, uncontrived divine pride is 
generated, and by that the need is established. (Pg. 23 of the root text)  
 From the perspective of the mental consciousness, there is ordinary appearance and ordinary concept. Those are to be stopped through the meditation on the practice of deity yoga in the generation stage. One visualises the environment as an inestimable mans ion and everything 
arises as pure appearance.   Through meditating on the generation stage, through the force of great familiarity, there will come a time when one’s clear appearance and divine pride of oneself as the deity arise naturally without effort. When these two (clear appearance and divine pride) are stable, they 
will overcome any ordinary appearance of oneself and the sense of oneself being ordinary. This 
is what it is meant when it is said the generation stage “stops” ordinary appearance and ordinary concept. We are not relating this to whether or not in reality that phenomenon has transformed into the deity.   Question:  In this context, is “clear” appearance and “pure” appearance to be understood as the 
same thing?  
Answer:  Something appearing clearly and something appearing purely –  they do not mean the 
same thing. We do talk about pure and impure appearances and also clear appearance. Whatever is pure does not necessarily appear clearly. Here, (we are talking) about the pu re 
appearing clearly.  
 
Lesson  27          Page 177 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
From among the two: (1) clear appearance ( gsal snang) and (2) divine pride, when meditating 
on  
(1) clear appearance, analytical meditation (dpyad sgom) is predominant (gtso che) since one 
needs (to practice) analysis by visualizing again and again the aspects of the supported (deities) and supporting mandala.  
(2) After visualising those aspects, since one must generate individual (divine) pride thinking: 
“Really, I am that and that”, (one) must do both.  
It is also said that in order to generate clear appearance one doesn’t need to establish calm 
abiding focused on it first. Nor is it not generated if one does not become familiar with each deity in stages. Nor does one need to become familiar with the perfect meaning (yang dag pa’i don).(Pg. 23 of the root text)  
“Perfect meaning” refers to emptiness. This paragraph is saying that in order to generate clear 
appearance of oneself as deity, one doesn’t have to be familiar with the non- inherent existence 
of the deity.  
 In order to generate the clear appearance of oneself as the deity, one has to apply analytical meditation repeatedly to elicit that clear appearance in the mind. But this does not mean that one must have (achieved) calm abiding before attaining such clear appearance. It also  doesn’t 
mean that if one doesn’t realise the emptiness of the deity, one is unable to have a  clear appearance of oneself as the deity.   
 
Question: What is the criterion of clarity in “clear appearance”?  
Answer:  To be able to see each and every detail.  
 If one places frequent attention on those aspects, indeed clear appearance is generated by just that but one does not attain continuous stable abidance. If there is no stable abidance, one lacks the potency to stop ordinary appearance and conception. Ther efore it is certainly (nges 
par) necessary to establish calm abiding when on the stage of generation and also that should 
be done through the yoga of the subtle drop (phra thig gi rnal ‘byor). (pg. 23 of the root text)  
 It is insufficient to simply have c lear appearance. The mind must abide single -pointedly on that 
clear appearance without which one lacks the power to overcome ordinary appearance and concept. Therefore there is a need to develop this single- pointed concentration which is done 
during the subtle generation stage.  
 
It is necessary to achieve calm abiding on the generation stage (and the time for doing so is) 
when one has obtained little control over primordial awareness (wisdom). This does not mean that one who has attained little control ove r primordial awareness necessarily achieves calm 
abiding but in (answer to the question when  calm- abiding is achieved),  one attains calm 
abiding at that time of the path.  
 
 
Lesson  27          Page 178 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The complete meditation on the hand symbol/implement or the supporting mandala and  
supported (deities) inside the subtle drop is not a meditation for beginners nor for those 
attaining a little primordial awareness but there is need for this meditation after having obtained a little control over primordial awareness. Therefore, at the time of the first two cases, the mind holds the hand symbol/implement or the subtle drop of the upper and lower (opening). ( Pg. 23 of the root text)  
 
The meditation on the subtle generation stage basically entails meditating on the complete 
supporting mandala and supported deities within the subtle drop which is placed at the lower opening of the central channel, the secret place (at the place of union of the deity father and mother).  
 When meditating on the subtle drop at the secret place, the size of the subtle drop is one mustard seed. In terms of the Guhyasamaja practice, one meditates that within that subtle drop is the complete mansion of Guhyasamaja together with the 32 deities.   
 When one can maintain that clear appearance and stable abidance of the visualisation in the subtle drop for four hours, that is the measure of having achieved stability on the subtle generation stage.  
 When one can do that for as long as one wants, a month, a year, then one will have 
consummated (come to the end of) the subtle generation stage.  
 
Further, in the first two cases, meditation of the subtle drop is predominantly meditation on 
the realization/sadhana (of self  generation) and is for the purpose of severing (mental) sinking 
and agitation. Establishing the stable abidance of the mind encompassing (dril) (everything) in 
the subtle drop is said to be done from the third level (of those who have a little control ove r 
primordial awareness).  
 Although calm abiding is not established in the case of beginners, when the mind forcefully holds letters or subtle drops etc., at the upper and lower openings (steng ‘og sna sgo gnyis), the navel (lte ba) or the heart (snying kha), this acts as a condition for the winds to gradually 
abide internally through the essential points (gnad) of the place of meditation (sgom pa’i gnas) 
and the support of the focal object.  
Although the focal objects of analytical meditation are  many and mixed (bsres pa), by the 
might (mthu) of gradually taming the winds one is capable (nus) of quickly stopping mental 
agitation when meditating on the supreme victory mandala (dkyil ‘khor rgyal mchog)
32 and so 
on. Therefore this is different to the system for establishing concentration explained in the Perfection Vehicle
33 and the three lower classes of tantra.  
32 Supreme Vic tory Mandala (dkyil 'khor rgyal mchog): one of the three types of concentration practiced during 
generation stage in which one visualises and places all deities of a particular practice in their respective place of 
the mandala by imagining them as having e manated from the bodhichitta drop of the principal deity in union with 
the consort.  
33 Perfection Vehicle: the Sutric Vehicle.  
 
Lesson  27          Page 179 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
That is because, in the case of the Perfection Vehicle and the lower tantras even though one 
attains (rnyed) actual (mtshan nyid pa) calm abid ing, if analytical meditation becomes excessive 
it is said that the previous (stable) abidance (of mind) diminishes. However in this case, though one meditates through mixing many (types of) analytical meditation when one has not yet attained calm abiding,  it is said that stable abidance is attained.  
The coarse generation stage is consummated because when one arrives at the third level (gnas skabs) because it is said that after attaining (rnyed) mental stability through (all) encompassing 
drop yoga one med itates on the subtle (stage). And when one (achieves) stability on the subtle 
(drop) of the upper opening
34 it is said that calm abiding is obtained. ( Pg. 23 - 24 of the root 
text)   
When one is a beginner and when one has obtained a little primordial awaren ess, the 
meditation of the subtle drop exists, for example, meditating on a small vajra at the upper opening of the central channel or the subtle drop at the lower opening of the central channel. These meditations on the subtle drop are done primarily for the purpose of severing laxity and excitement.  
 The meditation of establishing the stable abidance of the mind on the supported and supporting mandala inside the subtle drop at the lower opening of the central channel only  
occurs when one has gained a little control over primordial awareness.  
 Although calm- abiding is not established in the case of beginners, through their meditation on 
the objects of observation - the letters (syllables), subtle drop or hand implements -  together 
with the places of meditation [i.e., the object of observation placed on the essential points of the body such as the upper and lower openings and so forth], they act as the condition for the winds to gradually abide internally.  
 As a beginner, there are many other meditations to do such as (the meditation of the) supreme victorious mandala and so forth. Although they have to perform analytical meditation on many objects, they are able to establish stable abidance.  
 The Perfection Vehicle and the t hree lower classes of Tantra have a different way of 
establishing concentration. This is because in the case of Perfection Vehicle and the three 
lower classes of Tantra, even when one has already attained fully qualified calm -abiding but 
engages in too muc h analytical meditation, “ it is said that the previous (stable) abidance of the 
mind diminishes. ” This can happen even when one has calm -abiding. Of course, one doesn’t do 
too much analytical mediation before the attainment of calm- abiding.  
  
However in t he case of (the practice of) Highest Yoga Tantra, although one meditates through 
mixing many types of analytical meditations when one has yet to attain calm- abiding, stable 
abidance is achieved.  
 
34 Upper opening (sten sgo): is located between the eyebrows.  
 
Lesson  27          Page 180 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The attainment of calm -abiding and special insight in Highe st Yoga Tantra is a little 
complicated. There are different views as there are some who say that calm- abiding and 
special insight are achieved simultaneously  (in Highest Yoga Tantra) while others say that they 
are achieved in stages.  
 In the Perfection Ve hicle and the three lower classes of Tantra, calm- abiding and special insight 
are achieved separately. It is not possible for calm- abiding and special insight to be achieved 
simultaneously.  
 Now I want to highlight the things you must know (from this lesson):  
• What the objects of abandonment of the generation stage are, i.e., ordinary appearance and ordinary concept. As to what these two are, you can discuss further (this Sunday).  
• When does one meditate on and achieve calm -abiding, i.e., at the subtle generation 
stage?  
     Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  27          Page 181 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 28   DATE: 16TH JULY 2009  
 
We will spend five minutes in silence to transform our minds into a virtuous state so that this 
session of listening to the Dharma can be transformed into a virtuous activity. We should think 
of how fortunate we are to have the opportunity to do these studies and with that recognition and understanding, generate delight and enthusiasm.  
 
The more we study the teachings of the Buddha, the more doubts we can elim inate. The more 
doubts we eliminate, more ignorance is removed. More ignorance we remove from our minds, 
the closer we will be to enlightenment. When we think about what we are doing here, it is actually very meaningful.  
 
The fact we have this opportunity  to learn the teachings of the Buddha is actually due to the 
kindness of this human rebirth which we have now and which gives us the chance and 
opportunity to study and practise. If we are now in the lower realms, it will be difficult for us to 
do this. This is something we have to remember all the time.  
 
All of you know intellectually what I have said so far. You have heard it many times. But what you have to do is to internalise what you have heard so that when you reflect on these things, you should hav e some feeling for them and they  should not only stay up there in the brain but 
actually move your heart and mind. That has to come from your side and it is your personal responsibility to do this.  
 In the context of studying this (present) text, it is v ery difficult for us to know its full meaning, 
i.e., the meaning of each and every single word and to eliminate (every) doubt or qualm we 
may have with respect to them.  
 But there is a way of studying this. For example, before you can read, you first have  to know 
the alphabet, without which you cannot read. Likewise here, we are trying to get an overview (a rough idea) of the manner of progressing on the (Tantric) path.  
 
There are some students who are unduly worried. It doesn’t mean that when you read va rious 
other texts (and commentaries) they are going to benefit you especially when you are just a beginner. As a beginner, I think reading too many texts sometimes may not be (so) beneficial. 
As you have to start with something as a basis (for your studies ), you should first use whatever 
is in the text. When we take a particular text as a base, for example the one we are using here 
and then you read other books that help your understanding of this text, then that is beneficial. But (some students) are not l ike that. They read (a bit) here, (a bit) there. In the end, they get 
nothing. Maybe they understand a little bit here and there but they don’t understand the root text.  
 There are some (students) who say (the root text) is very tough. Even the language a nd words 
are tough.  That is true. It is tough because we are beginners.  I think the style of learning here accords with the name of this program, Basic Program. We are just looking at the basics. Just like someone learning and picking up a new language, one starts from the basic building blocks 
 
Lesson  28          Page 182 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
of the language, its alphabet.  
 
Likewise here, when we study Tantra, we are trying to get a rough understanding or overview of Tantra such as learning the phrases, words and so forth. When we study in such a way, once we get this rough understanding, then interest will come. That interest will motivate you to look at other materials. This is something you should keep in mind. It doesn’t matter whether you understand each and every single word or not but what we are  trying to achieve here is a 
rough understanding and to get some idea of what we are studying. That is sufficient for our purpose.  
 Actually this topic is not easy. Even in my case, though I have completed my studies, whenever I look at (this topic), ther e are more things that I do not know than what I do know. When you 
listen to the teachings, you have to pay attention. Then, you will learn something. So keep your mind alert.  
 
***************  
 Highest Yoga Tantra can be divided into (1) the generation stage and (2) the completion stage.  
 There are three levels of practitioners who meditate on the generation stage:  
1.  The beginner is someone who is able to attain clear appearance of the mandala  together 
with the deity that he is meditating on. He does this  gradually and is able to achieve clarity but he is unable to achieve such  clarity within a short period of time. (Generally speaking, within half an hour).                                                      
 Take a person who is doing the practice of Guhyasamaja. He meditates as he goes through that sadhana, moving from the concentration of initial preparation to that of the supreme victory mandala and then the supreme victorious activity. He is able to meditate clearly in a gradual way, but he is unable to achieve clarity within half an hour.  
 2.  The practitioner who has attained a little primordial awareness (also translated as “those on whom a little wisdom has descended”) is able to gai n clear appearance of the mandala and the 
deity he is meditating on within a short period of time, i.e., within half an hour. That practitioner also visualises the subtle deities of the sources, i.e., the various deities that are placed at  different parts  of the body.  He is able to gradually see them clearly but he is unable 
to do so within half an hour.  
 3.  The practitioner who has attained a little control over primordial awareness is able to see very clearly:  
• the coarse mandala together with the coarse deity within half an hour and  
• the subtle deities of the sources at the various parts of the body within half an hour.  
 The practitioner who has attained perfect control over primordial awareness has achieved stability with respect to the clear appeara nce of not only the coarse mandala and the coarse 
deity but also achieved stability with respect to the clear appearance of the subtle deities and is able to abide in that state of stability for 1/6 of the day, i.e., four hours. That person has 
 
Lesson  28          Page 183 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
achieved stability of the coarse generation stage .  
 
When that practitioner can maintain that stability of the clear appearance of both the coarse and subtle deities for a month or even a year, then the practitioner is said to have consummated the coarse generation s tage . 
 The first two levels of practitioners - the beginner and those on whom a little wisdom has 
descended - are those practitioners who also meditate on the subtle drop. For example, there 
is a meditation visualising the hand implements at the upper opening of the central channel. There is also a meditation on the subtle drop at the lower opening of the central channel at the secret place. They meditate on these for the purpose of eliminating laxity and excitement. They visualise the hand implements of th e deity at the upper opening of the central channel in order 
to eliminate laxity. In order to eliminate excitement, they meditate on the subtle drop at the lower opening of the central channel at the secret place.  
 The third level of practitioners, who has  attained a little control over primordial awareness (or 
who have attained slight mastery with respect to wisdom) also meditate on the subtle drop but (they do so) for the purpose of achieving a single -pointed mind or calm abiding.  
 Once the practitioner has consummated the coarse generation stage, he meditates on the 
subtle drop to achieve calm- abiding. For example, he meditates on a five -pointed blue vajra the 
size of a mustard seed at the upper opening of the central channel. When he can maintain the clarity of this visualisation for four hours, this is the measure or sign of having achieved calm 
abiding . After that, he moves on to meditate on the subtle generation stage.  
 How (does one) practise on the subtle generation stage ? Does one achieve calm abiding when 
one is practising the subtle generation stage?  
 Using the meditation on the five -pointed blue vajra at the upper opening of the central channel 
as the basis, one does the practice of emanating and gathering back.  One visualises emanating 
(the vajra) exponentially, i.e., one becomes two, two becomes four and so forth, till the vajras 
gradually cover one’s entire face and fill the whole space in front of oneself. One then gradually gathers back all the vajras and dissolves them into the small ( five-pointed blue)  vajra. The 
sequence of gathering back is the same as the sequence of emanating.  
 
After performing this practice of emanating and gathering back all these subtle hand 
implements - the five-pointed blue  vajra in the case of the Guhyasamaja p ractice - one 
visualises that blue  vajra transforming into the entity of the holy body in the aspect of 
Akshobhyavajra, having three faces and six arms.  
 With that as the basis, one again performs the practice of emanating and gathering back in the same w ay. In the end, when everything has gathered back, one visualises that Akshobhya 
dissolves into the concentration being at one’s heart.  
 Following that is the meditation on the subtle drop at the lower opening of the central channel, specifically at the s ecret place of the union of the father and mother.  
 
Lesson  28          Page 184 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• One visualises a very small subtle drop the size of a mustard seed (inside that secret place).  
• One (then) visualises the entire mandala and the deities of Guhyasamaja inside that drop.  
• One places one’s mind (there) to achieve clarity and stability.   
• Once one has achieved stability with respect to the clarity (of that visualisation), one 
(moves on to) meditate on the secret place of the principal deity within the mandala that is 
inside the subtle drop  
• There is also a subtle drop within that secret place of that principal deity.  
• One then visualises the entire mandala and the deities of Guhyasamaja inside that subtle 
drop.  
 
When one can maintain stability with respect to the clarity of the entire visualisation for four hours, then one will have  achieved stability of the subtle generation stage.  
 When one can maintain the stability and clarity of that entire visualisation for a month, a year, one has consummated the subtle generation stage . If one asserts that calm abiding and 
special insight can be achieved simultaneously, then I guess this will be the time when one achieves that realisation.   ●  The meditation on the subtle drop is for achieving calm abiding.  
●  Meditating on the practice of emanating a nd gathering is for the purpose of  achieving the 
subtle generation stage.  
●  When one has consummated the subtle generation stage, one has achieved special insight.  
 You have to remember the stages that I have described today. There are many (different) views 
with respect to these (stages) and it is quite difficult to come to a definitive conclusion as there are many (different) expert (views).  
• One achieves calm abiding when one has obtained a little control over primordial 
awareness.  
• After one has achieved calm abiding, one continues to meditate on the subtle generation 
stage.  
• When the subtle generation stage is consummated, one achieves special insight.  
 
Question: During the subtle generation stage, through the force of meditation, if the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel, would that whole yoga become a completion stage?  
Answer : Generally, it is said that at the subtle generation stage, even through the strength of 
meditation, the winds cannot enter, abide and di ssolve in the central channel.  
 But it is (also) said that for trainees of sharp faculties, it is possible that even during the subtle generation stage, the winds do enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. But that is still not called the comple tion stage. There are qualms (regarding this issue). To keep it simple for 
now, (we will say that) during the subtle generation stage, the winds will not enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel.  
 
 
Lesson  28          Page 185 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Question: But wasn’t there an earlier description of emanating and dissolving the winds in the 
central channel?  
Answer : That description relates to the emanation and withdrawal of the hand implements. 
One gathers back whatever one has emanated but it is not the winds. Also, when there is the 
absorption in to the concentration being at one’s heart, that is also done at the level of 
visualisation. It is not as if the winds are entering the central channel.  
 
What we have described here is the process whereby calm abiding and special insight is 
achieved separa tely. Calm abiding is achieved first followed by one achieving special insight 
later. When one reaches the end of the subtle generation stage, then one moves on to the completion stage.  
 It is said that for a practitioner who has consummated the subtle ge neration stage, his entire 
visualisation is so stable that even when he is meditating in the middle of an open field, all his surroundings become the celestial mansion of the deity. Because of the stability of his realisation, even if it rains, the rain do esn’t enter his mandala. Due to the stability and power of 
his visualisation and concentration, such a practitioner can even walk on water because he can visualise all the subtle atoms of the water to be as hard as vajras.  
 Of the five Highest Yoga Tantri c paths to enlightenment, the person who has consummated the 
subtle generation stage is on the first path, the path of accumulation.  
 As long as you understand what is the coarse generation stage and its related meditations and what is the subtle generatio n stage and its related meditations, that is sufficient. We are not 
going into the details of a specific deity practice because that is not the subject matter of this module. If you want to learn that, then we need to have a separate class.  
When we follow the self -generation rite (or sadhana), the yoga of repetition (i.e., mantra 
recitation) comes only after the meditation of the subtle generation stage. When one has consummated the subtle generation stage, then one recites mantra and engages in the yoga o f 
repetition. Because one has achieved the full -fledged union of calm abiding and special insight,  
whatever mantra one recites will actually yield the power (of that mantra). (At our level), no matter what we recite, nothing happens.  
 Geshe -la: Only the m outh gets tired!  
The coarse generation stage is consummated because when one arrives at the third level (gnas 
skabs) because it is said that after attaining (rnyed) mental stability through (all) encompassing 
drop yoga one meditates on the subtle (stage). And when one (achieves) stability on the subtle 
(drop) of the upper opening
35 it is said that calm abiding is obtained.  
Then, by the wisdom of individual investigation (so sor rtogs pa’i shes rab) repeatedly performing dispersal and gathering, one attains t he peerless (phul phyin) concentration of the 
union of calm abiding and insight (zhi lhag zung ‘brel gyi ting nge ‘dzin). And when yoga such as this becomes stable it is posited as (‘jog pa) the consummation of the generation stage which is 
35 Upper opening ( sten sgo):  is located between the eyebrows.  
 
Lesson  28          Page 186 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
stated in the Mantric Stages to be the system of both36 (traditions of) Guhyasamaja. ( Pg. 24 of 
the root text )  
Whatever I have explained earlier is the meaning of these two paragraphs. Lama Tsong Khapa 
mentioned in one of his texts that this is the order of the visualis ations: one performs 
emanating and gathering back on the basis of the subtle implements at the upper opening of 
the central channel. When stability is achieved with respect to that, one meditates on the 
subtle drop at the lower end of the central channel. This is not so clearly explained in (other 
texts) as to when calm abiding is achieved, the meditations to be performed and so forth.  
 
After this is the elimination of qualms: Whether one posits achieving the stability with respect 
to the coarse and subtle generation stages to be the same or different from consummating 
these two (stages)?  
One Scholar says: When the subtle generation stag e is consummated, calm abiding is obtained.  
Ngawang Palden: But this does not teach the full limit (mtsham) of new obtainment (because) 
by training in that way one obtains stability on each of the coarse and subtle generation stages. 
The mode of positing t heir individual measure of consummation should be known from the 
presentation of Grounds and Paths of our teacher, Yangchen Gawa’i lodro (dbyangs can dga’ 
blo).  
The explanations of each measure of consummating the obtainment of stability are formulated in accordance with Penchen Choegyen’s (pan chen chos rgyan) clear presentation of Khedrup 
Rinpoche’s (mkas grub rin po che) intention. Still, there is some basis for analysis because the 
Mantric Stages states:  
Positing that one consummates the generation sta ge when such yoga (has become) stable, is 
the system of the two (traditions) of Guhyasamaja.  
And the Illuminating Lamp states:  
Beginner’s concentration is the yoga of the first stage and abiding in that is (attaining) stability in that or the consummation of that.  
Also the Analysis of the Array of the Four Commentaries states just that. But except for these 
(explanations) it does not appear that the terms ‘stability’ and ‘consummation’ are clearly and individually explained (gsungs). (Pgs. 24 –  25 of the root text)  
There is another qualm which is brought up and has to be eliminated. There are some who may wonder: The main meditation during the initial preparation is (focussed on) the deity and not so much on emptiness. Our response  is: No, that is not true.  Emptiness has to be meditated on 
at all times.  
In this context one says: It follows that there is no need for the three concentrations, such as 
36 Two tr aditions of Guhyasamaja Tantra: Arya Nagarjuna's tradition (asserting thirty -two deities) and Acharya 
Jnanapada's tradition (asserting nineteen deities).  
 
Lesson  28          Page 187 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
the initial preparation (dang po sbyor ba) etc., to meditate on emptiness because apart from a 
few cases such a s training in primordial awareness or the special resolution (lhag mos) 
subsumed within clear light, generally (pha cher) in the context of the initial stage, the method of meditating on the appearance (snang phyogs) of the deity circle is explained as the  main 
(practice).  
Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion because in the context of the three concentrations, one must cultivate (skyong) the clear, profound, non -dual yoga determining the meaning of non-
inherent existence through focusing on the deities as their focal object. The Mantric Stages 
states:  
The yoga entering just that state (de kho na nyid) of selflessness of the mind possessing the aspect of the circle (of deities) was explained by Peldre Dorje (dpal ‘bras rdo rje) as the general function (spyi lgro) of the three concentrations and this was the opinion of Yeshe Shap (ye shes 
zhabs). Indeed in the context of the first stage one mainly meditates on the appearance (snang 
phyogs) of the circle of the deities, yet one trains in everything being like an illusion through 
inducing strong determination of the non- inherent existence of all dharmas. Then having 
meditated on the circle of deities, one enters emptiness which is the referent object (‘dzin 
stangs) of the discernment determining the meaning of non -inherent existence through 
focusing on the deities as the focal object. Then also the profound, clear, non- dual yoga of the 
appearance of the held aspect: the supporting (mandala) and  supported deities, acts to 
meditate intermittently?? (res kyis) on the realisation.  
The profound, clear, non -dual yoga in the continuum of one on the generation stage and the 
yoga without signs (mtshan med kyi rnal ‘byor) of the lower tantras are superior in strength to 
the path comprehending emptiness in the Perfection vehicle, from the perspective of method and wisdom being one in nature, because the Ocean of Attainments of the Generation Stage  
states:  
The discernment meditating on non- inherent existence  through focusing on the circle of deities 
in the mandala generates both the nature of the accumulation of merit through focusing on the circle of deities in the mandala and the accumulation of primordial awareness through generating (awareness) possessing the referent object of non- inherent existence.  
And:  
The discernment ascertaining non- inherent existence through focusing on the circle of deities 
as its focal object is one hundred times superior in its potency to act as an antidote to grasping at true ex istence than for example the discernment ascertaining non- true existence through 
focusing on a sprout.  
The etymology (sgra bshad) of the generation stage, the method of how it meditates, the 
differences between each of the deities and the different modes o f explanations set forth by 
each of the siddhas do not appear to be explained clearly in other texts. Therefore they are to 
be understood through the Mantric Stages alone. (Pgs. 25 –  26 of the root text)  
 
Lesson  28          Page 188 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Even though you may not completely understand these  paragraphs, what you have to know is 
this: “ The profound, clear, non- dual yoga in the continuum of one on the generation stage and 
the yoga without signs (mtshan med kyi rnal ‘byor) of the lower tantras are superior in strength 
to the path comprehending e mptiness in the Perfection vehicle .” Why? Because “ from the 
perspective of method and wisdom being one in nature .”  
 We have now completed the generation stage. We will move on to the completion stage.  
 Geshe -la: From now on, I will (teach) like this. You must read otherwise there is no point, you 
won’t understand anything. I am not going to read the details because it takes too long. At the end of the day, everyone is just confused.   You need to learn some of the basics. You must get some kind of real und erstanding not only of 
the words but getting some knowledge (of what they mean).   I think I will try this way because when I read the sentences, they do not make any sense to you and make you more confused. But in order for you to understand (what is being taught), you must read. I will change to this different way (of teaching) but in order (for it) to benefit you, you must read. If you don’t read, you won’t get anything (from the class). I am encouraging everyone to read. It doesn’t matter whether you un derstand or not but you must read (the text).  
Question: It is said that the union of calm abiding and special insight is achieved on the Highest 
Yoga Tantric path of accumulation but for the three lower Tantras as well as the Sutric path, 
the union of calm abiding and special insight is only achieved at the path of preparation. 
(Please clarify this point)?  
Answer : This is an extremely contentious issue. In the Sutric vehicle, it is not said that those 
who have achieved the union of calm abiding and special insight are necessarily  on the path of 
preparation. T here are outsiders who are non -Buddhists who achieve calm abiding and special 
insight.  
 
It is clearly (stated) in the teachings that for those of definite Mahayana lineage, i.e., those who enter the Mahayana path from the beginning, when those bodhisattva s achieve the union of 
calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness , then they also achieve the heat level 
of the path of preparation simultaneously.  
 No one is asserting that they have achieved the path of preparation simultaneously when they 
achieve the union of calm abiding and special insight. When one achieves the union of calm 
abiding and special insight, that does not mean that one has achieved calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness. This is an extremely contentious issue . If we don’t elaborate, 
then it is quite difficult.   Here, in the Highest Yoga Tantric path of accumulation, it is said they have achieved the union of calm abiding and special insight but do they mean the union of calm abiding and special insight focuss ing on emptiness?  
 
 
Lesson  28          Page 189 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
According to Aku Sherab Gyatso, he says that the person on Highest Yoga Tantric path of 
accumulation achieves the union of calm abiding and special insight but this is not the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptin ess.  
 There are also some masters who say that when they achieve the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness, they also achieve the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on the deity’s body. Although they have achiev ed this, this does not mean 
they are on the Highest Yoga Tantric path of preparation. This is extremely complicated.  
 Question: What is the deity’s body made of?  
Answer : The deity’s body that is meditated on in the generation stage is just an imagined bod y, 
a meaning generality, a mere creation of the mind. It is not a coarse body or form. On the generation stage, (everything is done at the level of) visualisation and nothing really happens. It starts from there. When one  moves to the next level, one can become a real deity. It will be very clear when we look at the completion stage.  
 Question: With reference to pg. 23 of the root text, in the first paragraph, “Accordingly, through mental awareness strongly engaging alternate objects….,.” what does “altern ate 
objects” refer to?  Answer:  This can be understood as “other objects.” In this instance, it can be taken to refer to 
the deity’s body.  When the mental consciousness is strongly engaged on the deity’s body, for 
example, due to that, the power of the im mediate preceding condition will degenerate the 
sense consciousness.  
 
Question: Does this mean the practitioner is not using his sense consciousnesses in his daily 
routines?  
Geshe -la: When you say you can see when the eye is opened, that is not necessarily  so. For 
those in deep meditation, (when) they are really concentrating on their object (of meditation), (even) with their eyes opened, you can wave your hands in front of them, they will not see (you). This is because the immediate preceding condition for  the generation of the eye 
consciousness has degenerated.   Only when they come out of meditation will they be able to see ordinary appearances. But during the time of meditation, their minds are fully concentrated on the object (of meditation) and ordinar y appearance will not appear to them.  
 Question:  (inaudible)   
Answer : The main objects of abandonment of the generation stage are ordinary appearance 
and grasping. That is overcome when one has achieved stability on the generation stage. The meditation on the generation stage is done with the mental consciousness, not the sense consciousness. For someone who has achieved stability on the generation stage, to the mental consciousness of that practitioner, there is no ordinary appearance and concept.  
 For someone who has consummated the subtle generation stage, he is able to  remain in the 
state of meditation for a month or a year. Whatever appears is pure appearance to that mental consciousness. At that time ordinary appearance also do not arise to the sense consciousness.  
 
Lesson  28          Page 190 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
When the practitioner arises from meditative equipoi se, the sense consciousness starts to 
manifest again. Then ordinary appearances will arise. It will be quite sad if our teachers don’t recognise us!   Please read up on the completion stage for the next class. The first section gives you the definition of the completion stage but the rest is just settling qualms and debates on the 
definition.  
 The next important section is the “ Enumeration and definite order of the five stages”  from page 
28 to the second paragraph on page 29. You must know this. Think care fully as you read 
because the entire meaning of the completion stage is summarised in these one and a quarter pages.  
     Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  28          Page 191 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
LESSON NO: 29   DATE: 19TH JULY 2009  
 
We will spend a couple of minutes to do some reflection. Reflection is very important. 
Especially as a Buddhist, it is important to know how to keep the mind happy. Take the prayer 
we recite before class as an example. When one knows how to think, just hav ing this 
opportunity to recite this prayer alone can make our minds happy.  
 
All of us know the teachings of the Buddha but somehow we still remain unhappy. Of course, I 
think it is quite difficult to find someone who is always happy throughout his (entire ) life.  But, 
at least, from our side as a Buddhist, we should reflect on the teachings and be able to keep our minds happy. For example, we have some faith and belief in the Buddha. That in itself 
should bring some kind of happiness to our minds. This is followed by prostrations and prayers 
which come about in dependence on that faith and belief.  
 
There are many ways to develop faith in the Buddha but the best method is to study and learn 
the teachings of the Buddha. The faith that arises from understandi ng the teachings of the 
Buddha is a very special kind of faith which is very different from other (kinds of faith). It can 
become irreversible faith. That comes from studying and thinking about the Buddha’s teachings.  
When we do this, we can come to our o wn decisive conclusions about the teachings, seeing 
how they are true. Then a very special kind of faith will arise in those teachings. From that, a special faith will arise (in us) towards the Buddha (himself) because we come to understand 
that he is some one very special. We will spend five minutes in silence to think about this.  
 
********************************  
 
Before we can talk about the completion stage, we first need to understand the different levels 
of the body and mind. The body exists on three different levels:  
1.  The coarse body refers to the body that we have which we can see.   
2.  The subtle body refers to the channels, winds and the drops abiding inside our body.  
3.   The extremely subtle body refers to the extremely subtle wind.  
 
Likewis e, the mind is divided into three:  
1. The coarse mind refers to the manifest sense consciousnesses.  
2. The subtle mind refers to the 80 indicative conceptions together with the minds of appearance, increase and (near) attainment.  
3. The extremely subtle mind is the  fundamental innate mind.  
 
It is quite difficult to understand how we move from one particular completion stage to another higher completion stage without first understanding the nature of the bases, i.e., the body and mind. We should remember all these le vels.  
 
What happens at the time of death?  
• At the time of death, the coarse physical body ceases.  
• First the four different elements (earth, water, fire and wind) gradually dissolve into one 
another, i.e., the earth element dissolves into the water element and so forth.  
• The mind also becomes subtler.  
 
Lesson  29          Page 192 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• After the dissolution of the four elements, the min ds of the 80 indicative conceptions 
gradually dissolve into the mind of white appearance.  
• The mind of white appearance gradually ceases and dissolves into the mind of red increase.  
• The mind of red increase ceases and dissolves into the mind of black near attainment.  
• That mind of the black near -attainment ceases and dissolves into the extremely subtle 
mind, the mind of clear light at the time of death.  
• When this clear light mind manifests, this is when actual death is said to happen.  
 
You need to have a  rough idea of the stages of dissolution:  
o First, the coarser levels of consciousnesses dissolve.  
o Then the minds of the 80 indicative conceptions dissolve.  
o Then the mind of white appearance dissolves.  
o Then the mind of red increase dissolves.  
o Then the mind of the black near -attainment dissolves.  
o Finally, at the end of the death process, it culminates in the mind of clear light.  
 At the time of our death, (as) we go through the dissolution process, we will arrive at the stage where the mind of white appearance  manifests. At that time one has the appearance of 
whitish light. This is an internal appearance to the mind and is not something external or appearing from outside.   
 Why does this happen? We have three main channels in our body: the central channel an d the 
right and left channels. The mind of white appearance starts when the winds in the right and left channels start to enter the central channel. The winds at the upper part of the body enter 
the central channel from the top and, at the same time, the w hite bodhicitta at the crown 
(which came from our father) starts to descend together with the movement of the winds down into the central channel.  This white bodhicitta descends to the level of one’s heart 
chakra. As it descends, one will have the internal appearance of white light.  
 The mind of white appearance is followed by the manifestation of the mind of red increase. 
That happens when the winds in the right and left channels enter the central channel from beneath the navel. Due to the movement of the winds up the (central) channel, the red bodhicitta at the navel that came from our mother moves up the central channel to the level of the heart. Due to the movement of this red bodhicitta up the central channel, one has the internal reddish appearance.   After the mind of red increase, the mind of black near -attainment  will manifest. Earlier on we 
saw how the winds in the right and left channels enter the central channel from the top and bottom. These winds gradually come to the level of the heart but they have not yet dissolved at the heart.  
 
At the heart, there is th e indestructible drop which has always existed from birth. When the 
white and red bodhicittas come together at the level of the heart, there is an appearance of 
darkness to the mind. It is like fainting or blacking out. It is said that there are two parts to this 
mind of black near-  attainment: During the earlier part, it is said that one still has some 
 
Lesson  29          Page 193 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
mindfulness and  objects can appear to that mind. In the later part, that mind does not have 
mindfulness of any object. At that time, it is like one has fai nted or blacked out.  
 When one arises (wakes up) from that state, (at the end of the dissolution process) that is when the extremely subtle mind manifests. This is the clear light mind of death. What appears 
to that clear light mind is vacuity or nothingness. It is not the emptiness (of inherent existence) that we usually talk about. Together with this extremely subtle mind is the extremely subtle 
wind. It is said that one can abide in this state for 3 days. For yogis or practitioners, they are 
able to do so for a longer period of time.  
 One remains in that state of clear light mind of death till the extremely subtle wind starts to stir. That is the time when the extremely subtle wind inside the indestructible drop will leave the body with the extremely subtle mind (since these two are one entity).    
The signs of the consciousness having  left the body is the emitting of the white and red bodhicittas: The red bodhicitta at the level of the heart ascends and is emitted through the nostril. The white bodhici tta at the level of the heart descends and is emitted from the sexual 
organ. Seeing these red and white bodhicittas leave the body is taken as the signs that the consciousness has left the body.  
 The body of the intermediate state comes into being when on e enters the intermediate state.  
The extremely subtle wind is the mount of the extremely subtle mind.  
o The extremely subtle wind is the substantial cause of the body of the intermediate state being.  
o The extremely subtle mind is the substantial cause of the mind of the intermediate state being.  
 When one enters the intermediate state, the first consciousness that comes into being is the mind of black near attainment followed gradually by the mind of red increase, white appearance, the 80 indicative conceptions and so forth. Basically, the mind becomes coarser, i.e., when (the mind) is first established, it is  established as subtle and then it becomes coarser.  
You have to know the stages of the process of dying and how one comes into existence again becau se when we examine the completion stage, this whole process will come into play.  
o In essence when one dies, the coarse mind will become subtler.  
o When one enters the intermediate state, the mind moves from being subtle into a 
coarser state.  
 
Question: Can  the body of the intermediate state being also be divided into coarse and subtle 
levels?  
Answer:  It is not clear in the text but I guess one can posit different levels of subtlety because 
when the intermediate state being first comes into existence, the mi nd of black near -
attainment manifests. There is a wind that is the mount of that consciousness just as there are the winds that are the mounts of the minds of red increase and white appearance. These three levels of mind are considered subtle. We can there fore probably say that the winds which are 
the mounts of these three consciousnesses (can also) be classified as subtle bodies. When the intermediate state being comes into full existence, developing the five sense powers and so 
 
Lesson  29          Page 194 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
forth, we can then posit that to be the coarse body.  
 
In order to take rebirth, the intermediate state being has to die and does so by  going through 
the same death dissolution process. The coarser levels of mind dissolve and the subtle mind 
manifests. We have the 80 indicative conc eptions, the minds of white appearance, red increase  
and black near -attainment, finally culminating in the clear light mind of death.  
 
It is this mind of clear light of death of the intermediate state being that connects with the 
fertilised egg (at concep tion) and takes rebirth in the womb.  The mind becomes increasingly 
coarser again. The mind of black near-  attainment will manifest, followed by the mind of red 
increase and so forth. This is the reverse process. In the case of rebirth from the womb, birth  
does not refer to the time when one emerges from the mother’s womb. Birth is the first moment of conception.  
 From the perspective of a normal person, the winds do not move into the central channel until the time of death. They move into the central channel  due to the force of karma.  
 I have been asked about the mother and son clear lights and the mixing of the two. The mother clear light  refers to the clear light of death. Everyone will experience this mother clear light in 
the death process.  One can also manifest this clear light mind through the force of meditation. The clear light mind that manifests through the force of meditation is termed son clear light . If 
one is able to do that during the death process, then instead of the clear light of death arising at the time of death, through the force of meditation one manifests that son clear light. When one is a ble to do that during the death dissolution process, this is called the mixing of mother 
and son clear lights .   
 You have to know this whole process very well from how the mind of white appearance manifests and so forth and also how this process works in reverse , i.e., from the mind of black near- attainment to the mind of red increase and so forth.  
 
Question:  Does this process apply to animals?  
Answer : This particular death process pertains to those who are born from the womb, 
possessing the six constitue nts.  
 Question: If the bardo being cannot find a body in which to take rebirth, does it die every seven 
days? Answer : It is taught in the teachings that the intermediate state being can remain for a 
maximum of 49 days but within that 49 days, the intermediate state being has to take rebirth. Within that period, if he does not find a rebirth after 7 days, he will have to die and then be reborn again in the intermediate state. He has to die every week as long as he has not taken  rebirth but up to a maximum of 49 days. The intermediate state being definitely has to take rebirth within those 49 days.  
 2.1.3.1.2   THE WAY TO MEDITATE ON THE COMPLETION ST AGE  
 There are two divisions:  
 
Lesson  29          Page 195 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
1 Explaining some classifications of the completion stage of the arya system  
2 Teaching in brief the completion stage of other Highest (Yoga Tantras)  
 
2.1.3.1.2.1  EXPLAINING SOME CLAS SIFICATIONS OF THE C OMPLETION STAGE OF T HE ARYA              
SYSTEM  
 
(This) has two(types):  
1 Examining the definition  
2 The meaning of each classific ation  
 
2.1.3.1.2.1.1  EXAMINING THE DEFINI TION  
The yoga in the continuum of a learner derived through making the winds enter, abide and 
dissolve in the central (channel) through the strength of meditation. ( Pg. 26 of the  root text ) 
In the definition (of the completion stage), it is a yoga  that exists in the continuum of a learner. 
There are some masters who assert that the completion stage exists at the time of 
enlightenment as well whereas there are others who say it does not exist at that time. It only exists when one is a learner. (The buddhas are non -learners). We will stick to the definition 
given here. According to this definition, does the completion stage exist in the buddhas’ continua?  
 What are the different levels of the co mpletion stage? This is something you have to memorise 
by heart. According to Arya Nagarjuna’s tradition, there are six levels of the completion stage:  
1. physical isolation (isolation of body)  
2. verbal isolation (isolation of speech)  
3. mental isolation (isolatio n of mind)  
4. illusory body  
5. clear light  
6. union  
 It would be good if there is some system that can help beginners to learn such things but the text is not arranged in that way. There are many ways of dividing the completion stage. There are the four, five and s ix divisions but they all arrive at the same conclusion. There are different 
ways of explaining the modes of progressing on the path of Highest Yoga Tantra. Here, we examine this from the perspective of Guhyasamaja, according to Arya Nagarjuna’s tradition.   
 
The completion stage has to be the yoga that is derived through making the winds enter, abide 
and dissolve in the central channel through the force of meditation. The details of the different levels of the completion stage will come later. Here, I will give a simple explanation of  these levels but it is not the definitive explanation as there are many details (to be covered later).  
 Through the force of meditation on the subtle drop at the upper opening of the central channel, the yogi experiences the signs of the dissolution that happen at the time of death. That experience lasts up to (just) before the loosening of the channel knots at the heart. That whole period of time is called the completion stage of the physical isolation . 
 
Lesson  29          Page 196 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
In general, when we talk about physical isolation, there is the physical isolation of the generation stage and the physical isolation of the completion stage. Here we are talking about the latter. During this isolation, the winds actually enter the central channel but are unable to enter the heart level of the central channel. The physical isolation of the completion stage exists from the time when the winds enter the central channel through the force of meditation and up to the time before the winds dissolve into the heart lev el of the central channel.  
 It is said that it is difficult to release the channel knots which exist at the heart charka. When (they are released) through the force of meditation, the winds at the central channel then will be able to enter the heart level  of the central channel. That is the time when one moves to the 
next level of the completion stage, i.e.,  verbal isolation .  
 Although the winds have entered the heart level of the central channel, they have yet to dissolve into the indestructible drop the re. The next completion stage level, mental isolation , 
happens when, through the force of meditation, the winds at the heart level of the central channel dissolve into the indestructible drop.  
 Question: When the white and red bodhicittas move, do the (cha nnel) knots open?  
Geshe -la: If they don’t open at the time of death, you won’t die. In order to die, must open. (This 
happens due to) force of karma.  
 Question:  Do these drops have to melt?  
Answer : The white bodhicitta that abides at our crown is the subtle part of the white bodhicitta 
from our father. For that white bodhicitta to descend to the central channel, it has to melt and is said to be in the nature of liquid.  
  Question: Is it that melting and movement of the white bodhicitta that results in what is termed ‘tantric bliss’?  
Answer:  This will be covered later. There are methods taught to induce the four joys (four 
blisses). That happens through melting the white bodhicitta at the crown. Each of these four joys is further subdivided into four, making a total of 16 joys. There is also the joy associated with the ascent of the red bodhicitta which is further divided into 12.  
 
Question: Why are they called bodhicitta?  
Geshe -la: I don’t kno w why they are labelled as bodhicitta.  
 
Question: Does verbal isolation exist at the generation stage?  
Answer : There is no verbal isolation on the generation stage. There is physical isolation on the 
generation and completion stages but verbal isolation is necessarily  on the completion stage.  
 Things to remember : 
• the six levels of the completion stage  
• a rough idea of how one moves from physical isolation to verbal isolation to mental 
isolation  
 
Lesson  29          Page 197 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• what is a completion stage. You can understand this easily by t hinking of it as the time 
when the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel through the force of 
meditation.  
 
Now there are (more) things to discuss. When you return to the definition of the generation stage, does it have to be a yoga  that d oes not occur through the winds entering, abiding and 
dissolving in the central channel through the force of meditation? On pages 26 and 27 (of the root text), there is a lot of discussion on whether the winds actually enter, abide and dissolve in the cent ral channel through the force of meditation during the generation stage. The 
conclusion that is reached with respect to the two stages is that:  
• the completion stage is the time when the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel through the fo rce of meditation.  
• during the generation stage, the winds do not enter, abide and dissolve in the central 
channel through the force of meditation.  
      Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  29          Page 198 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 30   DATE: 21ST JULY 2009  
 I will talk a little bit about the coming retreat that you all will be going to this October. I actually intended to talk about this after this module but some people are wondering what is going to happen during the retreat and some people have some worrie s thinking that it is going to be 
difficult.  
 It is very important to be very clear whether you want to do the retreat or not. Going for the retreat is a personal decision. Will there be any difficulties during the retreat? Probably. I can’t think of anyo ne who will not meet with any difficulties. (But) if from your own side, you really 
have a strong heartfelt desire to do the retreat, then whatever difficulties (that may arise) will become  insignificant.   Are all these people who are going for this retr eat experienced meditators?  The answer is, 
“No.” There are not even some who are good at it. We are  all going to learn and take the first step.  
 Geshe -la: All are beginners . 
 There are some people who get discouraged by thinking, “There are people who are better 
than me in their studies and therefore, in terms of meditation, I will not be able to compare 
with them.”  
 
Geshe -la : There is no pervasion.  
 This retreat is not that difficult and challenging. This retreat is mainly on the stages of the path to enlightenment, i.e., it is meditation on the Lam Rim . The retreat will be conducted in silence. 
I guess some people will experience some difficulty with this. Don’t worry. You can always (give) feedback. There is also opportunities for relaxation.  
 Of co urse, during the retreat, we will be sitting down for some time and it is possible that you 
will experience some discomfort with your legs or your back may feel a little sore. But whatever it is, you should learn to put up with it. Whenever discomfort come s and if you 
immediately need to get up and rest, then you will never ever improve. But if it is really 
unbearable, then you have the choice to stretch your legs. It is not as if no matter what 
(happens), you are forced to sit there.  
 Since (there is) now  this opportunity for you to do retreat, you should take this  opportunity to 
do so. It is mentioned in the teachings, “Worldly activities will never come to an end on its own accord. When will they end? When we put an end to them. Otherwise they will neve r end by 
themselves.” It is good to remind ourselves (in this way). It is important to remember that the opportunity to do retreat is whenever all the conditions are there. Your body and mind are fit and you are in relatively good health. You should grasp this opportunity.  
 Remember this: One day, when things go wrong and the positive conditions are no longer 
 
Lesson  30          Page 199 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
there or one falls sick and facing problems and obstacles, then at that time, even if you wanted 
to do retreat, you will never be able to do so.   
 If you really want to do the retreat, you have to make the decision now. You should not think 
that there will be another opportunity in the future and you will do it in the future. I think then that probably will not happen. Does it mean that you can do thi s retreat better in the future 
but not now? I don’t think so because you are not getting younger but older by the day. With 
age, your faculties deteriorate.  
 
This retreat is basically an exercise for all us including the teacher (Geshe -la).  All of us are  
beginners and we are going there to learn. It is good if one can attend the retreat. If we go for the retreat with a clear decision in our mind and do so by setting aside whatever work or business for a period of time, even if it is (only) for two weeks, the retreat will be useful and beneficial.  
 Definitely there is a lot of benefit in doing the retreat even if one cannot meditate at all. Whenever we recite the prayers and do the practices based on the particular deity practice, reciting mantras and keep ing silent, definitely there will be a lot of benefit and no loss.  
 It is a meditation retreat on the Lam Rim  particularly the path that is shared with persons of 
small capacity. Those who are going for retreat should prepare by learning that particular 
section of the Lam Rim . 
 
My point is that you don’t have to worry unduly by thinking of all the possible difficulties. The 
retreat is meant to be relaxing. If you really meet with some difficulties, there are channels of communication open to you and there will be  people you can talk to.  
 Geshe -la: if you have any doubts, (thinking) that the retreat will be very difficult and impossible 
to do, please don’t think that. It is possible. For myself, I am doing this for the first time. I am a beginner. So don’t  worry. Everybody is the same. Nobody is perfect.  
 
 ********************************  
 
This exercise (the impromptu quiz) is to improve the standard of learning and is meant to facilitate and help you in your studies. It has to be a collective effort betwee n the students and 
the teacher.  
 If you think that this is just another exercise by closing the texts and take out a piece of paper and doing it for the sake of doing it, then this exercise will be pointless and  a waste of time. The point is to encourage you to prepare beforehand, to lea rn to anticipate (that certain) 
questions will be asked.  
 If you are able to answer the question that I am now posing to you that is good as it shows that you are studying. You should rejoice.  
 If you don’t know the answers to the questions, you should g o home and try to find the 
 
Lesson  30          Page 200 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
answers. It is only a couple of questions, not a lot. If you are not able to answer the questions, 
then you should generate the determination to want to know the answers, thinking, “If I were to be asked these questions again, I would definitely be able to answer them.” You should have that kind of determination.  
 Impromptu quiz:  
1. What is the definition of the completion stage?  
2. Write down the six levels of the completion stage without confusing the order.  
 Some of the comments tha t I make may sound prickly to your ears but these comments are 
mainly directed at those who are interested in their studies.  These comments are not directed at those who only  come here to listen (to the teachings).   
 Geshe -la: So don’t be afraid. So for  those who want to study, I try my best.  
 
Geshe -la: If you don’t get the correct answer, go back and read. Everything is in the text. If you 
can’t remember the order (of the six levels), correct it, remember it. If you don’t know the 
definition, go back and read the text and try to remember it.   
*************************  
It is insufficient to be able to write or memorise the definition of the completion stage. You 
need to understand what it means. The completion stage is basically a realisation that occurs  
through the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel. But that alone is not 
enough. It does not mean that if it is a realisation that occurs through the winds entering, 
abiding and dissolving in the central channel is necessarily a co mpletion stage. It (also) has to 
be a yoga in the continuum of a learner and this means, in accordance with this text, the completion stage does not exist in the continua of the buddhas.  
 The six levels of the completion stage in according with Arya Nagar juna’s tradition are :  
7. physical isolation (isolation of body)  
8. verbal isolation (isolation of speech)  
9. mental isolation (isolation of mind)  
10. illusory body  
11. clear light  
12. union  
 
• Physical isolation  refers to the time when the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central 
channel from both the upper and lower openings up to (just) before entering the level of the heart.  
• Verbal isolation  happens when the winds are able to enter into the heart level o f the 
central channel through the force of meditation.  
• Although the winds in the central channel have entered (the heart level of the central channel) and dissolved at the level of the heart chakra, the winds have yet to dissolve in the indestructible dro p. When the winds in the central channel have dissolved in the 
indestructible drop, then that is the time of mental isolation . 
 
Lesson  30          Page 201 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
It is important to pay attention and try to understand what is being said because I am presenting these different levels of the completion stage in a really simple manner.  
 Although we say the winds have dissolved in the indestructible drop when one first achieves mental isolation, most of the winds (but not all of them) have done so. Initially the pervasive 
wind has not dissolved in the indestructible drop. Comes the time when all  the winds, including 
the pervasive wind,  have dissolved in the indestructible drop during the death process, one then achieves the example clear light of the final mental isolation .  
 With that example clear light of the final mental isolation acting as the cause, when one arises from the example clear light, then the mind of black near - attainment of the reverse process 
manifests. At the same time, one attains the impure illusory body  which is the real body of the 
deity. This process is similar to when one enters the intermediate state and takes on the  subtle body of the intermediate state being.  
 Do not worry if you are not getting each and every single point. It is difficult to so now. This is just an introduction. All you need to know is just a rough idea of what happens after each particular level of the completion stage. Now we are at the fourth level, the illusory body.  
 What are the substantial cause and the co -operative condition of  this impure illusory body?:  
• The operative condition of this impure illusory body is the example clear light of the final mental isolation.  
• The subtle wind that is the mount of this example clear  light of the final mental isolation is 
the substantial cause of the impure illusory body.  
 
What is the entity of that impure illusory body? The impure illusory body is form but it has the 
nature of wisdom. It is not consciousness. (Although it is form), it is not atomically established, i.e., it is not made up of particles or atoms. Here we are following the assertion that form and matter are not mutually inclusive.  
 Why is this illusory body impure? This is an impure illusory body because it is not purified of the obstructions to liberation.  
 What happens after that? Through meditation, the next realisation to be achieved is the meaning clear light. (Having achieved the impure illusory body), one meditates and  there will 
come the time when one is able to realise emptiness directly. This mind of clear light directly realising emptiness is the meaning clear light.  
  
When this meaning clear light manifests, this is the uninterrupted path of the Highest Yoga 
Tantric path of seeing, which is the direct antidote to all the obstructions to liberation. Having achieved the meaning clear light, one enters the Highest Yoga Tantric path of seeing, achieving the first ground and b ecomes a superior. (Here we are talking about the five paths in 
accordance with Highest Yoga Tantra).  
• The generation stage is the Highest Yoga Tantric path of accumulation . 
• The completion stage levels of physical, verbal and mental isolations and the impure 
 
Lesson  30          Page 202 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
illusory body are the Highest Yoga Tantric path of preparation.  
• When one achieves the meaning clear light, one achieves the Highest Yoga Tantric path of 
seeing  and one becomes a superior.  
 
There are clear lights that realise emptiness directly and there  are also clear lights that realise 
emptiness inferentially through the medium of a mental image.  
• The clear light that realises emptiness inferentially through a mental image is the example 
clear light.  
• The clear light that realises emptiness directly is the meaning clear light.  
I am putting this in simple terms for ease of understanding. I am sure that most of you have heard this term many times: The non -dual wisdom of bliss and emptiness  (the inseparable 
wisdom of bliss and emptiness)? What is this (refe rring to)? It refers to the example clear light 
and the meaning clear light. Of these two clear lights, the non- dual wisdom of bliss and 
emptiness really refers to the meaning clear light. For it to be non -dual, all duality must have 
subsided which only ha ppens when emptiness is realised directly. Therefore the non -dual 
wisdom of bliss and emptiness is referring to the meaning clear light.  
 When the subtle wind that is the mount of the meaning clear light stirs, one arises from that clear light and in the n ext moment, the mind of black near-  attainment is actualised and at that 
same time, one achieves the pure illusory body:  
• The co -operative condition for this pure illusory body is the meaning clear light.  
• The substantial cause for this pure illusory body i s the subtle wind that is the mount of the 
meaning clear light.  
 
Why is it called a pure illusory body? It is called the pure illusory body because it is purified of the obstructions to liberation, the meaning clear light being the direct antidote to them.  
 
There are two kinds of union: (1) the abandonment union and (2) the realisational union.  
One achieved the pure illusory body when the obstructions to liberation are abandoned. At this 
time, one achieves the union of the meaning clear light and the pure illusory body. This union is called the abandonment union.   
 One achieves the pure illusory body when the obstructions to liberation are abandoned. They are abandoned when one achieves the path of thorough release.  
• Earlier on, the meaning clear light is the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing and it is the direct antidote to the obstructions to liberation.  
• When one achieves the path of thorough release, one has abandoned the obstructions to liberation.  
• At that moment, one becomes an arhat.  
• Of the ten grounds, one has achieved the second ground . 
• Of the five paths, one has achieved the path of meditation.  
 When the pure illusory body is obtained, one becomes an arhat, i.e., one has abandoned all the obstructions  to liberation. After that realisation, one enters into meditation again and 
manifests clear light again. When the clear light is manifested again, (on the basis of one’s pure 
 
Lesson  30          Page 203 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
illusory body) one achieves the realisational union. Amongst the two unions, the  realisational 
union is the main union whereas the abandonment union is the ordinary union.  
 Why is it a union now? It is the union of the pure illusory body and with the pure mind of meaning clear light. The clear light that one who has the pure illusory  body manifests is the 
clear light at the end of the path of the learner  which is the antidote to the obstructions to 
omniscience. Different monastic literature has different views on this.   
 The clear light at the end of the path of the learner is the uninterrupted path of the path of 
meditation and is the direct antidote to the obstructions to omniscience. In the second 
moment, when the obstructions to omniscience are abandoned, one achieves the unification of no -more learning . 
 Geshe -la: At that time, y ou become Vajradhara!   
 The emptiness of that unification of no -more learning is the dharmakaya (truth body). It is an 
uncomposed phenomenon.  
 When we talk about clear light, there is:  
1. the objective clear light which refers to the emptiness of the unification of no -more 
learning and  
2. the subjective clear light which is the consciousness that takes that emptiness as its subject and is the wisdom truth body.  
 
The person that is imputed as a non -learner is the sambhogakaya and the  substantial cause for 
the sa mbhogakaya is the pure illusory body. When we say Vajradhara has the aspect of 
sambhogakaya, this is what we are talking about. We will go into this in more detail (later). (For now), if you have some idea on how these six levels of the completion stage ac cord with the 
five paths, then we have achieved (our goal for this session).   
 THE FIVE PATHS ACCORDING TO HIGHEST YOGA TANTRA  
Five Mahayana paths according  
to Sutra  Five paths according to  
Highest Yoga Tantra  
Path of Accumulation  Generation stage  
Path of Preparation  • Physical isolation  
• Verbal isolation  
• Mental isolation  
• Impure illusory body  
Path of Seeing/First Ground  Meaning clear light  
Path of Meditation  • Pure illusory body  
• Realisational union (learner’s union)  
Path of No More Learning  Union of no more learning  
 (Chart provided at Geshe Chonyi’s teachings on Tantric Salam in October 2002)  
  
 
Lesson  30          Page 204 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Highest Yoga Tantric Paths  
Path of accumulation   Generation stage  Coarse generation stage  
Subtle generation stage  
Path of preparation  Completion stage levels 
of physical, verbal and  
mental isolations and 
impure illusory body   
Uninterrupted path of Path of 
seeing  
(Direct antidote to the obstructions 
to liberation)  Completion stage level of 
clear light  One achieves the meaning 
clear light and becomes a 
superior  
Path of thorough release of path of 
meditation  
(Obstructions to liberation are 
abandoned)  Completion stage level of 
union  One achieves the pure 
illusory body and  becomes 
an arhat.  
Uninterrupted path of the path of 
meditation  
(Direct antidote t o the obstructions 
to omniscience)  Completion stage level of 
union  Clear light at the end of the 
path of the learner  
Path of No -more learning  
(Obstructions to omniscience are 
abandoned)  Unification of no -more 
learning  Objective clear light is the 
truth body  
Subjective clear light is the 
wisdom truth body  
 
**************************  
Information on the total solar eclipse on 22 July 2009:  
 Tomorrow is the total eclipse of the sun. According to the Tibetan calendar, as per Indian local time, the total ecli pse starts at 5.45am (8.15am Singapore   time) and by 6.43am (9.15am 
Singapore time), the eclipse will reach 90%. At 7.30am (10am Singapore time),  the total eclipse will happen.  
 It is mentioned in the calendar that any virtue that is created during the t ime of a solar eclipse 
is multiplied by 100,000 x 10 million, i.e., 1000 billion times.  
Why is this so?  
There is definitely a correlation between the external sun and moon and the internal subtle body (i.e., the channels, winds and drops). Of the various channels in the body:        ●   The central channel is called the mind (or Rahul) channel.  
• The right channel is called the speech (or sun) channel.   
• The left channel is called the body (or moon) channel.   
 I am not sure but during the eclipse of the sun, the winds on the right  channel may enter the central channel on its own accord. In the earlier lesson, we said that one of the signs of the winds entering the central channel is that the movement of the bre ath in the two nostrils is 
equal. I am not sure whether this happens to everyone but a lot of people have experienced 
 
Lesson  30          Page 205 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
this based on their own checking. During the eclipse, it seems that the flow of winds in both 
nostrils is of equal strength. On normal day s, the flow of winds in one nostril is usually stronger 
than the other. His Holiness the Dalai Lama has mentioned a couple of time that he has made several observations during the eclipse and he said that it is true that the flow of winds in both nostrils is of equal strength during the eclipse.  
 I guess when the breath from the nostrils, which basically comes from both channels is equal, 
then the mind is in equilibrium and is probably more stable. Of course then, any virtue that is 
performed with a stable mind will be more powerful. Maybe this is (the merit multiplying effect) 
can be explained. So try to engage in as much virtue as possible during the eclipse time. Try to wake up a little bit earlier tomorrow and make use of that time.  
    Interpreter: Ven.  Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  30          Page 206 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 31   DATE: 23RD JULY 2009  
 
As usual, we will spend about five minutes in silence to do some reflection. The main thing is to 
bring joy and delight to the mind. We should remind ourselves how we have this precious 
human life, have faith in the Buddha and have some idea of what a buddha is. We (also) have some small wish of wanting to become a buddha and we have the opportunity to learn the 
path that will lead us to our goal. We should feel happy and rejoice.  
 
We will spend the next five minutes to uplift our minds, generating this se nse of joy and 
happiness and focus our minds single -pointedly to generate a positive motivation. The point is 
to try to transform the mind into a virtuous state.  
********************* 
Do you understand how the six levels of the completion stage are related to the five paths?  
 
Geshe -la: How many people understand the last lesson on Tuesday? I don’t know. Sometimes, it 
is difficult (for me) to understand. Maybe you don’t have enough time….I am not really sure 
why you are not getting it. If I repeat (everything) again, I am not very sure whether it is 
beneficial. You want me to repeat the same (thing) or not? If I repeat the same thing, it will be never - ending.  
 
It is said that the teacher who explains Tantra needs to generate into a wrathful deity!  
 
Geshe -la: You see there are so many wrathful deities in Highest Yoga Tantra.  Why do you think 
(this is so)? Why are they not smiling all the time?  
 When we consider the teachings of the Buddha, be it the Hinayana,  Mahayana or even 
Mahayana Tantra, all the instru ctions are for subduing or disciplining one’s body, speech and 
mind. By subduing one's body, speech and mind, one progresses, becoming better and one gets closer and closer to enlightenment.  
 The teachings in the explanation of the First Noble Truth, true  suffering, talks of four aspects: 
impermanence, misery, empty and selfless. These are instructions for subduing the coarse 
mind. There are many vows (of individual liberation) when one looks at the pratimoksha vows 
contained in the Hinayana system. There are eight divisions in which there are many different 
rules of conduct. These are all methods for disciplining or subduing one's coarse body and 
speech.  
In the Mahayana, there are meditations on love, compassion and, in particular, bodhichitta is taught. Again, these methods are primarily for subduing the mind but (as they) are built upon 
the earlier methods, Mahayana meditations are more refined, subtler and more extensive in nature.  
 The bodhisattva vows are taken in the Mahayana. (They also relate) to disciplining one's body and speech and give extensive explanations on how one should practise the six perfections. In the Mahayana system, in particular there is an explanation on how to unite the two -  
 
Lesson  31          Page 207 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
bodhicitta and the wisdom realising emptiness -  and there are also elaborate explanations on 
how the two obstructions are removed.  
  
There are four classes of Tantra. In the first three classes, there is the practice of taking desire 
or bliss into the path. Then, there is the practice of keeping the vows and commitments of 
Tantra and the practice of deity yoga. All of these are means of disciplining the body and  subduing one's physical actions or behaviour. It is the same in Highest Yoga Tantra but the 
methods there are more profound. Again, there is the pra ctice of deity yoga. All these are 
methods to subdue and discipline the mind.  
 
In Highest Yoga Tantra, through the practice of striking the vital points of the body, one attempts to control one’s subtle winds. In particular, Highest Yoga Tantra teaches the methods for gaining control over one's subtle body (i.e., the subtle wind) and the subtle mind and then transforming them into the entities of clear light and the illusory bodies.  Such  methods are peculiar to Highest Yoga Tantra and are not taught else where.  
 The actual substantial causes of the two bodies -  the truth body and the form body -  of the 
Buddha are none other than these two things, clear light and the illusory body. When one analyses what are the real substantial causes of the two bodies, these are the two things that one can point to and say, “These are  what will become the Buddha's body and mind.”  
• What is the substantial cause of the wisdom truth body? It is the wisdom at the end of the 
continuum of the learner.   
• The substantial cause of the for m body of the Buddha is the pure illusory body.  
 
It is important to have this overview of the entire buddhadharma and understand how it is 
basically the method for subduing one's body, speech and mind and becoming enlightened. In 
particular, when one unde rstands the essence of Highest Yoga Tantra, one will be able to really 
understand, at the end of the day, what is it that will move to enlightenment? What kind of 
mind will become the Buddha's mind? It is none other than the wisdom at the end of the contin uum of the learner -  clear light. It is the pure illusory body that moves to enlightenment 
and becomes the Buddha’s form body. It is only in Highest Yoga Tantra that you have this final view and explanation on what kind of mind and body, when subdued, move  to enlightenment.  
 Question: It seems like at every step of the way, there is this mother and son clear lights. …There is this mind that arose from the example clear light at the end of mental isolation and the subtle wind that is the mount of this is the  substantial cause for the impure 
illusory body. But at the same time, there is also the manifestation of the mind of black near -
attainment. So it seems like there are two entities with the son and the mother. Am I correct to say that or am I getting it wrong?  
Answer : Whether it is son or mother clear light, both are clear lights. We are talking about clear 
lights. (It has) nothing to do with the black near - attainment which is simultaneous with the 
achievement of the impure illusory body
. 37 
37 The mother clear light  refers to the clear light of death. Everyone will experience this mother clear light in the 
death process.  One can also manifest this clear light mind through the force of meditation. The clear light mind 
that manifests through the force of meditation is  termed son clear light . If one is able to do that during the death 
 
Lesson  31          Page 208 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Question:  Can I rephrase my question? Because the mind of black near -attainment of the 
reverse process comes from the clear light mind of death. And the substantial cause for the impure illusory body…..  
Ven. Gyurme:  You mean the one that is simultaneous with the ac hievement of the impure 
illusory body, isn’t it?  
Answer:  Referring to the mixing of the mother and son clear lights, that is the example clear 
light of the final mental isolation. What actually happens is that the mother clear light (which is the clear lig ht of death) is not allowed to manifest but instead the example clear light manifests. 
Once the example clear light manifests, the mother clear light is finished forever.  
 Question:  Then why is it called “mixing” in such a case rather than abandoning one or the other?  
Answer:  Literally, it is called, “mixing.” But whether it is mother clear light or son clear light, it is 
the subtle  mind that we are talking about. One realises emptiness, the other doesn’t realise 
emptiness….  
 Question: But it seems like th e mind of black near- attainment is also manifesting………..  
Answer:  When one arises from the example clear light, one arises into the mind of black near-
attainment of the reverse process. When the mind of black near -attainment manifests, the 
example clear is  no longer there so it is not simultaneous (with the arising of the pure illusory 
body). When one arises into the mind of black near -attainment, simultaneous with that, one 
arises as the impure illusory body.  
 Question:  Does this impure illusory body have  its own clear light because it is from there that 
the meaning clear light is derived? It is a substantial cause for the meaning clear light. This clear light is neither the example clear light at the end of mental isolation nor is it the meaning clear light. Is there a clear light that is the same entity as the impure illusory body? Is there any 
specific name for that?  
Geshe -la: If you  didn't understand what I said to you on Tuesday, then there is no way you can 
understand the question now.  
Ven. Gyurme : In short what kind of clear light  exists from the attainment of the impure illusory 
body up to and before the actualising of the meaning clear light? In between, there is a clear light. What is it called?   
Answer : It is called the example clear light o f mental isolation or simply, the example clear light. 
Remember there are two main clear lights: the example clear light and the meaning clear light.  
 Question:  Is this example clear light different from the example clear light at final mental 
isolation?  
Answer:  The example clear light of the final mental isolation is the basis for actualising the 
impure illusory body. Once the impure illusory body is achieved, that clear light is the example clear light.  
process, then instead of the clear light of death arising at the time of death, through the force of meditation one 
manifests that son clear light. When one is able to do that during the death dissolution process, this is called the 
mixing of mother and son clear lights .  (Pg. 4 of Lesson 29 )  
 
 
 
Lesson  31          Page 209 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
************************  
We will talk a little abo ut father Tantra and mother Tantra to have some understanding of what 
they mean since we hear these terms quite often.  Mother Tantra  is Tantra that clearly 
explains the clear light and is also referred to as wisdom Tantra. Father Tantra  is Tantra that 
clearly explains the illusory body and is also referred to as method Tantra. They are not posited 
on the basis of gender but rather their area of emphasis.  
 
On page 28 of the root text, there is the heading, “ Enumeration and the definite order of the 
five st ages”  followed by their individual explanations. This is basically a different way of 
presenting what I have already explained so far.  
 
2.1.3.1.2.1.2  THE MEANING OF EACH CLASSIFICATION  
 
There are two:  
1 Enumeration and definite order of the five stages  
2 The meaning of each  
 
2.1.3.1.2.1.2.1  ENUMERATION AND DEFINITE ORDER OF THE FIVE STAGES  
 
In establishing the final object to be established/ attained, one needs these common and 
uncommon paths and one does not need other paths not included here. The establ ishment of 
non-learner’s union (mi slob pa’i zung ‘jug) explained in the general Highest Yoga Tantras, must 
be preceded by learners union combining (tshogs) both the meaning clear light (don gyi ‘od 
gsal) and pure illusory body (dag pa’i sgyu ma’i sku).(Pg. 27 -28 of the root text ) 
 
“In establishing the final object to be established” is referring basically to the union of no more 
learning. (What is presented) here is the mode of assertion of most Highest Yoga Tantras but the Kalachakra Tantra gives a different  explanation. Therefore, it says here, “i n the general 
Highest Yoga Tantras….. ”  
 In order to achieve the final object of attainment:  
• the non-learner's union  must be preceded by the attainment of learner's union.  
• What is the learner's union  (or realisational union)? This is the union of two things: the 
meaning clear light and pure illusory body. The meaning clear light and pure illusory body are the substantial causes of the Buddha's mind and body respectively.  
• The achievement of this learner's union must be preceded by the attainment of the pure 
illusory body . 
The pure illusory body must precede it because if the pure illusory body does not precede it, it’s not possible (mi rung) to obtain such a union. (However) the pure illusory body does  not 
need to precede the obtainment of mere union because the pure illusory body and ordinary (phal pa) union must be obtained simultaneously. (Pg. 28 of the root text )  
“The pure illusory body must precede it ”: “It” refers to the learner’s union. If the learner's union 
is the realisational union, then the “ ordinary union” is  referring to the abandonment union.  
 
 
Lesson  31          Page 210 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
With reference to the six levels of the completion stage, starting from physical, verbal and 
mental isolations followed by the illusory body, that  (illusory body) refers to the impure 
illusory body . After that is (the level of) clear light and this refers to the meaning clear light . 
This meaning clear light is the uninterrupted path  which is the direct antidote to the 
obstructions to liberation (afflictive obstructions). When these are removed, one achieves the 
state of abandonment of the obstructions to liberation and the pure illusory body .  The 
abandonment of the obstructions to liberation and achieving the pure illusory body are 
simultaneous.  
 
Although one has removed the obstructions to liberation, one still has to remove the obstructions to omniscience (knowledge obstructions). In order to abandon these obstructions, one needs to generate the direct antidote to them.  Therefore one needs to ma nifest the 
meaning clear light again. When one generates the uninterrupted path which is the direct antidote to the obstructions to omniscience , one achieves the learner's  or the realisational 
union.  
 When the uninterrupted path that is the direct antidote to obstructions to omniscience is generated, the obstructions to omniscience will be removed. Upon removal of the obstructions to omniscience, one will achieve the state of abandonment of the obstructions to omniscience which is enlightenment and one bec omes a buddha.  
 
If you can memorise what we have discussed here and are clear about (the process), it will be 
easy for you when we approach it from the top -down manner. The reason why I have 
explained to you from the bottom -up is because I thought that when I explain it top- down, you 
will not be confused. But this doesn't seem to be the case.  
 Geshe -la: I am not including so much detail as I don’t want people to get confused. Even within 
the first isolation, physical isolation, there are so many details. F or now, just understand how 
the path moves (from level to level).  
 The obtainment of the pure illusory body must precede the meaning clear light because the pure illusory body is derived from its perpetuating/ substantial  cause (nyer len ), the very subtle 
fundamental wind (gnyug rlung) that is the mount for the (mind of) actual  clear light.  
 The obtainment of the actual  clear light must be preceded by either amassing the (two) 
accumulations for three countless aeons or the illusory body o f the third stage as its equivalent. 
That is because it is impossible (mi rung) to manifest the actual [meaning]clear light that has the potency to quickly exhaust the very subtle obscurations (sgrib pa) that other paths do not have the potency to abandon when not preceded by either of these two . (Pg. 28 of the root 
text)   
 (Interpreter ’s correction and clarification: “ The obtainment of the pure illusory body must 
precede the meaning clear light ” should read as “ The obtainment of the pure illusory body must  
be preceded by the meaning clear light.”  “Actual clear light”  refers to the meaning clear light.)  
 Our earlier explanation of the six levels of the completion stage is from the perspective of 
 
Lesson  31          Page 211 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
someone who is definitely of the Highest Yoga Tantric lineage,  i.e., a practitioner who enters 
the Highest Yoga Tantric path right from the beginning. Specifically, (the explanation) is from 
the perspective of the practitioner of Guhyasamaja in accordance with the tradition of Arya Nagarjuna.  
 “The obtainment of the  meaning clear light must be preceded by either amassing the 
accumulations for three countless aeons or the illusory body of the third stage as its equivalent”: 
This means that the obtainment of the meaning clear light is not necessarily preceded by the 
impure illusory body.  
 
For example, Shakyamuni Buddha practised all the way up to the tenth ground but he was not on the path of Highest Yoga Tantra. He entered the path of Highest Yoga Tantra when he was on the tenth ground. He entered from the level of me aning clear light which means that 
realisation was not  preceded by the achievement of the impure illusory body.   The point is how does one achieve the meaning clear light? What must precede it? In order to achieve the meaning clear light, one must either have amassed the collection of method or 
wisdom (the two accumulations) over a period of three great countless eons or one must already have achieved the impure illusory body which can act as the substitute for those two collections.  
 
The reason is given  next: “That is because it is impossible (mi rung) to manifest the actual clear 
light that has the potency to quickly exhaust the very subtle obscurations (sgrib pa) that other 
paths do not have the potency to abandon when not preceded by either of these t wo.”  “These 
two”  means either the two collections or the impure illusory body.  
 
The obtainment of the illusory body of the third stage must be preceded by actual mental isolation (sems dben dngos) or an equivalent (dod thub) completion stage (practice) bec ause if 
it is not preceded by the dissolution of all karmic winds in the indestructible (drop) at the heart by the strength of meditation in accordance with the stages of death, obtainment of the illusory body exactly in accordance with (ji ma ji bzhin) the intermediate state is not possible (mi rung). (pg. 28 of the root text)  
 Is the obtainment of the impure illusory body necessarily preceded by the actual mental isolation? “ The obtainment of the illusory body of the third stage must be preceded by actual 
mental isolation  or an equivalent completion stage practice”  means that the obtainment of the 
illusory body of the third stage need not necessarily  be preceded by actual mental isolation. It 
can be preceded by some other equivalent completion stage practice.   
 For example, in the mother Tantras, different terminologies are used. In place of verbal isolation which is essentially the practice of vajra recitation, in the mother Tantras, there is the 
(practice of) tumo yoga. Based on this yoga , there are different ways to induce the four joys 
and so forth, causing the winds to enter into the heart level of the central channel. Those practices in the mothe r Tantras are methods to actualise the impure illusory body.  
 The obtainment of actual mental isolation or an equivalent (dod thub) completion stage 
 
Lesson  31          Page 212 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
(practice) must be preceded by either the branch of life -force exertion imputed by the name 
Vajra recitatio n verbal isolation’ (ngag dben rdo rje bzlas pa) or an equivalent (dod thub) 
completion stage (practice) because it is impossible (mi rung) to generate actual mental 
isolation or an equivalent (dod thub) completion stage (practice) without completely releasing 
(grol) the channel knots (rtsa mdud) of the heart by such a completion stage (practice).  
 To completely loosen ( grol) the channel knots at the heart in easy stages (bla rim) through such 
a yoga, it must be preceded by actual physical isolation or a co mpletion stage (practice) similar 
in type because it is more difficult to loosen the channel knot at the heart than the other channel knots and it is easier to gather (sdud) the winds in other places than to gather them at 
the heart.  
 To fully generate suc h a completion stage (practice) in one’s continuum, it must be preceded 
by meditation in four sessions on the gross and subtle generation stage which definitely matures the continuum for the generation of the full comprehension of the completion stage. And one must obtain the complete pure empowerment and properly protect the commitments 
(samaya) and vows.  
To fulfil the definition of being a vessel protecting the commitments and vows one must train in the stages of the common path of the practices (spyod pa’i lam) of the two bodhichittas and (their) branches. Since practices (spyod) which extract the benefit (bogs ldon) are represented 
(mtshon nas ston) by external life exertion (srog rtsol), such (practices) are definite in number 
for all the paths and they are also definite in (their) order. That exhausts their presentation (go 
bar zad). (Pgs. 28 –  29 of the root text)  
(Interpreter ’s correction: “ Since practices which extract the benefit…” sh ould read as  “Since the 
enhancing conducts ... ………”)  
 You must know (the following):  
• What are the five completion stages  
• The illusory bodies: The impure illusory body and the pure illusory body.  
o Why is one called impure and the other pure illusory body? The impure illusory 
body is so called because it is not purified of the afflictive obstructions and the pure illusory body is so called from the perspective of being purified of those obstructions.   
• What kind of clear lights are there and what differentiates them? There are mainly two:  
o The example clear light is a conceptual consciousness. It realises emptiness conceptually, but it doesn't realise emptiness directly.  
o The meaning clear light is a direct perceiver which directly perceives emptiness.  
• The learner's union is also divided into two:    
o The abandonment union which is a union of abandonment and the pure illusory body  
o The realisational union which is a union of realisation and the pure illuso ry body  
• The difference between mother and father Tantras:  
o Mother Tantras are those Tantras that clearly emphasise the clear light  
o Father Tantras are those Tantra that clearly emphasise the illusory body  
  
 
Lesson  31          Page 213 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
The obtainment of  Must be preceded by  Reason  
1. The non -learner’s union  Learner’s union combining 
both the meaning clear 
light and pure illusory 
body  The pure illusory body must precede it (i.e., 
learner’s union) because if the pure illusory 
body does not precede it, it is not possible to 
obtain such a union. (However) the pure 
illusory body does not need to precede the 
obtainment of mere union because the pure 
illusory body and ordinary union must be 
obtained simultaneously.  
2. The pure illusory body  
 
  The meaning clear light  Because the pure illusory body is derived from 
its substantial cause,   the very subtle 
fundamental wind that is the mount for the 
mind of meaning clear light.  
3. The meaning clear light  
 Either amassing the two 
accumulations for three countless aeons or the illusory body  of the third 
stage as its equivalent.  Because it is impossible to manifest the 
meaning clear light that has the potency to quickly exhaust the very subtle obscurations that other paths do not have the potency to abandon when not preceded by either of the se 
two.  
4. The illusory body of the 
third stage  
 Actual mental isolation or 
an equivalent completion stage practice  Because if it is not preceded by the dissolution 
of all karmic winds in the indestructible drop at the heart by the strength of meditation  in 
accordance with the stages of death, obtainment of the illusory body exactly in accordance with the intermediate state is not 
possible.  
5. Actual mental isolation or 
an equivalent  completion 
stage practice  
 Either the branch of life -
force exertion imputed by the name Vajra recitation verbal isolation’ or an equivalent completion 
stage practice.  Because it is impossible to generate actual 
mental isolation or an equivalent completion stage practice without completely releasing the channel knots  of the heart by such a 
completion stage practice.  
     Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  31          Page 214 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 32   DATE: 28TH JULY 2009   
 We will spend five minutes in silence to reflect on what we have studied so far particularly on the six levels of the completion stage: physical , verbal and  mental isolations, illusory body, 
clear light and union. In the next five minute, see whether you can come out with the reasons as to:  
• why the clear light must precede the attainment of union,  
• why the illusory body must precede the attainment  of clear light,  
• why the mental isolation must precede the attainment of illusory body and so forth, 
working backwards to physical isolation.  
 
*****************************  
We have been talking about the six levels of the completion stage. We have also ta lked a lot 
about the five completion stages. The meaning is the same. When we talk about the five 
completion stages, then instead of starting with physical isolation, we start with verbal isolation which will include physical isolation. When we condense th is further into four 
completion stages, then we start with mental isolation which subsumes physical and verbal isolations. These are the different ways of classifying the completion stage.   When we posit the five profound paths from the perspective of Guhyasamaja, we have five stages:  
1. the stage of mantra generation,  
2. the stage of mental isolation,  
3. the stage of illusory body,  
4. the stage of clear light and  
5. the stage of union.  
These stages are posited from the perspective of the entire path including the generation stage. (It does not mean that each stage) is directly related to one of the five paths.   
• The stage of mantra generation is the generation stage.  
• On page 28 of the ro ot text, “ the illusory body of the third stage ” is referring to the  third 
stage of illusory body amongst the five stages. When we refer to the illusory body, it does 
not necessarily mean the impure illusory body as it can also refer to the pure illusory bo dy. 
But when we say the illusory body  of the third stage, then that necessarily means the 
impure illusory body.  
• Likewise, the reference to the “meaning clear light of the fourth stage ,” refers to the fourth 
stage of clear light of these five stages. It do es not refer to all clear lights but to the 
meaning clear light that is the direct antidote to the obstructions to liberation.   
 There are six preparatory branches:  
1. Individual withdrawal  
2. Meditative stabilisation  
3. Lengthening vitality  
4. Retention  
5. Subsequent m indfulness  
 
Lesson  32          Page 215 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
6. Concentration  
 
• Individual withdrawal and meditative stabilisation are included in  physical isolation.  
• Lengthening vitality is included in verbal isolation.  
• Retention is included in clear light  
• Subsequent mindfulness and concentration are included in union.  
 
Try to memorise these various classifications in order to get some rough idea of them.  
 Regarding this one says: It follows that it is pervasive that the learner’s union combining both the clear light and the illusory body is obtained before the obtainment of non -learner’s union, 
because just that is pervasive for obtaining the non -learner’s union explained in the general 
highest (yoga tantras).  
 Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion but the  reason is easily (established). (Also your 
assertion
38) is unacceptable because it is said that obtainment of the non- learner’s union of the 
Kalachakra system must be preceded by the branch of concentration combining both the body 
of empty form (stong gzugs kyi sku) and the immutable great bliss (mi ‘gyur ba!i bde chen) but 
it is not said that it must be preceded by the union combining both the clear light and the illusory body.  
 However, this is formulated as a basis for examination for those with analytical (wisdom), it is not to be taken as a final conclusion (mtha’ gcig tu).(Pg. 29 of the root text)   According to the Guhyasamaja system, there is a union of no -more learning that must be 
preceded by the union of learning, which is basically the union of the meaning clear light and the pure illusory body. But if one was asked, “In general, is the achievement of the union of no -
more learning necessarily preceded by the union of the meaning clear light and the pure 
illusory body?” The answer is, “No.”  
 Gener ally speaking, the achievement of the union of no -more learning is not necessarily  
preceded by the union of the meaning clear light and the pure illusory body. For example, according to the Kalachakra Tantra, in order to achieve the union of no -more learni ng one does 
not have to achieve the union of the meaning clear light and the pure illusory body. According to that  system, the union of no -more learning is preceded by the achievement of the 
concentration of the empty body and immutable bliss.  
 Again, one  says: It would follow in consequence that it would be pervasive that the obtainment 
of the ultimate clear light (don gyi ‘od gsal) must be preceded by the obtainment of the impure illusory body because the Illuminating Lamp states:  
 
The illusory body must be generated prior to the basis of perceptual entry to clear light.  
38 The assertion is the subject plus the predicate: (Take as subject) the learner's union combining both the clear 
light and the illusory body. It follows it is obtained before the obtainment of non -learner's union.  
 
 
Lesson  32          Page 216 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion because that is explained as the mode of progression 
on the paths of one of definite lineage of highest (yoga tantra). (Also your assertion) is unacc eptable because that being (possessing) the same continuum as the Teacher who had 
just obtained (thob ma thag) the meaning clear light, did not previously establish the impure illusory body because the Illuminating Lamp states:  
 
Bestowing the last two empo werments
39 without having previously bestowed the vase 
and the secret empowerment, and generating the last two stages without having 
previously generated (the stages) prior to and including the third stage illusory body, 
should be understood as special case s (dmigs bsal)...(Pgs. 29 –  30 of the root text)  
 
From the perspective of the Guhyasamaja Tantra, when we are talking about a person who 
enters the Tantric path from the beginning, this practitioner (does so) on the basis of having 
obtained a pure initiation and training in the coarse and subtle generation stages. After that, he 
progresses on the completion stages from the physical, verbal and mental isolations, illusory 
body, clear light up to union. This is a step -by-step process.  
 
But, in general, must the achievement of the meaning clear light necessarily  be preceded by 
the attainment of the illusory body of the third level? The answer is, “No” because Guru 
Shakyamuni Buddha, through practising the Paramitayana path, progressed all the way up to  
the tenth ground. On the tenth ground, he entered the Tantric path at the level of the meaning 
clear light. He did not achieve the illusory body of the third level prior to entering that level.  
 
In general, one must receive the four complete empowerments: vase, secret, knowledge and word initiations. But Buddha was a special case. He did not have to receive the vase and secret initiations and started off with receiving the knowledge and word initiations.  
 Again, one says: It follows that it is pervasive that in order to attain the impure illusory body, one must have previously established mental isolation (sems dben) because the Illuminating 
Lamp states:  
 
The wind and mind which are the basis for  establishing any such illusory body...  
 And:  
 
Since that generating the three (types) of primordial awareness of mental isolation are the mind and the wind as its mount, mental isolation must proceed the illusory body.  
 
Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion because stating that mental isolation must precede the illusory body, and that vajra recitation verbal isolation must precede mental isolation is from the perspective of the mode of progress on the path of a disciple for whom the Guhyasamaja (tantra) was given. But that is not certain for the mode of progress of disciples of mother tantra because the (Illuminating Lamp) states:  
39 The last two empowerment: refers to wisdom and word empowerments.  
 
 
Lesson  32          Page 217 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
The substitute for inducing mental isolation by the wind of vajra recitation is the yoga of 
candali (gtum mo). The substitute for mental isolation are the four joys (bga’ba bzhi), including great bliss (bde ba) derived from the winds entering and dissolving in the central channel dependent on meditating on tummo. Those two are derived from the 
tantra of the yogini. (Pg. 30 of the root text)   
When we talk about the achievement of the illusory body in general, must that necessarily be 
preceded by the verbal and mental isolations? It is not necessarily so. The practitioner of mother Tantra achieves the illusory body (through the prac tice of) tumo yoga. The yoga of 
inducing the four joys follows that. The tumo yoga is a substitute for verbal isolation. The four joys induced by the tumo yoga is the substitute for mental isolation.  
  
Therefore in the presentation of the grounds and paths of Yangchen Galo (dbyangs can dga’ blo) he states that other paths of tantra are subsumed (‘dus) in the five stages of Guhyasamaja 
(‘dus) by their nature, but they are not subsumed by means of actually being (those stages). 
They must be subsumed by being compatible in function (byed las mthun pa) . 
 2.1.3.1.2.1.2.2   THE MEANING OF EACH  
When we classify the completion stage of the superior sys tem (of Guhyasamaja), there are said 
to be) six (levels): (1) physical isolation, (2) verbal isolation, (3) mental isolation, (4) illusory 
body, (5) clear light, and (6) union. There are also said to be five and four levels and four 
branches of preparation  (sbyor ba’i yan lag). It is said that there is no contradiction since these 
(differences in number) are due to (different ways of) classification (dbye bsdu).  
In explaining a little of the meaning of each, there are two:  
1 The concentration of three isola tions  
2 The concentration of two isolations ( Pg. 30 of the root text )  
 (Interpreter ’s correction: “ The concentration of two isolations” should be amended to “ The 
concentration of the two truths .”) 
 The “two truths” are the conventional truth and the ultimate truth. In this context, the conventional truth refers to the illusory body and the ultimate truth refers to the clear light.  
 2.1.3.1.2.1.2.2.1  THE CONCENTRATIONS OF THREE ISOLATIONS  
 has three  (subdivisions):  
1 The concentration of the vajra body: (ordinary) physical isolation (lus dben sku rdo rje’i ting nge ‘dzin)  
2 The concentration of the vajra speech: (ordinary) verbal isolation (ngag dbengsung rdo rje’i ting nge ‘dzin)  
3 The concentration  of the vajra mind: (ordinary) mental isolation (sems dben thugs rdo 
rje’i ting nge ‘dzin)  
 
 
Lesson  32          Page 218 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
2.1.3.1.2.1.2.2.1.1  THE CONCENTRATION OF  THE VAJRA BODY: (ORD INARY) PHYSICAL 
ISOLATION  
 
The completion stage (practice) generated by a yogi who has consummated the  subtle and 
gross generation stages of this system, from (that yogi) generating the primordial awareness of the empties (ston pa’i ye she) derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in 
the central channel by meditating on the subtle (drop)  in the lower opening (of the central 
channel), up to but not including the generation of the primordial awareness that arises through dissolving of the upper and lower winds in the central channel at the heart is the nature of completion stage physical is olation. ( Pg. 31 of the root text)  
 If one were to ask, “What is physical isolation of the completion stage?” that is the definition. This paragraph talks about a yogi who meditates on the subtle in the lower opening of the central channel. Depending on the tantric system (that is being practised), there are different places where one can focus on to cause the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. In Tibetan, it literally means “to strike at the different vital points of the body.”  
 
• According to the Arya tradition of Guhyasamaja, one meditates on the subtle in the lower 
opening of the central channel to cause the winds to enter into the central channel.  
• According to the Luipa tradition of Heruka Chakrasamvara, one strikes at the vital point of 
the navel to cause the winds to initially enter into the central channel.  
• According to the Ganapada tradition of Heruka Chakrasamvara, one strikes at the vital 
point of the heart to cause the winds to initially enter into the central channel.  
• In Kalachakra, one strikes at the vital points at the upper and lower openings of the central 
channel to cause the winds to gather and then enter into the central channel.  
 
You need to know that according to the Arya tradition of Guhyasamaja, one strikes at the vital 
point at the lower opening of the central channel to cause the winds to initially enter into the central channel. Geshe -la thinks what he is saying now may contradict what he had said earlier 
when he gave the rough overview of the completion sta ge.  
 
This yogi by meditating on the subtle in the lower opening of the central channel generates the 
wisdom (primordial awareness) of the empties derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. (In the Tibetan text, there is no mention of drop. It just says 
“subtle .”)  
 There are four such wisdoms:  
1. appearance (or empty)  
2. increase (or very or extremely empty)  
3. near- attainment (or great empty)  
4. clear light (or all empty)  
 When does physical isolation start? It starts whe n the wisdom of the empties are generated 
from the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel up to but not  including 
the generation of the wisdom that arises through dissolving of the upper and lower winds in 
the central channel at the heart.  
 
Lesson  32          Page 219 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Question: When the four empties are generated, is this clear light (i.e. the fourth empty) the same as the clear light of death?  
Answer:  Although it is clear light, it is similar to but not the clear light of death.  
 There are eight signs of disso lution when the different elements of the body dissolve one after 
another. These eight signs start from the vision of the mirage up to the clear light (of death). 
There are the eight actual signs of dissolution and there are eight signs which are similar t o the 
eight actual signs of dissolution. These similar signs of dissolution appear on different occasions, for example, during the time of sleep when the coarser levels of consciousnesses dissolve. They also arise during sexual union between a man and woman and when one faints.  
 At the time of the basis, the eight actual signs of dissolution only occur at the time of death. At the time of the path, these eight actual signs of dissolution occur at the level of mental isolation.
4 
 During the completion stage of physical isolation, the wisdoms of the four empties arise but they are not the actual empties but something similar to the actual ones. Something that is similar to the example clear light also occurs at the completion stages  of physical, verbal and 
mental isolations.  
 
The wisdoms of the four empties do not occur naturally during physical, verbal isolation and 
mental isolations but they occur through the force of meditation. It is through familiarity that one comes after the other. (This is) unlike the four empties that arise naturally during sleep and not through the force of meditation.  
 Question:  Are the four empties of the basis and the four empties of the path the same?  
Answer : They are the same.  
 Question: How can it be  called “mixing of mother and son clear lights” when the mother clear 
light no longer manifests when the son clear light manifests?  
Answer: When we say the mother and son clear lights mix, this means that instead of allowing 
the most subtle mind of clear light to arise as it is in its natural state, one transforms that mind into the entity of the path.  
 
Geshe -la: The Swee Kim (name of student) who is a teenager and Swee Kim who is an uncle are 
mixed together. Swee Kim has many different parts; young, old, uncle, teenager…They are 
mixed with one another, isn’t it? When the teenager Swee Kim is no longer there any more, only 
uncle Swee Kim remains. The mother clear light and son clear light are something like that. It is a continuum of the mind but we don’t r eally label the changes but the continuum is the same.  
 Question: Is the emptiness of the mother clear light the basis for the truth body ? 
Answer : The most subtle wind and mind continue up to enlightenment. When you look at them 
from the perspective of a c ontinuum, the most subtle wind and mind are the cause of the two 
bodies. But the substantial cause is the meaning clear light and the pure illusory body. It is the 
 
Lesson  32          Page 220 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
same as meditating on bodhicitta or impermanence, doing prayers and prostrations. They are 
the causes for enlightenment. Here, we are looking at the direct cause.  
 
• You have to remember the stages of the profound paths. In the text, when you see the 
words, “ the illusory body of the third level”  and the “ meaning clear light of the fourth level,”  
you need to understand what they are referring to. That is why I talked about the stages of 
the profound paths.  
• You should be able to list the six preparatory branches.  
• You should know what physical isolation is and understand its definition and entity.  
     Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  32          Page 221 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 33   DATE: 30TH JULY 2009   
 We will spend the next five minutes to adjust our motivation for participating  in this session.  
 All of us have received teachings from the Lam Rim , the stages of the path to enlightenment. 
We are advised there that whenever we listen to the teachings of the Buddha, we should to do 
so by abandoning the three faults of the vessel and cultivating the six recognitions or attitudes. 
We know what these ar e but the point is to see whether we can actually put them into practice 
whenever we listen to the teachings.  
 Do we actually listen by abandoning the three faults of the vessel? Do we actually cultivate those six attitudes? This is something we should check up for ourselves.  
 
When, prior to listening to the teachings, one has abandoned the three faults of the vessel and 
cultivated the six attitudes, it is definite that imprints will be placed on one’s mental continuum. (With this preparation), one’s mind will become closer to the Dharma and one also develops 
the affinity with the instructor. One will develop the mind that seeks the Dharma and be able to generate the thought, “The Dharma is really a wonderful thing.” It is extremely important to always list en to the teachings by abandoning the three faults of the vessel and cultivating the 
six attitudes, making sure these are always done. Why? Because when one listens to the 
teachings correctly:  
• firstly, one will place many imprints that arise from hearing i n one’s  mental continuum;  
• secondly, one will develop interest and desire in seeking the Dharma and  
• thirdly, one will develop the mind of delight and generate affinity with the instructor.  
 
When we don’t listen to the teachings with these attitudes, I think it is difficult for these three things to happen. In the end, who profits from listening to the teachings with these helpful attitudes and through abandoning those faults? None other than ourselves, no one else. We usually consider the I or self to be very important, therefore, it is important that the I  profits. In order for that to happen, this is how we must think when we listen to the teachings.  
 Impromptu Quiz:  
1) What is the definition of physical isolation in the completion stage? If possible, you should write the definition as it is found in the text.  
2) What are the six preparatory branches?  
 If you know the answers, that is very good. But if you don’t, when you go home, make sure you know the answers so that if you were asked the same questions again the next time, you should have the confidence to be able to produce the correct answers.  
 
**************************************  
 There are six preparatory branches:  
7. Individual withdrawal  
 
Lesson  33          Page 222 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
8. Meditative stabilisation  
9. Life force exertion (In this context,  it is translated as lengthening vitality)  
10. Retention  
11. Subsequent mindfulness  
12. Concentration  
• Individual withdrawal and meditative stabilisation are included in physical isolation.  
• Lengthening vitality is included in verbal isolation.  
• Retention is included i n clear light  
• Subsequent mindfulness and concentration are included in union.  
 
Memorise this and if you can, think about why they are related to (these specific levels of the completion stage). The reasons will come later.  
 If classified there are two:  
1 Individual withdrawal (sor sdud) in post equipoise (rjes thob) where all phenomena 
such as objects, (sense) powers, etc., appear as the manifestation (rnam ‘gyur) of bliss and emptiness ( bdestong gyi rtam ‘rgyud)  
2 Absorption where the deities appear as the manifestation (rnam ‘gyur) of bliss and emptiness. (Pg. 31 of the root text)  
 
In brief, the complete stage of physical isolation is divided into two:  
1) Individual withdrawal  
2) Meditative stabilisation  
 
2.1.3.1.2.1.2.2.1.1.1  INDIVIDUAL WITHDRAWA L IN POST EQUIPOISE WHERE ALL 
PHENOMENA APPEAR AS THE MANIFESTATION OF  BLISS AND EMPTINESS  
 The reason why all appearance is sealed (rgyas btab) by the bliss and emptiness of equipoise is because when one has completed the analysis of view, one knows that emptiness is the essence of that subject which is the empty basis (stong gzhi) and the subject is the manifestation (rnam ‘gyur) of that emptines s. This is common in sutra and tantra.  
 In this context, just as subjects are (posited as) the manifestation (rnam ‘gyur) of emptiness through the point of being resolute (mos) in them being the single taste of bliss and emptiness, 
they are posited also as  the manifestation (rnam (gyur) of bliss by the power of that resolution 
(mos). That is because in taking them as the path of great bliss, it is indispensable they function 
to assist (grogs) to ignite (‘ bar) as bliss all that appears, through the power of familiarity with 
that. (Pg. 31 of the root text) 
 (Interpreter ’s clarification: “ The empty basis ” can be understood as the “basis of emptiness.”)  
 Individual withdrawal  is posited in the context of post- meditative equipoise.  
 
• Meditating on the subtle at the lower opening of the central channel causes one of the 
winds called the downward voiding wind (also translated as “downward dispelling wind”) to 
 
Lesson  33          Page 223 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
reverse, i.e., change direction and move upwards.  
• The reversal of the downward voiding wind causes the tumo  at the navel to ignite.  
• The blazing of the tumo causes the bodhicitta at the crown to melt and drip and gradually 
the four joys are generated.  
• The melting and flowing down of the white bodhicitta in the central channel act as the conditions for one’s mind to be transformed into the entity of bliss. One then uses that bliss to ascertain emptiness.  
• One enters into meditative equipoise on this non- dual wisdom of bliss and emptiness. At 
this time, it is not a fully qualified non -dual wisdom of bliss and emptiness but nevertheless 
one enters into meditative equipoise on this wisdom.  
This is the main practice of the completion stage. When we say, “To take desire into the path”, 
from one point of view, this is what it means, i.e., first one generates the bliss arising from the 
melting of the bodhicitta and one uses that bliss to realise emptiness.  
 
When one arises from that meditative equipoise on the non-dual wisdom of bliss and 
emptiness, the sense powers start to manifest followed by the manifestation of the sense consciousnesses. When the sense consciousnesses manifest, one perceives the objects of those 
sense consciousnesses -  form, sound, smell, t aste and touch.  
 
In post -meditative equipoise, one remembers that non- dual bliss and emptiness that was 
experienced during meditative equipoise . Then, one trains to see all those sense objects as the 
manifestation of emptiness. That emptiness is taken as the object of the mind of bliss. In short, 
in post -meditative equipoise, one sees everything in the nature of emptiness and trains to see 
that emptiness as the display (or sport) of bliss.  
  
During meditative equipoise, one generates the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. In the post-meditative equipoise, one trains to see everything that appears to one’s sense consciousnesses as the manifestation of bliss and emptiness such that whatever one sees assist in the generation of the wisdom of great bliss. This practice in post -meditative equipoise of seeing 
everything that appears as the manifestation of bliss and emptiness is something that ignites the wisdom of great bliss. That is called individual withdrawal.  
 Question:  Where does the downward dispelling wind e nter the central channel? Does it enter 
from the bottom or does it enter from the navel chakra?  
Answer : It enters from the bottom (i.e., lower opening).  
 What do we mean when we say individual withdrawal of the physical isolation? You must not forget what comes before (individual withdrawal):  
• Through meditating on the subtle at the lower opening of the central channel, that causes 
the downward dispelling w ind to reverse (i.e., go up) and causes the tumo to blaze.  
• The blazing of the tumo melts the bodhicitta at the crown and through melting and 
dripping of that bodhichitta one develops the wisdom of great bliss.  
• One then uses the wisdom of great bliss to a scertain emptiness in meditative equipoise.  
• When one arises from meditative equipoise, all the sense consciousnesses will start to 
function again. Objects will appear to those consciousnesses again and whatever appear -  form, 
 
Lesson  33          Page 224 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
sound, smell, taste and touch  - one trains by remembering one’s experience in meditative 
equipoise.  
• By remembering that experience, in post -meditative equipoise, whatever appears, one 
trains to see it as the manifestation of bliss and emptiness. By training in such a way, it doesn’t 
matter what appears to your sense consciousnesses. Everything that appea rs assist in the 
blazing of the wisdom of great bliss. That is the individual withdrawal.  
 Question: What is the meaning of “withdrawal” in “individual withdrawal”? Does it mean withdrawing the sense consciousnesses from ordinary appearance?  
Answer : Indiv idual withdrawal is a practice of seeing everything in post - meditative equipoise 
as the manifestation of emptiness and bliss. Although one ascertains the emptiness of form, sound, smell, taste and touch, what essentially appears to oneself is still the or dinary form (of 
these objects).     
 Question: The uncommon objects of abandonment of the generation stage are ordinary appearance and ordinary grasping. So if one is already on the completion stage, one has already consummated the generation stage. That b eing the case, won’t one have already 
overcome those two abandonments?  
Answer : The ordinary appearance and ordinary grasping are also the objects of abandonment 
of the completion stage. In Tantra, ordinary appearance is the knowledge obstruction and ordina ry concept is the afflictive obstruction. That being the case, obviously one has not yet 
abandoned ordinary appearance.  
 In post -meditative equipoise, one trains in whatever appearing to oneself as the manifestation 
of emptiness. That emptiness is taken as  the object by the wisdom of great bliss. In short, 
individual withdrawal trains one to take everything that appears to oneself as an assisting factor in the generation of the wisdom of great bliss.  
 The reason why all appearance is sealed (rgyas btab) by the bliss and emptiness of equipoise is 
because when one has completed the analysis of view, one knows that emptiness is the essence of that subject which is the empty basis (stong gzhi) and the subject is the 
manifestation (rnam ‘gyur) of that emptiness. This is common in sutra and tantra. (Pg. 31 of the 
root text)  
 
(Interpreter ’s correction: “The reason why all appearance is sealed (rgyas btab) by the bliss and 
emptiness of equipoise ” should read as “ The reason why all appearance is sealed (rgyas btab) 
by the bliss and emptiness of equipoise through remembering that is because….”   The words, 
“through remembering that ,” which appears in the Tibetan text are missing from the 
translation in the root text. The “subject” here can be taken to mean “object” and is not referring to the consciousness).  
 When one has completed the analysis of view, simply thinking about  dependent origination, one realises everything is empty. Just by thinking about emptiness, one immediately understands dependent origination. The analysis of view is completed when both the understanding of dependent origination and emptiness complement one another.  
 
 
Lesson  33          Page 225 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
In this context, just as subjects are (posited as) the manifestation (rnam ‘gyur ) of emptiness 
through the point of being resolute (mos) in them being the single taste of bliss and emptiness, 
they are posited also as the manifestation (rnam (gyur) of bliss by the power of that resolution 
(mos). That is because in taking them as the pa th of great bliss, it is indispensable they function 
to assist (grogs) to ignite (‘ bar) as bliss all that appears, through the power of familiarity with 
that. (Pg. 31 of the root text) 
 
(Interpreter ’s clarification: “Resolute” or “resolution” can be unders tood as “believed” or 
“belief.”)   
 
Here, it is just a belief, not a reality that emptiness and bliss have become of a single taste. That bliss arises from the melting of the bodhicitta. This wisdom of great bliss takes emptiness as its object and realises  emptiness. This wisdom of great bliss and emptiness are not a single taste 
yet. It is only a belief that these two are of a single taste because we are still on the path of preparation.  
 When we say bliss and emptiness are of a single taste, it is like po uring  water into water which 
is completely of one taste. As I have mentioned earlier, it is only when one has achieved the meaning clear light that one achieves a fully qualified non -dual bliss and emptiness which is of 
a single taste.  Here, at (the leve l of) physical isolation on the completion stage, one is still on 
the Highest Yoga Tantra’s path of preparation. So that bliss and emptiness being of a single 
taste is only at the level of belief.  
 
In the Perfection vehicle’s path of preparation, when one enters into meditative equipoise on 
emptiness, one realises emptiness. On that path of preparation, the duality of subject and object has not subsided. That duality of subject and object only subsides when one realises emptiness directly.  
 In meditative equipoise, although the wisdom of great bliss and emptiness has not yet become a single taste, we believe that to be so. When one is in post -meditative equipoise, one trains to 
see everything that appears as the manifestation of that wisdom of great bliss and emptiness. That is individual withdrawal.   Meditative stabilisation  refers to the training to see this wisdom of great bliss and emptiness 
arising as deities.  
 During individual withdrawal at post -meditative equipoise, one sees whatever that appears to 
be the manifestation of bliss and emptiness. But, during  meditative stabilisation, one trains by causing that bliss and emptiness to arise as deities. These deities that are generated are the manifestation of the wisdom of great bliss and emptiness.  
 In summary:  
• Individual withdrawal is the yoga that utilises whatever appears to the sense consciousnesses as the means to ignite the wisdom of great bliss. Individual withdrawal is the practice during the post -meditative session.  
• Meditative stabilisation is a  meditation that visualises whatever that appears in the 
 
Lesson  33          Page 226 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
aspects of the five buddha lineages. This practice happens while one is in meditative 
equipoise.  
 For our purposes, it is sufficient for you to have a rough idea of what individual withdrawal and meditative stabilisation are. For now, we do not need to know the details of these two. With 
this (commentary) as the basis, go back and reread the text and see what I have explained is what the text is saying.  
 
Question:  Can I say that the meditative stabilisation at the generation stage where one 
develops divine pride and clear appearance of sentient beings as deities is done at the level of 
the mental consciousness whereas this meditative stabilisation at the completion  stage is done 
at the level of the sense consciousness?   
Ven. Gyurme : They are both done in meditative equipoise  
Question: If that is the case, what is the difference between the two?  
Answer:  The meditative stabilisation where all deities appear as the manifestation of bliss and 
emptiness is done with the mental consciousness. It is not (the same) meditation (as) when you see things appearing to your sense consciousnesses as deities.  
 Question:  Seeing sentient beings and the environment as deities - if thi s practice is common to 
both the generation and completion stages, what is the difference between these two?  
Answer:  The meditation of eliciting a clear appearance and then generating divine pride is 
common to both generation and completion stages. There i s a difference (between the two), 
because the exalted wisdom generated on the completion stage arises due to the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel whereas the visualisation done on the 
generation stage is just at the level of vi sualisation which did not happen due to the winds 
entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel.  
 There is physical isolation in the generation stage and there is physical isolation in the completion stage. But what we are talking here is the phy sical isolation of the completion stage 
which is divided into two divisions.  
1) Individual withdrawal in the post -meditative equipoise where all phenomena such as 
objects, sense powers, etc., appear as the manifestations  of bliss and emptiness.  
2) Meditative stabilisation where the deities appear as the manifestations of bliss and 
emptiness.  
Question:  What is the physical isolation on the generation stage?  
Answer:  It is the meditation of oneself as the deity during the generation stage.  
 We will try to complete the physical isolation in the completion stage in the next class.  
 2.1.3.1.2.1.2.2.1.1.2  ABSORPTION WHERE THE DEITIES APPEAR AS TH E MANIFESTATION  OF 
BLISS AND EMPTINESS  
 has five (types):  
1 The investigation (sgom pa’i rtog) meditating without detailed examination on 
the bodies of deities, the object aspects (gzungs rnam) of undifferentiable bliss and emptiness.  
 
Lesson  33          Page 227 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
2 The analysis meditating with detailed examination.  
3 The mental bliss (yid bde) concordant with the primordial awareness of 
undifferentiable bliss and emptiness  
4 The bliss of pliancy (shin sbyangs) concordant with that  
5 The concentration of single pointed mind (sems rtse gcig pa’i ting nge ‘dzin)  
From among those, the three: individual withdrawal, investigation and analysis are post 
equipoise physical isolation and the (following) three: joy40, bliss and concentration are 
equipoise physical isolation meditating on the ultimate deity. (Pgs. 31- 32 of the root text)  
 
From today’s class, you should understand that:  
• Physical isolation has two divisions: individual withdrawal and meditative stabilisation.  
• Meditative stabilisation has five divisions: investigation, analysis, joy, bliss and 
concentration  
 
Whatever we study here, all the definitions are according to the Arya Na garjuna’s tradition of 
Guhyasamaja.  
 The subject matter is not easy but we have to try without giving up. Even when you have no teeth, when you are hungry, you still have to chew with your gums!  
  
 
 
 
 
Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
40 Joy here refers to the mental bliss mentioned above.  
 
Lesson  33          Page 228 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 34   DATE: 4TH AUGUST 2009  
 
(Impromptu Quiz)  
1) Write down the six preparatory branches in the correct order.  
2) What do individual withdrawal and mental stabilisation refer to?  
3) How are the six completion stages condensed into the six preparatory branches?  
If you are able to answer these questions, that is good. But if you don’t know the answers, you should try to find out the answers when you go home. It is important you remember these 
points because they are the bases for discussion.  
 
In general, in whate ver one does, if one gives up or gets discouraged, then nothing can be 
accomplished. Likewise it is not beneficial to (allow oneself) to be discouraged with one’s 
studies. It is good if one’s interest in the Dharma (can be) like the desire of a thirsty per son for 
water. When one’s interest in the Dharma is that strong, it will benefit one’s studies and 
practice. When  one fervently seeks the teachings, one will definitely experience the taste of 
the Dharma and one will see the teaching and the teacher in a very positive light.  
 
Having such a fervent desire (for the Dharma) is important. The reason one is stuck is because of the lack of this real desire for the Dharma. Because one’s desire for the Dharma is not as strong as that of a thirsty person thirsting  for water,  one doesn’t really value the teachings. If 
one doesn’t value the teachings, then of course one doesn’t value the teacher. One doesn’t see the teachings and the teacher as something very special.  
 When one doesn’t have strong desire for the Dha rma, I think it is very difficult to have real faith 
in and respect towards the guru, the teacher. Real faith in the teacher first comes from valuing 
the Dharma and seeing its benefits and preciousness. Then naturally one will see the preciousness of the teacher. When one values the teacher, one’s practice of guru devotion will be good and one’s reliance on the virtuous friend will turn out well. Otherwise,  without this interest in the Dharma, one’s guru devotion or reliance on the spiritual master will no t turn out 
well.  
 
Faith in the guru does not refer to the kind of faith that arises in the mind because one likes the 
way the guru looks at one or the guru’s external appearance and behaviour. That kind of faith 
is like the mindset of a child. When one’s faith in the teacher is so shallow, then as soon as that 
teacher does something one doesn’t like –  showing one a black face or speaking harshly to one 
-  immediately, the faith is gone. Why? Because the faith originates from just that - a certain 
facial ex pression, a certain manner of  speaking. As soon as that changes, one’s faith changes 
and is lost. This is something one must really understand and one should not make such a   
mistake.  
 
In the first place, do you need the Dharma? If you need the Dharma, then you have to seek it 
out. If you really want the Dharma, then you need to rely on the teacher. When the teacher is 
able to guide and teach you, you will benefit and o f course, faith will arise in that (teacher) .  
 It is important to first have the mind  that seeks the teachings. (Once you have that mindset), 
 
Lesson  34          Page 229 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
then you should pursue your studies continuously without discouragement.  
 
Even when I look at and read this text, there are many things that I still don’t understand.  Are there things that I do understand? Yes, of course there are things that I understand. But there are also many things that I don’t understand. But, slowly, understanding will arise. It takes time.  
 
****************************  
 In the physical isolation of the completion stage:  
• One is able to cause the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel by 
meditating on the subtle at the lower opening of the central channel.  
• As the winds enter the central channel, the tumo at the navel is ignited.  
• Through the blazing of the t umo, the white bodhicitta at the crown starts to melt and drip.  
• The mind is transformed into the entity of bliss and one uses that bliss to ascertain emptiness by entering into meditative equipoise and focussing on that. This wisdom of great bliss ascertaining emptiness is the actual realisation  of the completion stage.  
• When one arises from that session, the sense consciousnesses manifest again and the 
objects of the sense consciousnesses appear:  form, sound, smell, taste and touch.  
• During the post -meditative session, one trains to view everything that appears as  the 
manifestation of emptiness. Whatever appears is empty (“empty” literally means great 
bliss). That emptiness is taken as the object by the wisdom of great bliss. The (purpose of doing so) is to generate the non -dual wisdom of great bliss and emptiness.   
• When that is done well, one trains in causing that non- dual wisdom of great bliss and 
emptiness to appear as deities.  
 In short, this practice of seeing everything that appears as the manifestation of emptiness during the post- meditative equipoise is called individual withdrawal. The practice of causing 
that wisdom of great bliss and emptiness to arise as deities is called meditative stabilisation.  
 
When we look at the etymology of individual withdrawal, “individual” refers to those objects 
that appear to the individual sense consciousnesses: form, sound, smell, taste and touch. “Withdrawal” is the training of withdrawing all that appears and condensing them into the 
entity of bliss and emptiness.  
 
Meditative stabilisation is the meditation on the five tathagatas.  
 Individual withdrawal and meditative stabilisation are the two divisions of physical isolation of the completion stage and are condensed into the completion stage level of physical isolation.  
 ABSORPTION WHERE THE DEITIES APPEAR AS THE MANIFE STATION OF BLISS AND EMPTINESS  
has five (types):  
1 The investigation (sgom pa’i rtog) meditating without detailed examination on 
the bodies of deities, the object aspects (gzungs rnam) of undifferentiable bliss and emptiness.  
2 The analysis meditating with  detailed examination.  
 
Lesson  34          Page 230 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
3 The mental bliss (yid bde) concordant with the primordial awareness of 
undifferentiable bliss and emptiness  
4 The bliss of pliancy (shin sbyangs) concordant with that  
5 The concentration of single pointed mind (sems rtse gcig pa’i ting nge ‘dzin)  
From among those, the three: individual withdrawal, investigation and analysis are post 
equipoise physical isolation and the (following) three: joy41, bliss and concentration are 
equipoise physical isolation meditating on the ultimate deity.  (Pgs. 31 –  32 of the root text )  
(Interpreter ’s suggestion: “ the object aspects (gzungs rnam) of undifferentiable  
bliss and emptiness” can be read as “ the apprehended aspects of  non-dual bliss and 
emptiness.” “C oncordant ” to be replaced by “concomitant.”)  
 
The classification of physical isolation is the physical isolation of:  
The 100 immaculate lineages  
The 5 lineages of those  
The 3 secret lineages  
The 1 extremely secret lineage  
 
The 100 immaculate lineages: One meditates on the twenty gross (phenomena): the five 
aggregates, the four elements, the six bases (of perception) such as the eye and so on and the 
five such as forms, sounds and so on, through classifying them in five components, and one 
meditates on the twenty deities: the five Tathagatas, the four consorts, the six Bodhisattvas 
such as Kshitagarba and so on, and the five such as Rupa Devi and so through classifying them 
in five lineages. ( Pg. 32 of the root text)   
 Between investigation and analysis, this physical isolation of the100 immaculate lineages is 
primarily analysis  which is a detailed meditation on the deities.  
 There are 20 bases of isolation. One classifies them into five components and meditates on 
them by classifying them into five lineages.  
 Investigation  does not meditate on the deities in such a detailed way. Investigation meditates 
by condensing everything into either five lineages or three secret lineages or one extremely secret lineage.  
• Analysis is the detailed examination of the deities and  
• Investigation is a less detailed examination of the deities.  
Therefore, the physical isolation of the 100 immaculate lineages is analysis while the remaining 
four lineages come under investigation.  
 When we lo ok at the physical isolation of the100 immaculate lineages, how does one 
meditate? The basis of the isolation is the 20 gross phenomena. Of those, there are five 
aggregates. Of those aggregates, for example, let’s take the aggregate of form (Vairochana). 
We can relate the aggregate of form to the five tathagata lineages:  
41 Joy here refers to the mental bliss mentioned above.  
 
Lesson  34          Page 231 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
1. Vairochana of Vairochana 
2. Akshobhya of Vairochana,  
3. Ratnasambhava of Vairochana,  
4. Amitabha of Vairochana and  
5. Amoghasiddhi of Vairochana  
 
This particular way of classification is according to Guhyasamaja but when  we look at the 
Arya’s tradition of Guhyasamaja, there are 32 deities in the mandala. When we multiply the 32 
deities by the five tathagata lineages, there should be 160 deities, bu t here there are only 100 
immaculate lineages. Why is that so? The reason is given in the following paragraph.  
 From among the thirty -two deities, the ten Wrathful Ones, Maitreya and Samantabhadra are 
not explained since they are not explicitly and clearly stated in the Root Tantra. In general there are thirty -two deities of physical isolation because the complete thirty -two deities are 
stated in the context of physical isolation explained secretly in the index [prologue of the root tantra] (gleng gzhi). T his should be understood from the commentary in the annotations 
(mchan).  (Pg. 32 of the root text )  
 (Ven Gyurme:  The Tibetan text reads, “ This way of explanation is from the perspective of not 
including the ten Wrathful Ones, Maitreya and Samantabhadra because they are not explicitly and clearly stated in the Root Tantra.)  
 According to the Arya tradition of Guhyasamaja, the 32 deities of Guhyasamaja are as follows:  
• Five Tathagatas: Akshobhya, Vairochana, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and Amoghasiddhi  
• Four mot hers: Lochana, Mamaki, Pandaravasin and Tara  
• Eight bodhisattvas: Ksitigarbha, Vajrapani, Khagarbha, Lokeshvara, Manjushri, Sarvanirvana 
Viskambini, Samantabhadra and Maitreya  
• Five vajra goddesses: Rupa Vajra, Shabda Vajra, Gandhe Vajra, Rasa Vajra and Sparsha Vajra  
• Ten wrathful ones: Yamantakrit, Prajnatakrit, Hayagriva , Vighnantakrit,  Achala, Takkiraja, Nilandanda, Mahabala, Ushnishachakravartin and Sumbharaja  
 
When we classify each of these 32 deities into the five tathagata lineages, there should be 16 0 
deities instead of 100. Why is it that only 100 immaculate lineages are mentioned here? This is because in the Root Tantra of Guhyasamaja, only 20 of the 32 deities are explicitly mentioned and the remainder 12 deities are not clearly stated. The 12 deities that are not explicitly mentioned are the ten w rathful ones, Maitreya and Samantabhadra. Since only 20 deities are 
explicitly mentioned in the Root Tantra of Guhyasamaja, therefore, there is only the classification of the 100 immaculate lineages.  
 The explanation is given in the text. What I have said is another way of presenting that 
explanation. (The main thing is) you (need to) know how to arrive at the 100 immaculate 
lineages instead of the actual 160 lineages and why only the 100 immaculate lineag es are 
mentioned.  
 
 
Lesson  34          Page 232 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
I think the 100 immaculate lineages are mainly a classification for analysis. Individual 
withdrawal is not meditation on deities possessing faces and hands and the three: joy, bliss and concentration do possess the ultimate aspect (of the deities). ( Pg. 32 of the root text )  
 Analysis here refers to the analysis from the classification of analysis and investigation and not to the general term, analysis.  
 
Investigation is resolution (mos) in the aspects of the five lineages or Vajradhara through 
condensing the bases of purification in five without applying the twenty gross components to 
each of the twenty deities. That is because Gyaltsab Je’s Notes on the Five Stages states:  
 
Investigation  is resolution in being the mere aspect of Vajradhara and detailed 
contemplation applying individual deities to each object and power is analysis. ( Pg. 32 
of the root text)  
 Meditative stabilisation of physical isolation has five divisions. Of these five,   we have analysis which is the detailed examination of the deities by classifying each of the 20 deities (that are explicitly mentioned in the Root Tantra of Guhyasamaja) into the five tathagata lineages 
resulting in 100 deities.  
 Investigation is (a les s) detailed examination of the deities. It basically condenses the 100 
immaculate lineages into five tathagata lineages and meditates on that. To substantiate this point, the author quotes from Gyaltsab Je’s Notes on the Five Stages . 
 
• The five tathagata li neages are essentially the purified aggregates.  
• When they are condensed (further), we arrive at the three secret lineages which are 
essentially the three deities that are the purified factors of body, speech and mind  
• When these three secret lineages are f urther condensed, we have one  extremely secret 
lineage which is basically Vajradhara, the purified factor of the mind.   
In short, all these lineages can be condensed into Vajradhara. One expands on the classification 
from Vajradhara into the three secret  lineages, to the five lineages and then up to the 100 
lineages.  
 When one condenses the 100 lineages into the five lineages, one meditates on whatever appears as the entity of the five tathagata lineages and this meditation serves to increase the non-dual  wisdom of bliss and emptiness.  
 By condensing (those five) into the three secret lineages, the meditation is on seeing whatever appears as the three secret lineages and this also serves to increase the non -dual wisdom of 
bliss and emptiness.  
 (When) one  sees whatever appears as having the entity of Vajradhara,  through this 
meditation, it also assists in the generation and increase of the non -dual wisdom of bliss and 
emptiness  
 In short, the physical isolation of the completion stage is divided into two:  
 
Lesson  34          Page 233 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• During individual withdrawal , one trains to see everything that appears in post -equipoise 
as the manifestation of emptiness.  
• In meditative stabilisation, one causes the non -dual wisdom of bliss and emptiness to arise 
as deities in the elaborate way and in  the condensed way.  
 
The etymology of (the term) ‘physical isolation’ exists because the physical basis of isolation is the twenty gross (objects) etc. The cause of isolation is generating the appearance and conception of oneself as ordinary (tha rnal pa’ i snang zhen). The meaning of isolation is 
meditating on those as being the aspect (rnam ‘gyur) of bliss and emptiness or as being deities. Thus, to be physical isolation it does not need (to conform to) that full etymology and if it (does conform) to the complete etymology of physical isolation it does not need to be physical 
isolation because from the verbal isolation onwards one meditates on everything that appears 
as being sealed by bliss and emptiness. (Pg. 34 of the root text)  
 
(Interpreter ’s clarification: “ The cause of isolation is generating the appearance and conception 
of oneself as ordinary (tha rnal pa’i snang zhen)” can be read as “ The cause of isolation is 
generating the ordinary appearance and ordinary conception of oneself as ordinary (tha rnal 
pa’i snang zhen).”  “The cause of isolation ” refers to what is gotten rid of (during isolation).)  
 The (purpose of isolation) is to isolate from ordinary appearance and ordinary grasping. Whatever appears in post -meditative equipoise is empty and that  emptiness is the 
manifestation of great bliss. One causes the non- dual wisdom of bliss and emptiness to arise as 
deities. When one sees everything as deities, that assists in the igniting of great bliss. Through the blazing of that great bliss, that cause s the sense consciousnesses to withdraw, which 
further increases the bliss.  
 
Essentially, in both the meditation and the post -meditation sessions, we are trying to increase 
the non- dual wisdom of bliss and emptiness which is the actualising cause of the dharmakaya.  
 
As long you understand that the physical isolation of the completion stage is actually a practice to increase the great bliss in both the meditation and the post- meditation session that is good.  
 In general, the state of our minds is influenced  by how the mind looks at things. When 
everything appears to the mind as very pleasant, the mind will be always in a blissful state. That is why the meditation of the completion stage of physical isolation is the meditation on seeing (whatever) appears as empty and (seeing) that emptiness as the manifestation of great bliss.  
There is also the meditation of seeing everything as deities. (When) whatever appears to the mind is either the non- dual wisdom of bliss and emptiness or  deities, the mind will always  be 
happy.  
 This is one of the most profound essential points of Highest Yoga Tantra. Whatever appears is empty and that empty is in the nature of great bliss. When one develops the very subtle mind of non- dual wisdom of bliss and emptiness, the coarse le vel of consciousnesses gradually 
withdraws and dissolves. What remains is a very powerful mind that gradually develops on the completion stage, acting to counteract the afflictions.  
 
Lesson  34          Page 234 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
This meditation does not rest on whether the person who appears to you is  a deity in reality. 
When we are able to have that kind of pure appearance, basically we have fulfilled the purpose of doing the meditation which is to achieve happiness.  
 Please read the entire section on verbal isolation. I plan to finish the verbal iso lation in the next 
three lessons. It is very important for you to read before coming to class. If you don’t read 
before coming to class and I have to go through each and every single line, it will take up too 
much time and we will never finish. If you don’ t read before coming to class, when I summarise  
and highlight the different points, you will not understand. It is not important (at this stage) whether you understand or not after reading. Just try to think of what you have read.  
      Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
Lesson  34          Page 235 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 35   DATE: 6TH AUGUST 2009  
 
It is very important to set a proper and virtuous motivation for participating  in this session. In 
particular, when we listen to the teachings, we should do so by abandoning the three faults of 
the vessel and generating the six recognitions or attitudes.  
 
Cultivating the six recognitions is something that you already know from studying the Lam Rim . 
This is just a refresher for you. The first attitude is recognising ourselves as patients who have a 
chronic illness. This first recognition is extremely important. All of us are tormented by the 
three poisons. This is very obvious. At the slightest instigation, we get angry. We can also generate attachment and desire very easily. When we do not strive to weaken these mental 
poisons now, then, at the time of dea th, due to being overwhelmed by them, we will have to 
go to the lower realms.  
 
We are all Buddhists and, in particular, we are followers of the Great Vehicle, the Mahayana.  
We also believe that we are in the class of Vajrayana practitioners. That being t he case, it is 
very important to remember the importance of weakening our mental poisons. Whenever we 
attend teachings, it is very important to listen to them with the motivation of wanting to reduce our mental afflictions. Then those teachings will defini tely benefit us. This is something 
that all of you already know and should put into practice.  
 So whenever we attend teachings, we should adjust our motivation before they begin. It is also important that when we listen to the teachings, we should do so w ith enthusiasm.  Even when 
one is unable to understand (this) particular subject in detail, one should feel happy for having the opportunity to learn something that is so deep and profound. One should feel happy even 
if one only gains a rough understanding  of this profound subject. It is important, at all times, to 
have the understanding of how fortunate we are to have some faith in such a profound subject and to have all the available conditions and opportunity to hear, read and study it. We should always remember this.  
 The majority of you are studying such a subject for the very first time. Since this is so, of course 
it is difficult. Whatever we do for the first time, usually, (in the beginning we will face 
difficulties). As I had said (many times befor e), it is important not to get discouraged and to 
lose heart. You will not benefit once that happens. What you have to do is to pray to be able to 
learn the subject and then put in the effort to do so.  
Manjushri told Lama Tsong Khapa to always do these thr ee things together in combination:  
1. Make fervent requests to one’s deity, seeing it as inseparable from one’s guru  
2. Strive in the accumulation of merit and purification of obscurations  
3. Work hard at the texts and to study the teachings  
When all these three are done, then definitely one will develop. Such advice is really beneficial 
for the mind. I think there are some people who may feel disheartened or discouraged, saying they don’t understand anything. Such discouragement benefits no one.  
 
*********************************  
 
 
Lesson  35          Page 236 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
With respect to the etymology of the words, “physical isolation,” the basis of isolation is the 
coarse body appearing to us as ordinary and our ordinary conception of it. In order to isolate that ordinary appearance and c onception, one trains by seeing everything that appears to be 
the display of emptiness and bliss. Then, one trains to cause that non -dual bliss and emptiness 
to arise as the deity.  
 The completion stage of physical isolation has two divisions: (1) Individ ual withdrawal and (2) 
meditative stabilisation. There are five types of meditative stabilisation:  
1) Investigation  
2) Analysis  
3) Joy 
4) Bliss  
5) Concentration  
 We had looked at the difference between investigation and analysis in the last class. Briefly, analysis  is essentially the physical isolation which is the meditation on the 100 immaculate 
lineages and investigation is the meditation on the five lineages, the three secret lineages or 
the one extremely secret lineage.  
 How do we arrive at the classification of th e 100 immaculate lineages? Following the Arya 
tradition of Guhyasamaja, there are 32 deities. When we exclude 12 deities out of these 32, we 
are left with 20 deities. When we relate each of these 20 deities with the five lineages, we will 
arrive at the tot al of 100 immaculate lineages.  
 
When the 100 immaculate lineages are condensed, they become the five Tathagata lineages. When those are condensed, we have the three secret lineages -  the lineages of the exalted 
body, speech and mind. When the three secret lineages are further condensed, we arrive at 
the one extremely secret lineage, which is basically Vajradhara.   
  
Question: Investigation and analysis are meditative stabilisations to generate deities in the mental continuum. Why are these meditative stab ilisations performed in post -meditative 
equipoise?  
Answer :  Meditative equipoise is “ yamba shapa”  in Tibetan, which refers to meditative 
equipoise on emptiness or bliss and emptiness. In this context, it refers to the meditative equipoise on emptiness after the subsidence of coarse duality.  
 
What about meditative stabilisation? Meditative stabilisation is one of the (divisions of) physical isolation and is “ samten” in Tibetan. (This is sometimes translated as “concentration,” 
but for our purposes here, we  will translate “ samten ” as meditative stabilisation).  
 In general, meditative stabilisation is a mind that takes a chosen object and places the mind single -pointedly on it. There is a meditative stabilisation on the conventional deity and a 
meditative st abilisation on the ultimate deity.   
 The meditative stabilisation on the conventional deity is related to the post- meditative 
equipoise. When the mind focussing on the conventional (i.e. conventional deity) is stronger, 
 
Lesson  35          Page 237 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
then there is investigation and analysis, both of which deal with the conventional.  The other 
three meditative stabilisations -  joy, bliss and single -pointed concentration -   are (practised in) 
meditative equipoise. The conventional aspects of these three  minds are not as strong.  
 It is easy to explain this when we distinguish between meditative equipoise and meditative stabilisation. If we posit them to be the same, then that will be a problem.  
 
Question: During meditative equipoise, the winds have ente red the central channel. Do they 
remain there during post -meditative equipoise?  
Answer : A physical isolation of the completion stage must entail the winds entering the central 
channel. That being the case, I guess one can posit that if it is physical isolation in post-
meditative equipoise, the winds have entered into and are in the central channel.  
 Question: Do the preliminaries of meditating on the subtle drop at the lower opening of the central channel, igniting the tumo and so forth –  do they fall unde r the definition of individual 
withdrawal and absorption? In essence, where is the boundary of the beginning of physical isolation?   
Answer : The definition says, “…… a yogi who has consummated the subtle and gross generation 
stages of this system, from (tha t yogi) generating the primordial awareness of the empties …..” 
So when one generates the first empty of white appearance, i.e. the wisdom of the empty, this marks the start of physical isolation. The whole meditation preceding that is not physical 
isolation because that is the way to arrive at physical isolation. That is why the definition says, 
“…derived from causing the winds …”. Anything that is derived cannot be the effect, isn’t it?  
 
Question:  Are the four joys the four wisdoms?  
Answer : Through medita ting on the subtle at the lower opening of the central channel, the 
winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel.  The blazing of the tumo at the navel melts the white bodhicitta at the crown which starts to drip and descends down the central channel:    
• As the bodhicitta descends to the throat, one joy is generated.  
• When the bodhicitta moves from the throat to the heart, another joy is generated.  
• When the bodhicitta moves from heart to the navel, another joy is generated.  
• When the bodhicitta m oves from the navel to the tip of the secret place,   then the last joy 
is generated.  
These are the four descending joys .  
 When the bodhicitta moves upwards from the secret place to the navel, from the navel to the heart and from the heart to (the throat  and from the throat to the) crown,  the four ascending 
joys are also generated.  
 It is said that the four ascending joys are stronger than the four descending joys.   After the bodhicitta descends from the crown to the secret place, it must  not be lost and one has to prevent the emission of the bodhicitta. Instead of letting the bodhicitta emit from the body, one causes that bodhicitta to ascend the central channel. Such a practice is necessary 
during the completion stage of the physical isolation.  
 
Lesson  35          Page 238 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Ques tion: If the bodhicitta can go up and down the central channel, shouldn’t the winds be 
able to do likewise? Why are they stuck at the level of the heart?  
Answer : I also have this qualm but this is not clear in the text.  
 Thus, to be physical isolation it  does not need (to conform to) that full etymology and if it (does 
conform) to the complete etymology of physical isolation it does not need to be physical 
isolation because from the verbal isolation onwards one meditates on everything that appears 
as bein g sealed by bliss and emptiness. ( Pg. 34 of the root text ) 
 How do you posit a physical isolation that does not conform to the etymology but is still a physical isolation?  This is something you have to think about. See if you can come out with an illustra tion.  
 2.1.3.1.2.1.2.2.1.2  THE CONCENTRATION OF  THE VAJRA SPEECH: (O RDINARY) VERBAL 
ISOLATION  
 The nature of the second stage in the six -fold (division) of the completion stage of the Arya 
system is ‘the completion stage (practice) of a yogi from the generation of the primordial awareness of appearance derived from the winds entering, abiding and dissolving into the central channel at the heart by meditating on the mantra drop (sgnagthig) at the top (sna rtse) 
of the heart, up to (but not including) the g eneration of the primordial awareness of 
appearance derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the indestructible (drop) at the heart through completely loosening the channel knot (rtsa mdud) at the heart by 
the strength of meditation. ( Pg. 34 of the root text ) 
 During physical isolation, the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel but they are unable to do so at the level of the heart. Verbal isolation  is posited at the time when the 
winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel at the heart.  
 
During the time of verbal isolation, in order to cause the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in 
the central channel at the heart, one meditates on the   mantra drop at the heart inside the 
central channel and through this meditation, due to the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel at the heart, the first wisdom, the wisdom of appearance, is generated and that marks the start of ve rbal isolation.  
 Although the winds have entered, abide and dissolved in the central channel at the heart, they have yet to dissolve in the indestructible drop. That being the case, I think I will say that during verbal isolation, the channel knots at the  heart are loosened but are not completely loosened.  
  
When the channel knots are completely  loosened at the heart, only then can the winds dissolve 
in the indestructible drop. When this happens and the wisdom of appearance is generated, that is when menta l isolation starts .  
 Therefore, the boundary of verbal isolation is “ up to but not including the generation of the 
primordial awareness of appearance derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and 
 
Lesson  35          Page 239 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
dissolve in the indestructible (drop) at the heart thr ough completely loosening the channel knot 
(rtsa mdud) at the heart by the strength of meditation.”  
 
I have talked a little about this before. If you compare what I had said to this definition, see whether they have the same meaning. It is very important f or you to understand the meaning 
of the definition. Do you have any qualms or questions pertaining to this definition?  
 
Question: When are the channel knots at the heart initially loosened? I thought the loosening 
of the channel knots only occurs when the winds enter the indestructible drop and not before 
that.  
Answer : The channel knots are initially loosened during verbal isolation through the meditation 
of the mantra drop at the heart but are not completely loosened.  
 If you had read the pages pertaining to verbal isolation, you would know that there are three types of life -force exertions. They are:  
1) Meditating on the mantra drop at the heart  
2) Meditating on the light drop at the tip of the nose  
3) Meditating on the substance drop at the tip of the s ecret place  
 These are the stages of meditation:  
• First, one meditates on the mantra drop at the heart in the central channel  
• Then, one meditates on the light drop at the tip of the nose.  
• Then, one meditates on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place.  
 
Although these three yogas are designated as verbal isolations but the meditations on the mantra drop at the heart and the substance drop at the tip of the secret place are not fully 
qualified verbal isolations. That means that they are not  the actu al verbal isolation. The actual 
verbal isolation  has to be done with the meditation on the light drop at the tip of the nose.  
 This stage is called ‘verbal isolation’ (gnag dben) or Vajra recitation’ (rdo rje bzlas pa), but this is a one -sided designation (phyogs cig gi ming gis btags) life -force exertion and the two yogas 
of life -force exertion meditating on the mantra drop
42 and the substance drop (rdzas thig) are 
neither verbal isolation nor vajra recitation. ( Pg. 34 -35 of the root text)  
 If you remember the six preparatory branches, the third is life -force exertion. It is ‘ tsog chou’ in 
Tibetan and is sometimes translated as wind yoga, pramana yoga or in this context, 
lengthening vitality and exertion.  
 
What you have to know is that the meditati on on the light drop at the tip of the nose is the 
actual verbal isolation. Although the meditations on the mantra drop at the heart and the substance drop at the tip of the secret place are fully qualified life -force exertions, they are not 
42 Life- force exertion meditating on the mantra drop: is the yoga in which practitioners meditate on a mantra 
circle at the heart, visualising the syllable HUM at the heart channel. The syllable should be very bright and by 
focusing on the nada of the syllable, the gathering and dissolution of the winds into the central channel at the 
heart is facilitated.  
 
 
Lesson  35          Page 240 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
the actual verbal isolation. These three can be posited as the levels of verbal isolation but it 
doesn’t mean that whatever is posited as a level of verbal isolation is necessarily verbal isolation. Keep this in your mind. Go back home and read the text and see whether this is what 
the text is actually saying.   
 The three -fold process of the winds arising, entering and abiding  is called natural repetition (or 
recitation). These three -  the winds arising, entering and abiding -  is (also) called speech which 
is the basis of isolation . Speech here refers to this natural repetition which is taken to be the 
winds arising, entering and abiding . 
 The object of negation (that which is to be negated) is the ordinary conception which views 
these three -  the tones of the winds aris ing, entering and abiding  - to be different from the 
tones of the three syllables OM, AH, HUM. This ordinary concept which sees these two as separate is the object of negation.  
 “Isolation”  means bringing these two into union by seeing the tones of the winds arising, 
entering and abiding  as being indifferentiable from the tones of the three syllables OM, AH, 
HUM.  
 
• In the practice of vajra recitation, one sees the tones of the winds arising i.e., the winds 
exiting or exhalation. This exhalation is indifferentiable  from the tone of the syllable 
HUM.  
• With inhalation, one sees the tone of the winds entering as indifferentiated from the tone of the syllable OM.  
• When the tones of the winds are neither entering nor arising, i.e., the tone of the winds 
are abiding, one sees that as indifferentiated from the tone of the syllable AH.  
 I think for us, abiding doesn’t exist unless you are accustomed to it.  
 What does speech refer to? It is essentially the resonance or natural vibration of the winds. (In the text, this is described as the “ tone .”)  
 Here, isolation means one does not conceive that speech which is the tone of the winds as ordinary but rather one causes those tones to arise as the tones of the syllables OM, AH, HUM. 
Speech here primarily refers to the tone of the winds. The root of speech is wind.  
 
There are stages of meditation in the three life -force exertions because (1) in the context of 
physical isolation (there is meditation) to gat her the winds at the central channel at the heart 
when unable to do so, though one is able to gather the winds in the central channel, (2) 
meditation on the mantra drop at the top of the heart and (3) through long term familiarity with that one first gener ates primordial awareness of the four empties and transfers to the 
stage of life -force exertion designated as vajra recitation verbal isolation . (Pg. 36 of the root 
text)   
 This is the rough description of the way of meditating on these life -force exertion s.   
 
 
Lesson  35          Page 241 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Things that you have to know and need to understand from this class are:  
• the definition of verbal isolation  
• its boundaries  
• when does one move from physical isolation to verbal isolation.  
• what is the basis of verbal isolation  
• what is the object of ne gation  
• what is the meaning of isolation.  
As long as you have a rough understanding of what is the basis of isolation, what that speech 
refers to and what is the object of negation to be isolated and what is the meaning of verbal 
isolation, then you know how one’s speech can be transformed into the speech of the Buddha in the future.   The main thing is to understand how the completion stage of physical isolation is the cause for the achievement of the Buddha’s body and  how  verbal isolation contributes as the cause for the achievement of the Buddha’s speech. Later, we will see how mental isolation contributes towards the achievement of the Buddha’s mind. If one understands in detail how the Buddha’s body, speech and mind are achieved, then one will really understand that the attainment of enlightenment is something that is very amazing and very powerful.  
    
 
Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  35          Page 242 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
 LESSON NO: 36    DATE: 11
TH AUGUST 2009  
 As usual, we will spend five minutes in silence to do some reflection. We can refle ct on the 
meaning of the refuge and generating bodhicitta prayer which we always recite before class, checking to see whether what is described in that prayer manifests in our minds. If not, we 
should try to generate that motivation.  
 
We should check to s ee whether there is real refuge in our minds. After generating refuge, if 
we find that the bodhicitta thought is not in our minds, at least within the next five minutes, we should try to generate it.  
 When we manage to generate real refuge in our hearts, we are protected from the sufferings of the lower realms in future lives. When we are able to develop some bodhicitta within this short period of time, that helps to   purify negativities accumulated si nce beginningless time. 
There is nothing more powerful than bodhicitta for purification of negativities. We can relate this exercise to people around us. If there is someone whom we have difficulties getting along with, check whether we can develop forbear ance,  patience, positive thoughts and the good 
heart towards him within this short period of time. This is more practical and beneficial.  
 
This is a bit of a refresher (for all of you).  
• When we recite, “I go for refuge until I am enlightened to the Buddha, Dharma and the 
Supreme Assembly,” this is the practice of causal refuge. At the time when we recite “I”, we should have some understanding of emptiness and investigate who is this “I” who is going for refuge and try to bring to mind that this “I” is me rely designated by thought.  
• “By the practice of giving and other perfections,/ May I become a buddha to benefit all 
living beings”: This is the practice of resultant refuge.  
We had covered this when we studied The Tathagata Essence . This is just a reminde r. Actually 
there are many things that we can reflect on when we recite this verse of refuge and bodhicitta.  
 
*****************************  
 
Verbal isolation is essentially bringing the tones of the winds arising, entering and abiding into an indivisible union with the tones of the three syllables OM AH HUM.  
 The object of negation (i.e., what we are trying to stop) is the conception in the continuum of an ordinary individual believing that the tones of the winds arising, entering and abiding to be differ ent from the tones of these three syllables.  
 
There are three levels (or stages) of verbal isolation bringing the tones of the winds arising, 
entering and abiding into an indivisible union with the tones of the three syllables.  These are essentially the three yogas of life -force exertions:  
4) Meditating on the mantra drop at the top of the heart  
5) Meditating on the light drop at the tip of the nose  
6) Meditating on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place  
 
Lesson  36          Page 243 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Of these three yogas, only the meditation on the  light drop at the tip of the nose is the actual 
verbal isolation . The other two are designated as verbal isolation but they are not  the fully 
qualified verbal isolation.  
• “At the top of the heart ” refers to the middle of the heart chakra.  
• “At the tip of the nose ” refers to the upper opening of the central channel, i.e., the point 
between the two eyebrows.  
• “At the tip of the secret place ” refers to the lower opening of the central channel.  
 
There are stages of meditation in the three life -force exertions because (1) in the context of 
physical isolation (there is meditation) to gather the winds at the central channel at the heart when unable to do so, though one is able to gather the winds in the central channel, (2) meditation on the mantra drop at the top of the heart and (3) through long term familiarity 
with that one first generates primordial awareness of the four empties and transfers to the stage of life -force exertion designated as vajra recitation verbal isolation. ( Pg. 36 of the root 
text)  
 There a re three stages of meditation in the three life -force exertions:  
• During physical isolation, although the winds gather in the central channel, they do not 
gather at the heart level of the central channel.  
• In order to gather the winds at the heart level of the central channel, one meditates on the 
mantra drop at the heart. Through meditating on that, the winds enter, abide and dissolve 
in the central channel at the level of the heart.  
• Due to this three -fold process of the winds entering, abiding and dissolv ing in the heart 
level of the central channel, when the wisdom of the first empty (the wisdom of appearance) arises, that is the time one moves from physical isolation to verbal isolation.  
 Since this is a state compatible with (rjes mthun) mental isolation it is suitable to be designated as mental isolation but it is not the actual state (mtshan nyid pa). The Illuminating Lamp states:  
 Having well understood the point of meditating on the indestructible (drop) at the heart, and through long familiarity with that, the primordial awareness of the four empties is first generated. Since this is compatible with mental isolation it is suitable to be designated as that, but it is not actual (mental isolation).  
 
By meditating on the mantra drop as the method of ga thering (sdud) the winds at the heart in 
that way, the winds gather and dissolve in the central channel. This is dissolution (of the winds) in the central channel near to the indestructible drop at the heart, but not dissolution of the winds in the actual indestructible drop. To dissolve the winds in the actual indestructible drop its channel knot must be loosened. For that purpose, life -force exertion meditating on the light 
drop at the tip of the nose (sna rtse) meditates on vajra repetition of the indivisible union (sbyor) of the individual tones of the three: the wind (1) rising, (2) entering and (3) abiding and 
the tones of the three letters. ( Pg. 36 of the root text).  
 
 
Lesson  36          Page 244 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
When one meditates on the mantra drop at the heart, although the  winds enter, abide and 
dissolve in the heart level of the central channel of the heart, they do not  dissolve in the 
indestructible drop at the heart. In order for the winds to dissolve in the indestructible drop at 
the heart, the channel knots at the heart must first be loosened. In order to do this, one 
meditates on the light drop at the tip of the nose.  
 I myself have a qualm about this. When one is meditating on the mantra drop at the heart, do 
the channel knots at the heart loosen a little or not at al l? 
 
What the text is saying is in order for the winds to dissolve in the indestructible drop, the channel knots at the heart must be loosened. In order to do this, one meditates on the light drop at the tip of the nose. But prior to this meditation on t
he light drop at the tip of the nose, 
one is meditating  on  the mantra drop at the centre of the heart chakra at the central channel. 
One will have to say when one is meditating on the mantra drop at the heart that the channel knots at the heart have yet to be loosened. But through that meditation (on the mantra drop),  the winds are said to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel at the level of the heart. If 
the channel knots at the heart are not loosened, how is that accomplished? That is my qualm.   
 
Question: Is there only one set of channel knots? It sounds like there is a channel knot at the heart level of the central channel and another channel knot around the indestructible drop?   
Answer : It is not mentioned in the text that there is a knot that obstructs the indestructible 
drop but it does mention the channel knots at the heart.  
 By meditating on the mantra drop as the method of gathering ( sdud) the winds at the heart in 
that way, the w inds gather and dissolve in the central channel.  (Pg. 36 of the root text ) 
 One meditates on the mantra drop at the heart in order to gather the winds that are yet to be gathered at the heart. In  order to loosen the channel knots at the heart, one meditates on the 
light drop at the tip of the nose. Here, “light” refers to the winds so the meditation on the light drop actually refers to meditation on the winds.  
 That is because just as one opens ( ‘byer) a blocked hollow bamboo stem by inserting a long 
stick into it, one opens the channel knots by inserting winds into them . (Pg. 36 of the root text ) 
 When the wind moves in the channel, one recognizes the resonance (sgrog bzhin) to be like the 
tone of  the three letters and directing the mind to that without distraction is the method of 
vajra recitation in this context. (Pg. 36 of the root text)  
 
Question: Do all the winds gather in the central channel during (1) post- equipoise physical 
isolation and (2 ) during speech isolation?  
Answer : During post -equipoise physical isolation, the winds are not gathered in the central  
channel as one has arisen from meditative equipoise. The purpose of gathering the winds in the central channel (and having them enter), abide and dissolve there is to generate the non -
dual wisdom of bliss and emptiness. When that wisdom is generated, one places one’s mind on 
that wisdom. When one arises from that meditative equipoise, the sense consciousnesses 
 
Lesson  36          Page 245 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
manifest again and the winds are not gathered in the central channel. That is clear for post -
equipoise physical isolation.  
 
Question:  In order for i t to be a physical isolation, it has to be a yoga derived from the winds 
entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel. If that is the case, what about individual withdrawal which is post -equipoise physical isolation?  Since one is not in meditat ive equipoise, 
the winds are not gathered in the central channel. It follows then that individual withdrawal is 
not physical isolation.  
Answer: Physical isolation starts “ from (that yogi) generating the primordial awareness of the 
empties (stone pa’i ye sh e) derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the 
central channel by meditating on the subtle (drop) in the lower opening (of the central channel), 
up to but not including the generation of the primordial awareness that arises through dissolving of the upper and lower winds in the central channel at the heart .” (Pg. 31 of the root 
text). Individual withdrawal falls in between the generation of the wisdom of the empties in 
the meditative equipoise up to but not including verbal isolation.   
 Question: So the phrase, “the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel” does not mean they stay put there?  
Answer : The boundary of the definition covers both meditative and post- meditative equipoise. 
What is derived from the winds enter ing, abiding and dissolving in the central channel? The 
wisdoms of the empties are derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the 
central channel but those wisdoms are generated up to but not including verbal isolation.  
 
Question: Is th at the reason why in the definition of the completion stage, it is said to be a yoga 
in the continuum of a learner derived through making the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central (channel) but “ in general it is explained that if it is a completio n stage (practice) it is 
not pervasive that it is derived from making the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. That is because both individual (withdrawal) and absorption (sor bsam) of the Kalachakra system are preliminary (practices) fo r making the winds enter the central 
channel ”(Pg. 26 of the root text)  ? 
Answer : Generally speaking, for it to be a completion stage, it must be “ the  yoga in the 
continuum of a  learner derived through making the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel though the strength of meditation” .  (Pg. 26 of the root text). This is from the 
perspective of Highest Yoga Tantra as a whole but this does not mean that this is necessarily so for all Highest Yoga Tantras. For example, from the perspective o f the Kalachakra Tantra, 
individual withdrawal and meditative stabilisation are considered  preliminaries to that of the completion stage of Kalachakra. It is not the actual completion stage.  
If one is using this as a support for the earlier discussion, t hen it is not like that as the earlier 
discussion pertains to a different point.   
****************  
I will now give a brief description of the visualisation of vajra recitation:  
• Visualise a light drop at the heart travelling up to the central channel to the upper opening of the central channel, seeing that the tone (also referred to as resonance or vibration) of the winds to be inseparable from the tone of the syllable HUM. That i s the process of the 
winds arising.  
 
Lesson  36          Page 246 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• Now, visualise the light drop from the upper opening of the central channel going down the 
central channel towards the level of the heart. That is the process of the winds entering and 
one sees the tone of the winds entering to be inseparable from the tone of the syllable OM.  
• Next, the winds abide at the heart. One meditates on the tone of those winds  to be 
inseparable from the tone of the syllable AH.  
The meditation is to see the two things –  the tones of the winds ar ising, entering and abiding 
and the tones of the syllables OM AH HUM - as inseparable and as one. This meditation is not 
done as if one is reciting with one’s speech or one is doing mental recitation but as if one is 
hearing it with one’s ears.    
 Initially, one has to put effort into seeing these two (the tone of the winds and the tones of the three syllables) as inseparable. Due to repeated meditation and familiarity over time, it is said 
that experience becomes spontaneous and one will naturally view the tones of the winds 
resonating with the tones of the three syllables.  
 As an ordinary individual, our winds arise and enter but the phase of abiding is not there. But through effort in meditation, one can generate the phase of abiding. Through thi s meditation, 
the arising, entering and abiding of the winds are brought slowly into equilibrium. It is also said that through the force of meditation, after some time, the phases of the winds arising and entering are shortened and the phase of abiding lengthens. It is possible to lengthen the phase of abiding to the level where the winds, for a while, do not arise and enter but simply abide.  
 After gaining familiarity with this visualisation, there are additional practices such as sending the winds from the tip of the nose (i.e., the upper opening of the central channel)  out of the 
body to a distance of four -finger -widths and gradually extending that to the length of an elbow 
and so forth.   
 The purpose of doing this vajra recitation or meditation of the  light drop at the tip of the nose 
is to loosen the channel knots at the heart. The example mentioned in the text is this: “ That is 
because just as one opens  a blocked hollow bamboo stem by inserting a long stick into it, one 
opens the channel knots by ins erting winds into them.”  
 Regarding vajra recitation, if the object of recitation is classified by means of the winds there are two (types): main and secondary vajra recitation and also these are classified respectively in four and five (types). If we clas sify them from the point of view of the recited mantra there 
are two: vajra recitation of the two letters: HUM HO and vajra recitation of the three letters (OM, AH, HUM.) (Pg. 36 of the root text)  
 Regarding vajra recitation, there is the vajra recitation of the root winds and the vajra 
recitation of the secondary winds. There are five root and five secondary winds. In the context 
of vajra recitation, only four of the five root winds are practised, excluding the pervasive wind 
as one is unable to do vajra recitation with that wind at this point in time.  
 In terms of the mantra that is recited, there is the vajra recitation of the two letters HUM HO and the vajra recitation of the three letters OM, AH, HUM.   
 
 
Lesson  36          Page 247 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
There are three occasions when completion stage p ractitioners perform vajra repetition 
because it is stated that (1) when they perform vajra repetition to establish the activities of 
pacification, increase, subjugation and ferocity, they do it through the four main winds. (2) When they perform vajra repe tition to establish the five higher perceptions of the eyes, ears, 
nose, tongue and body, they do it serially through the five secondary winds such as the moving one etc. (3) When they perform vajra repetition to invoke (‘dren pa) the empties of mental isolation having previously established physical isolation, they do it first through the four main 
winds, then having attained mastery (nus pa) in that, they do it through the five secondary winds. ( Pg. 37 of the root text)  
 Of the three occasions when comple tion stage practitioners perform vajra repetition, it is the 
third one that we are talking about in this context of verbal isolation.  
 What is verbal isolation?  It is basically seeing the tone of the natural winds that are arising, 
entering and abiding to be inseparable from the tones of the three syllables OM AH HUM. This is something you have to remember and understand.  
 When does one transfer from physical is olation to verbal isolation?  Due to the winds entering, 
abiding and dissolving in the central channel of the heart, when the wisdoms of the four empties arise, that is the time when one is transfers to verbal isolation  
• In order to gather the winds that are not gathered in the central channel of the heart, one 
first meditates on the mantra drop at the heart.  
• In order to loosen the channel knots at the heart, one performs the vajra recitation.  
• Of the three life -force exer tions, only the meditation on the light drop at the tip of the nose 
is the actual verbal isolation . That particular life -force exertion is to be given the name 
verbal isolation. As I mentioned earlier, although this meditation is on the light drop, the 
light drop is actually a wind drop and it is a wind yoga.   
 We need to have a rough understanding of what verbal isolation is. I find it difficult to explain the actual meditation on vajra recitation as that is very complicated.  
 When we talk about the inde structible drop, there are actually two drops:  
1. There is the indestructible drop at the heart that exists during one’s lifetime which is 
made up of the two bodhicittas: the white and red drops. It remains at the heart as long as one is alive, only separatin g at the time of death.  
2. There is the indestructible drop that has existed forever which is basically the most 
subtle wind and mind which can never be separated.  
    Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecil ia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  36          Page 248 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
  
 
LESSON NO: 37   DATE: 13TH AUGUST 2009  
 As before, we will spend the next five minutes reflecting on the refuge prayer we recite before class. We had reflected on the meaning of causal and resultant refuge and the nature of the I who is going for refuge that is merely designated by the force of conceptuality.  
 Then there is the generation of bodhicitta or the altruistic intention thinking; “ I will lead all 
sentient beings to enlightenment ” or as said in some other prayers, “ I will place all sentient 
beings in the sorrowless state, ” which  refers  to the non -abiding nirvana, full enlightenment. 
We should see if we are able to transform our minds into the meaning of that prayer, to check whether our minds match what we recite verbally. If not, then spend the next couple of minutes to do so.   
*******************  
Verbal isolation is essentially the meditation on the inseparability of the tones of the winds arising, entering and abiding from the tones of the three letters OM AH HUM.   There are three life -force exertions during the stage of the verbal isolation:  
• First, one meditates on the mantra drop at the heart and that is done to cause the winds to 
enter into the central channel at the heart. When the winds do this, the wisdoms of white 
appearance, red increase and black near attainment are generate d. When the wisdom of 
white appearance arises, that is the time marking one’s transference from the physical isolation to verbal isolation.  
• Next is the meditation on the light drop at the tip of the nose. This meditation is done to 
loosen the channel knot s at the heart.  
• This is followed by the meditation on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place.  
Meditating on the substance drop at the tip of the secret (organ) has two (types):  
(1) Retention of the (drop of) bodhichitta (produced) from the unio n of oneself and an action 
seal (las rgya)
43 at the meeting point of the two (lower) openings of the central channels, 
without releasing it.  
(2) Meditation focusing on the drop at the meeting point of the two lower openings of the central channels of onesel f and a wisdom seal (yi rgya).
44(Pg. 37 of the root text)  
Basically this is a meditation focussing on the meeting point of the lower openings of the two central channels of oneself in union with either the action seal or the wisdom seal. Why is 
there a nee d for this meditation?  
There is a need to meditate in this way because to gather the winds at the heart when the two 
previous (types of) life -force exertion are unable to gather them there, this meditation on the 
43 Action seal (las rgya): is an actual consort.  
44 Wisdom seal (yi rgya): is an imagined consort.  
 
Lesson  37          Page 249 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
substance drop is advantageous (bogs ‘don du ‘gro ba) in gathering the winds at the heart.  
The life -force exertion uniting (sbyor) both oneself and the seal (phyag rgya) exists both (1) 
before and (2) after the consummation of vajra recitation and one must understand the 
method of how this acts as  the means for gathering the winds in the central channel through 
the Illuminating Lamp. (Pg. 37 of the root text)  
There are three life -force exertions during verbal isolation. It is sufficient for you to know the 
reasons for meditating on the mantra drop at the heart, for the light drop at the tip of the nose 
and the substance drop at the tip of the secret place.  
 Question : Is there a generation of the fourth wisdom of the empties (all - empty) in physical and 
verbal isolations?  
Answer:  The four empties do arise during the three stages in the isolations of body, speech and 
mind. But when one looks at the terminology th at is used in the context of the three isolations, 
only the wisdoms of the three empties appear. When one looks at the definitions of the three isolations, they talk about the arising of the wisdom of the four empties. But based  on what we have covered so  far, we have only been referring to the three and not four empties.   
 The fourth empty exists but there is no explicit reference to it. Why? Because all the four empties are similar in the sense of possessing duality and the fourth empty (all -empty) is 
subsumed by the third empty.  
 
On the fourth stage of the meaning clear light, however, clear light is specifically mentioned 
separately because the fourth stage of the meaning clear light does not possess any duality 
(whereas the wisdoms of the four emptie s do). In order to separate them on the fourth stage 
of the meaning clear light, we then talk about the wisdoms of the four (as opposed to the three) empties.  
 The clear lights that arise during the physical, speech and mental isolations possess duality. The 
fourth empty (all -empty) is a conceptual consciousness. When one reaches the fourth stage of 
the meaning clear light, that meaning clear light is a direct perceiver.  
 Question: With reference to the vajra recitation of the two letters, how do they cor respond 
with the movement of the winds?  
Answer : When one does vajra recitation of the two letters, HUM and HO, HUM will be related 
to the arising of the winds and HO will be relating to the entering of the winds. When we talk 
about the vajra recitation of the two letters, there is no reference to the stage of abiding. I 
haven’t seen this  clearly explained in the texts.  
 
Anyway, pertaining to even the vajra recitation of the OM AH HUM, depending on the text one 
refers to, for example, Khedrub Je and Gyaltsab Je have different ways of explaining this. There 
is an explanation of seeing the tone of the winds arising to be inse parable from the tone of 
HUM, the tone of the winds entering to be inseparable from the tone of OM and the tone of the winds abiding to be inseparable from the tone AH.   
 
 
Lesson  37          Page 250 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Question: With reference to the bottom of page 37 of the root text, there is a state ment that 
“dissolution of the winds at the heart exists without dissolution of the winds in the central 
channel at the heart. That is because to dissolve the winds internally, there is no pervasion they dissolve in the central channel.” It’s a bit confusing. I don’t understand this….  
Answer: During verbal isolation, the winds have to enter the central channel at the heart but 
they do not dissolve into the indestructible drop at the heart.    
 
There is much debate on this issue but I think it may be better to say that during verbal 
isolation, the winds dissolve into the central channel at the heart. The issue here is whether the winds actually dissolve in the central channel at the heart during verbal isolation.  
 (Following the extract mentioned in the question) there is a quotation from Lama Tsongkhapa’s Illuminating Lamp which seems to be saying this is not the case and this is the qualm that is being brought up. ‘ Tog jue ’ or eliminating the qualm in Tibetan is a very important part of the 
learning process.  But in order to understand the qualm, it is only useful if one reads and thinks 
about it beforehand. If not, there is no point in (eliminating the qualm now).  
 I think we have to say that the winds do dissolve into the central channel at the heart during  
verbal isolation because the definition says so. It is not helpful at all just to say this without knowing the reason or without any source. But when one says the source is the definition, then that makes sense.  
 There are many qualms in this particular section from pages 37 to 39 but I am not sure whether it will be beneficial to look at them because even if I do, most of you do not understand (the 
qualms).  
 Let’s say we are positing the view that the winds do dissolve in the central channel at the heart  
during verbal isolation. When we meditate on the first life -force exertion, the meditation on 
the mantra drop at the (top of the) heart causes the winds to dissolve at the heart but (the text) seems to be saying that although the winds dissolve at the hea rt, they do not dissolve at the 
heart in the central channel.  
 When do the winds dissolve in the heart at the central channel? It is only when we do the second life -force exertion, the meditation on the light drop at the tip of the nose. I think we 
just leave it as that. If not, it becomes too confusing.  
Student : So the winds can dissolve in the heart outside  the central channel…  
 Question:  Are there winds that are not gathered by the two previous life -force exertions and 
that is why we need the third li fe-force exertion?  
Answer: The text says that when you meditate on the light drop at the tip of the nose, you are 
able to gather the winds at the heart. Even the meditation on the mantra drop at the heart also 
gathers the winds at the heart.  
 There is a n eed to meditate in this way because to gather the winds at the heart when the two 
previous (types of) life -force exertion are unable to gather them there, this meditation on the 
 
Lesson  37          Page 251 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
substance drop is advantageous (bogs ‘don du ‘gro ba) in that gathering the wi nds at the heart.  
(Pg. 37 of the root text).  
 
The purpose of the meditation on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place is to gather the winds that were not gathered by the two previous life -force exertions. Are there such 
winds? If one says yes, then we have to posit what those winds are. Ma ybe we can say this 
refers to the pervasive wind. Even if we were to say that there aren’t any winds not previously 
gathered, that is not a problem. In such a case, the meditation on the substance drop at the tip 
of the secret place is the support  for the two previous life -force exertions to gather the winds 
at the heart. Here, “ don du”  can be taken to mean “enhance,” i.e., it enhances what was 
already achieved by the two previous life -force exertions.  
 The meditation on the light drop at the tip of the no se causes the channel knots at the heart to 
loosen but not completely. It is the meditation on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place that causes the channel knots at the heart to be completely loosened. When this 
happens, all the root and secon dary winds, except the pervasive wind, dissolve into the heart 
in the central channel. I am not sure whether it is all right to say this as there are many different views and explanations. During the verbal isolation all the winds, except the pervasive wind dissolve in the heart in the central channel.  
 There are many qualms starting from the bottom of page 37 all the way to the top of page 39. 
In short, do the winds dissolve at the heart during verbal isolation? If the winds do dissolve at 
the heart during verbal isolation, do they necessarily dissolve in the central channel at the heart? These are the qualms.  
 The Grounds and Paths (of Guhyasamaja According to Arya Nagarjuna) of Yangchen Galo 
states:  
 
In dependence on performing vajra recitation in which the individual tones of the three: (the winds) arising, entering and abiding dawns as the tone of the three letters, the channel knots above and below the heart are loosened and the upper and lower winds dissolve into the central channel at the heart, one generates the primordial awareness of appearance (snang ba’i ye shes) and one transfers from physical to verbal isolation. (Pg. 38 of the root text ) 
 
According to Yangchen Galo, during vajra recitation, the channel knots above and below the 
heart are loosened and the upper and lower winds dissolve into the central channel at the 
heart. Through that, one generates the wisdom of appearance and transfers from the physi cal 
to verbal isolation. His presentation differs from what we have been discussing.   To be able to eliminate this qualm, one has to read the text thoroughly. When this is done and if we find time in the future, we may look at this again.  
 In any case, o ur position is that the winds do dissolve in the central channel at the heart during 
verbal isolation, which involves meditating on the three life -force exertions. You have to know 
what these three are and why they are done.  
 
Lesson  37          Page 252 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
********************* 
 
The com pletion stage (practice occurring) (1) from the generation of the primordial awareness 
of appearance derived from dissolving the winds in the indestructible drop at the heart through completely loosening the channel knots at the heart in dependence on the internal condition: vajra repetition and absorption as the two stages of gathering winds (sdud) and the external 
condition: the life -force exertion of a mudra / seal(consort) (2) up to (but not including) the 
attainment of the impure illusory body’ is the nature of the stage of mental isolation. ( Pg. 39 of 
the root text ) 
 By depending on the two conditions –  (1) the internal condition and (2) the external condition - 
the winds dissolve into the indestructible drop at the heart. Due to that dissolution, the wisdom of appearance arises and that is the time when one transfers from verbal isolation to 
mental isolation .    
 One of the internal conditions  for developing the mental isolation is the practice of vajra 
recitation where, as before, one meditates on the inseparability of the tones of the winds arising, entering and abid ing from the tones of three syllables.  
 The (other internal condition) is absorption. There are many ways to translate the word 
‘samten’  in Tibetan. We shall use ‘meditative stabilisation’ instead of absorption, of which 
there are two: (1) apprehending th e entirety and (2) subsequent destruction.  
 
Let’s talk about these two (meditative stabilisations) in general. For example, if one is 
meditating on oneself as Guhyasamaja:  
• One emanates light from the heart of oneself as the deity.  
• That light strikes the environment and its  inhabitants, transforming everything into light.  
• The environment dissolves into the inhabitants and the inhabitants dissolve into oneself as the deity father and mother.  
• Then one’s consort dissolves into oneself as the principal.  
• One dissolves from top to bottom into the syllable HUM at the heart.  
• The syllable HUM gradually dissolves from bottom up until the nada (the squiggle at the top of the syllable HUM) and that dissolves into emptiness.   
Because this process of dissolving onese lf is subsequent to the dissolution of the  external 
world and its inhabitants, this process is called subsequent destruction.  
The process of dissolving oneself as the deity father and mother from top to bottom and then 
finally into emptiness that does no t involve the dissolution of the external world and its 
inhabitants is called apprehending the entirety.  
 In general, these two stages of dissolution occur during the generation stage when one dissolves the mandala into oneself. In this context here of be ing an internal condition for 
actualising mental isolation, it is related to the winds. The process is similar.   
 
Lesson  37          Page 253 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
In this context, one emanates light from the heart of oneself as the deity which strikes the 
environment and its inhabitants. The environment dissolves into the inhabitants and the 
inhabitants dissolve into oneself as the deity. Then oneself as the deity dissolves. One tries to gather all the winds at the heart. As one goes through the stages of dissolution, all the signs of dissolution associat ed with the vision of mirage and so forth (appear). This stage of dissolution 
is called subsequent destruction.  
 
But if one does not dissolve the environment and its inhabitants but one  simply gathers the 
winds into the heart without that dissolution, that dissolution is called apprehending the entirety.  
 You just need to have a rough idea of what these two meditative stabilisations (absorptions) which are posited as the internal condition are.  
 The external condition  is reliance on the consort or “ the life-force exertion of a seal ” (or 
mudra) (of which there are two): (1) The action seal (or action mudra) refers to an actual woman born from karma and (2) The wisdom seal (or wisdom mudra) who arises through the force of meditation.  
 There are three types  of action seals:  
1. The simultaneously born action seals refer to those who have achieved the meaning clear 
light.  
2. The field born action seals are those who are abiding on the stages of physical, verbal (and 
mental) isolations and who have achieved the illus ory body.  
3. The mantra born action seals refer to those who are abiding in the generation stage.  
 By depending on the method, the internal and external conditions, the channel knots at the heart are completely loosened and the winds are able to dissolve in t he indestructible drop at 
the heart.  
 Due to the dissolution of the winds into the indestructible drop, when the wisdom of appearance initially arises, that is the beginning of mental isolation and the time when one moves from verbal isolation to mental i solation.  From that point of time “ up to (but not 
including)  the attainment of the impure illusory body”  is posited as mental isolation.  
 
During the stage of mental isolation, the winds actually dissolve into the indestructible drop at 
the heart but the two conditions –  the internal and the external - must be present for that to 
happen.  
 From today’s (class), one should have a rough understanding of:  
• the two types of meditative stabilisations, the subsequent destruction and apprehending the entirety.  
• the two types of seals: the action seal and the wisdom seal.  
• the three types of action seal:  
1. The simultaneously born action seals are those who have actualised the meaning clear light.  
 
Lesson  37          Page 254 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
2. The field born action seals are those abiding on the three isolations (including 
the impure illusory body).  
3. The mantra born action seals are those abiding on the generation stage.  
 Because the simultaneously born action seal is posited as having the realisation of meaning clear light, one can see that one can achieve enlighte nment on the basis of a female body.  
 
In the Hinayana and Paramitayana, do they actually say it is possible to achieve enlightenment 
on the basis of a woman’s body? I think when one  looks at the Hinayana teachings, it is very 
clear that one cannot achiev e enlightenment as a woman. It is the same in the Paramitayana.  
 
But here in the context of Tantra, the simultaneously born action seal has achieved meaning 
clear light in which case enlightenment is a certainty. From that perspective, there is no 
difference whether one is male or female with regards to achieving enligh tenment. Doesn’t it 
become clear that a man cannot achieve enlightenment without a woman?  
 
There are also many qualms as well in this section of mental isolation. Please read up as I will 
try to finish the section on mental isolation in the next class.   
 
  
 
 Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  37          Page 255 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 38   DATE:18THAUGUST 2009  
 
No matter how loud the sound of the thunder,  
It is all empty.  
No matter how beautiful the rainbow,  At the end it disappears.  
 
Milarepa said that when one has to bear the consequences of one’s own negative actions and 
life is impermanent, one should not postpone one’s Dharma practice. All of us are aware of 
these facts but we should analyse and see whether this understanding arise  in and is mixed 
with our minds.  
 
We should reflect on the empty nature of all phenomena, in particular, impermanent 
phenomena. Our mental and physical aggregates are impermanent, disintegrating and changing in each and every single moment. In particular,  we should look at the basis of 
designation of the I or self, our aggregates and how by nature they are empty of inherent 
existence but we grasp at our bodies to be inherently existent and we apprehend our bodies 
and minds to be permanent.   
 Due to these two forms of grasping, afflictions like anger and attachment are generated. Due 
to these afflictions, we engage in many negative actions and in the end, we have to suffer the 
consequences of those actions. What I have said so far is not something that we do n’t know 
but it is something for us to analyse and bring to mind continuously for it is through that that we will be able to modify our actions and behaviours of body, speech and mind. We should reflect on this advice and, as much as possible, put it into practice without procrastinating.  
 For five minutes, we will reflect on how all phenomena are empty of inherent existence. In particular, (we focus on the fact that) our bodies and minds, the bases of designation of the I, are in the nature of emptiness a nd impermanence, disintegrating and changing in each and 
every single moment. By reflecting in this way, we should be motivated not to procrastinate (any further) but to (immediately) put the teachings into practice.  
***************************  
Let us loo k again at the definition of mental isolation:  
The completion stage (practice occurring) (1) from the generation of the primordial awareness 
of appearance derived from dissolving the winds in the indestructible drop at the heart through 
completely loosening the channel knots at the heart in dependence on the internal condition: vajra repetition and absorption as the two stages of gathering winds (sdud) and the external 
condition: the life -force exertion of a seal (consort) (2) up to (but not including) the  attainment 
of the impure illusory body’ is the nature of the stage of mental isolation. ( Pg. 39 of the root 
text). 
The points we must remember are that:    
1. there are two conditions –  the internal and external conditions - that must be present 
before menta l isolation can be achieved.  
 
Lesson  38          Page 256 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
2. The internal conditions are the vajra repetition and meditative stabilisations 
(absorptions) which are the two stages of gathering the winds.  
3. There are two types of meditative stabilisations:  (1) apprehending the entirety and (2) 
subsequent destruction.  
4.  The external condition is the life -force exertion of the seal, which means relying on a 
consort. There are two types of seals: (1) the action seal and (2) the wisdom seal.  
 
When the internal and external conditions are presen t, the channel knots at the heart are 
completely loosened. Due to this, the four root winds and the five secondary winds (are then 
able to) dissolve in the indestructible drop. Through this  dissolution, the wisdom of 
appearance arises. That is the time wh en one generates the realisation of mental isolation. 
From that time, “ up to (but not including) the attainment of the impure illusory body” is posited 
as mental isolation.  
 From this, we can say that during the stage of verbal isolation, the channel knots at the heart are not completely loosened. During verbal isolation, the four root and five secondary winds do 
dissolve at the central channel at the heart. What is the difference then between verbal and mental isolations? During mental isolation , the four root and five secondary winds not only 
dissolve in the central channel at the heart but they dissolve in the indestructible drop at the heart.  
 
Question: The complete loosening of the channel knots at the heart, the dissolution of the 
winds in the indestructible drop at the heart and the arising of the wisdom of appearance, are these three simultaneous?  
Answer : I am not sure whether these three occur sim ultaneously because the channel knots at 
the heart have to be completely loosened before  the winds can dissolve in the indestructible 
drop. The wisdom of appearance can only arise after  the dissolution of the winds in the 
indestructible drop. Think whether  there is any fault in positing these three stages in the 
following order:  
• first the channel knots at the heart have to be completely loosened  
• due to the complete loosening of the channel knots at the heart, the winds dissolve in the 
indestructible drop at the heart  
• due to this dissolution, the wisdom of appearance arises  
 
Is there any fault in saying these three are simultaneous? That means the  winds dissolve in the 
indestructible drop at the heart when the channel knots at the heart are completely loosene d 
and at the same time the wisdom of appearance arises. But for the winds to dissolve into the 
indestructible drop at the heart, the channel knots at the heart have to be completely loosened first.  
 Student : If we follow the first scenario, it follows the n that the first two stages fall under verbal 
isolation due to the boundaries of the definition of mental isolation which start from the generation of the wisdom of appearance  
Response : I am not sure whether there is a big time lapse between one stage and the next, i.e., 
when  the channel knots at the heart are completely loosened, after a while the winds dissolve 
in the indestructible drop at the heart and after a while, the wisdom of appearance arises.  
 
Lesson  38          Page 257 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
I guess there is no big time gap between these three  stages. We are talking about very small 
moments of time such as a finger snap. If one posits that there is a time lag between these three events, then the qualm that was brought up will be valid.  
 Question: The definition refers to the reliance on a conso rt. What if the deity (one is practising) 
does not have a consort?  
Answer : That will come later.  
 You have to understand what mental isolation is and what are the two conditions. In order for mental isolation to happen, the channel knots at the heart must be completely loosened. The 
external condition is reliance on the consort.  
 By this definition, one can see that in order to develop mental isolation, one must rely on a seal. Is that clear from the definition? Does the definition of the mental isolation  say that in 
order to actualise the mental isolation, you need to rely on a seal? If the answer is yes, then is the opposite true, i.e., one cannot actualise mental isolation if one does not rely on a seal? One’s understanding of the definition has to be firm and one needs to clearly understand what the definition is saying.  
 There is some debate in this text as to whether one needs to rely on an action seal in order to 
actualise mental isolation but one can conclude that it is definite that to actualise m ental 
isolation, one must rely on a seal (mudra).  
 
Question: Since the definition refers to the life -force exertion of a seal as an an external  
condition, will this exclude the reliance on a wisdom (visualised) seal?  
Answer:  If it is an external seal, is that necessarily an action seal? This definition seems to be 
saying that the wisdom seal (visualised consort) can  also be considered as an external 
condition. What is the reason for it being an external seal when it is a visualised consort? This is someth ing for you to discuss.  
 1. There are some scholars who are of the view that one must rely on an action seal to develop mental isolation.  
2. There are other scholars who are of the view that in order to develop mere mental isolation, one does not need to rely on an action seal. But one definitely needs to rely on an action seal if 
one wants to develop the example clear light of the final men tal isolation in this life.  
3. Another group of scholars asserts that sharp- facultied trainees need not necessarily rely on 
the action seal either in generating (mere) mental isolation or to generate the example clear 
light of the final mental isolation. These are the views held by three different groups of scholars. It is extremely difficult for us to judge which view is correct and which view is incorrect.  
 Of these three views, there are scholars who think that Lama Tsongkhapa subscribed to the second v iew, i.e., in order to develop mere mental isolation one does not need to rely on an 
action seal. But in order to develop the example clear light of the final mental isolation in this life, then one must  rely on an action seal.  
 
Lesson  38          Page 258 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
What I have just discussed is basically a summary of two to three pages in the Tibetan text. The 
third view is not stated in this text. For our purposes here, one needs to understand that with regards to these three views, many scholars indicated that they think Lama Tsongkhapa subscribed to the second view.  
 If our system posits that one must rely on the action seal in order to develop the example clear 
light of the final mental isolation in this life, the question arises as to how Lama Tsongkhapa 
achieved enlightenment himself. L ooking at his life story, how did he display the act of 
achieving enlightenment?   He displayed the act of achieving enlightenment in the intermediate state. During the time when he was passing away, in place of the clear light of death, Lama Tsongkhapa manifested the example clear light and instead of arising in the ordinary intermediate state, Lama Tsongkhapa actualised the illusory body and on the basis of that body, he achieved enlightenment. It is clear he did not rely on an action seal during his  lif etime. Why? Because he 
wanted to show that the basis for practising his tradition is the practice of celibacy.  
 So by looking at his life story and at our assertion (which is in order to develop the example clear light of the final mental isolation in this life, one must rely on an action seal), one has to answer how Lama Tsongkhapa actualised the mental isolation in that lifetime. In that lifetime, 
he did actualise the example clear light of the final mental isolation without depending on an 
action seal.  
 
There are four states of existence:  
1. the birth existence which refers to the very moment the consciousness connects to the next life from the intermediate state  
2. “Ngon tho kyi sidpa” (Tib.) which refers to the second moment of connecting to the next life u p to and before the manifesting the mind at the time of death of that life. This can be a 
very long time.  
3. the death existence refers to when the mind at the time of death manifests  
4. the intermediate state existence comes into existence when the mind at the  time of death 
ceases.  
The reason for discussing these four existences is related to the question of Lama Tsongkhapa achieving the example clear light of the final mental isolation in that life time without 
depending on an action seal. Of these four existences, to develop the example clear light of the 
final mental isolation during “Ngon tho kyi sidpa”, one must depend on an action seal.  
 
• First, one must understand the definition of mental isolation and conclude in one’s own 
mind, “Yes, it is this and it is not that.” It is very clear in the definition. In order to develop mental isolation, one must  rely on a seal. There are two types of se als: the action seal (or 
actual consort) and the wisdom seal (visualised consort).  
• With respect to the need for relying on an actual consort, there are three views from 
different groups of scholars:  
o One view says that one needs an action seal to develop mental isolation.   
o Another view says that one needs an action seal to develop the example clear light 
 
Lesson  38          Page 259 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
of the final mental isolation and  
o The final view says the action seal is not necessary.  
• All scholars agree that one must rely on a seal to develop mental isolation but there are 
differing views as to whether this seal has to be an actual consort or not.  
• The third view indicates that in order to develop the example clear light of the final mental 
isolation, one only needs to rely on a visualised consort.  
 
According to our system, we assert that one must rely on an action seal in order to develop the 
example clear light of the final mental isolation in this life which amongst the four states of 
existen ce refers to the “Ngon tho kyi sidpa.” This particular assertion is not without a source. It 
can be found in Lama Tsongkhapa’s  Illuminating Lamp.   
 
I (the author) wonder whether this is Je Rinpoche’s intention, but since unanimous agreement 
would be diffi cult I put this (view) forward (bkod) merely to stimulate analysis. (Page 41 of the 
root text ) 
 Most people see the common side of Lama Tsongkhapa from his ordinary biography but there is also an uncommon side of him as in reality, he is the manifestation of Manjushri, Chenrezig 
and Vajrapani, the three lineages combined into one. To the common view of disciples, Lama Tsongkhapa achieved enlightenment in the intermediate state (as described above).  
 The need for (a seal) is to cultivate ( bskyangs pa ) bliss and emptiness of the generation stage 
and through that to act as the special maturer of the roots of virtue generating comprehension of the completion stage. Though there are many needs (for a seal) such as gathering the winds 
with extreme ease etc., through meditating on the methods for piercing the vital points of the body on the generation stage, it is stated that a fully qualified basis / practitioner (yul rten ) is 
extremely rare. And if one does not practice properly it is stated that there is the grea t 
disadvantage of falling to evil migrations. Therefore, it is extremely good to consummate the gross and subtle stages of the generation stage through a wisdom consort ( ye rgya ) and then 
meditate on the means for piercing ( bsnun) the points in a body of the completion stage. That 
is because such a path is capable of generating mental isolation and such disadvantages do not occur if one relies on an action seal having already obtained mental isolation. ( Page 41 of the 
root text)  
 This is an extremely import ant point: Both the practitioner and the consort one relies on must 
be fully qualified. That is extremely rare. When one is not qualified or when one’s seal is not qualified, instead of achieving enlightenment one will definitely go to the lower realms. Th is is 
something to keep in mind.  
 When one looks at the Six Session Guru Yoga, there is a section that lists out the heavy 
transgressions which include, “ Relying upon an unqualified consort;  /Sitting in union without 
the three recognitions.”  Relying upon  an unqualified consort is a very heavy tantric 
transgression and even when one’s consort is qualified, if one sits in union without the three recognitions, one still commits a very heavy transgression. When one’s consort is qualified, one has to sit in union with the three recognitions, i.e., seeing (1) one’s body as the deity’s body (2) one’s speech as mantra and (3) one’s mind as Dharma. A very heavy tantric transgression is 
 
Lesson  38          Page 260 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
said to be  even more serious than committing a root downfall of the individual liberation vows.  
 
A qualified consort (seal) refers to one of the three types of action seal -  the field born, mantra 
born and simultaneously born. When one is not qualified to do this practice, it will not lead one closer to enlightenment but only to the  lower realms so one should be very careful.  
 When is the time for one to engage in the practice of using a consort? One has to consummate 
the coarse and subtle generation stages on the basis of a wisdom consort. Then through 
striking the vital points of t he body, one develops all the realisations of the completion stage 
up to mental isolation. Having done that, when one relies on the action seal at that time, it will only be beneficial and there will be no fault. Through the practice of seeing everything a s the 
manifestation of emptiness, which is in the nature of great bliss and causing the non -dual 
wisdom of bliss and emptiness to arise in the form of deity, with those realisations and attainments, that is the time when it will be perfect for one to enter  into union with a consort.  
 There is a correction to the translation on pg. 39 of the statement from Nagarjuna’s Five Stages : 
 Regarding that, one says: To generate the three (types of) primordial awareness of mental isolation one must depend on an action seal. The intention of the statement in the Five Stages is just that. It states:  
 
From among all the illusory (bodies) the female illusory (body) is superior. The classification of the three (types of) primordial awareness, is clearly illustrated through that.  
 
“From among all the illusory (bodies) the female illusory (body) is superior ” should read as 
“From among all the illusory , the illusory female is superior .”  
 Question: Since the field born and the mantra born action seals are themselves not qualified to 
engage in consort practice, why are we allowed to take them as consorts?   
Answer : The ideal time for relying on an action seal is during mental isolation but the use of an 
actual consort exists during the generation stage. It is mentioned in the texts that by depending on an actual consort on the generation stage, the winds enter the central channel. In the earlier section on  the definition of the completion stage, it was mentioned that on the 
generation stage, there is entry, abidance and dissolution of the winds in the central channel 
but those things happen due to relying on an actual consort. Mental isolation is the ideal time 
for relying on the actual consort as there will be no danger in doing this. Relying on an action seal before  mental isolation does carry risks. Does consort practice exist prior to mental 
isolation? Yes, it exists at the generation stage.  
 Question: O n the Sutric paths and grounds, at the path of preparation, the bodhisattva will no 
longer abandon bodhicitta. In Tantra, due to the bodhisattva’s improper reliance on an action seal and going to the lower realms, will he abandon bodhicitta then ?  
Answer : The bodhisattva on the Sutric path of accumulation can still go to lower realms but 
once he reaches the path of preparation, he will not go to the lower realms. The bodhisattva 
 
Lesson  38          Page 261 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
who makes a mistake in his practice of relying on the consort will go to the lo wer realms but is 
he still a bodhisattva? Yes, he is.  
 
    
Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  38          Page 262 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 39   DATE: 20TH AUGUST 2009  
 
When you recite the prayer of going for refuge and generating bodhicitta and when you recite 
the word, “Buddha,” what comes to mind?  Are you able to have some idea of what a buddha is? 
Similarly, when you recite the words,  “Dharma” and “ Sangha”, what comes to mind?  
 
Focus on that and see whether you have any faith towards the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha . If 
there is some faith, then wh at kind of faith is it? How did that faith arise? The essence is that 
when you recite the words Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, think about them and reflect on them. 
At the end of that, see whether you are able to feel from your heart that the Three Jewels are 
something really inconceivable and amazing. On that basis, see whether you have any interest 
in actualising them?  
 
It is really important to meditate on the meaning of refuge because when one doesn’t have a good understanding of refuge, then one will not have any aspiration seeking the Three Jewels. 
When one doesn’t have such a  aspiration, then saying that one is a Buddhist is merely (at the 
level of) words.  
 
In order to be a real Buddhist, one needs a very strong aspiration to seek out the Three Jewels and become like them. When one has that, then one is allowed to identify oneself as a 
Buddhist. One of the benefits of going for refuge to the Three Jewels is that one won’t go to 
the lower realms. The reason for this benefit is this strong mind seeking ou t the Three Jewels 
and wanting to become like them. When one has such a strong mind, then of course one will not go to the lower realms.  
 
In order for one to be a real Buddhist, therefore, one must have meditated on these points on refuge. Before one can m editate on these points, one must have reflected on them. Before one 
can do any reflection, one must have listened to and studied the explanation of the teachings. So the three - fold activities of studying, reflection and meditation are necessary in order to for 
one to become a real Buddhist.  
 
An ideal meditation on refuge must be preceded by excellent reflection and  excellent 
reflection must be preceded by excellent studying. The more that one learns and studies, the 
greater one’s capacity for analysis and reflection will be. Then obviously the greater will be the 
extent and scope of one’s meditation. At the end of such a three -fold process i.e., after an 
excellent meditation, the result will be real faith in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha and one 
will hav e a very strong interest in seeking them out. At the end of this process, one will become 
a real Buddhist of the highest quality. In order to achieve this, the entire process that I have 
mentioned above becomes indispensable.  
 When one thinks about it, what is the reason for doing these (Basic Program) studies, studying so many different modules? One of the reasons is to recognise and understand what the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha  really are. In particular, when we study the paths and grounds, 
they help us  understand what a buddha really is. When we have a good understanding of the 
different topics like paths and grounds and the achievement of buddhahood, of what it takes to 
 
Lesson  39          Page 263 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
become a buddha, only then will the thought arise, “Buddhahood is not really a simp le thing. It 
is something inconceivable and amazing.” Then you will really  appreciate what a buddha is. 
This comes after having done these studies. When one does not understand the paths and grounds well and one thinks of the Buddha, then nothing much com es to the mind.  
 Sometimes, it is possible that students who engage in these studies may  think; “What is the point of doing this? It is pointless and useless. What does it have to do with me?”  We should 
understand that one of the benefits for studying these topics is to understand in whom we are 
taking refuge? Who is this Buddha? In order to understand what a buddha is, then these studies are indispensable.   Through such studies, we come to recognise our objects of refuge – the Buddha, Dharma and 
Sangha.  Through our analysis, we come to develop faith in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha . 
Through that faith, we come to develop a strong interest in seeking them out and to actualise them. When one has that kind of strong aspiration, naturally one’s actions of bo dy, speech and 
mind will be modified and change for the better. One becomes subdued, disciplined and also good -hearted. Otherwise, it is very difficult to become a good- hearted person just on the basis 
of being a Buddhist on the nominal level.  
 Just by sa ying “I am a Buddhist” and then trying to become a good person, I think this is really 
quite difficult. You should remind yourself of this. If you think that what you are doing here is 
just a waste of time, that it is useless and of no benefit, then you should understand that what 
you are studying here actually helps you to establish the foundation for being a Buddhist and without this, nothing works. It is basically to come to an understanding of what is a buddha, the 
object of our faith.  
 
*****************************  
Impromptu quiz:  What is the  definition of generation stage?  
 Geshe -la: Don’t look at the book. This is not the time to look at the book. If you can write, you 
just write. If you cannot write,  that is all right. If you know the answer, that is good. If you don’t, then you have to work a bit harder.  The reason I asked this question is to see if you can remember or not. The point is that we have to revisit this material every now and then so as not to forget it.  
 
*****************  
We are now  looking at the etymology (not the definition) of the term, mental isolation.  
• The object is the mind.  
• The mind referred to here is the mind that is the root of samsara together with its 
mount, the wind.  
• The meaning of isolation in this context is the med itation on the yoga of non -dual bliss 
and emptiness.  
 
It is also taught in the Paramitayana that one must realise emptiness in order to achieve liberation. Without this realisation, one will not be freed from samsara. The introduction to the 
 
Lesson  39          Page 264 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
nature of the  mind given in the Causal Perfection Vehicle and even in the three lower classes of 
Tantra is different from that given in Highest Yoga Tantra. It is only in Highest Yoga Tantra that 
one is fully introduced to the nature of the mind, hence the need to ente r (the path of) Highest 
Yoga Tantra.    
 In Highest Yoga Tantra, one is introduced to the existence and the nature of the subtle mind and in the path of Highest Yoga Tantra, one transforms the entity of that mind into the nature 
of great bliss. One then uses that mind of great bliss, to realise e mptiness. This is only taught in 
Highest Yoga Tantra.  
  
The simultaneously born joy that is generated on the path of Highest Yoga Tantra must be used 
to realise emptiness, otherwise that joy will not lead one out of samsara and one will continue to circle  in samsara.  In this sense, it is the same as the Paramitayana which clearly explains the 
need to realise emptiness in order to achieve liberation. This is what we are actually referring to when we talk about the true path. These studies can be seen as another way of introducing us to the meaning of the Dharma Jewel.  
 The meaning of mental isolation is to generate the mind which is the root of samsara into the entity of non -dual bliss and emptiness.  
 One initially achieves the mental isolation with the ge neration of the wisdom of appearance 
after which the wisdom of increase is generated followed by  the wisdom of near -attainment 
and clear light.  
 
There is a section in the text eliminating qualms as to whether the appearance, increase and near- attainment that arise during mental isolation are necessarily fully qualified empties. To 
summarise this discussion, while on the path, the empties that arise during the first two isolations (i.e., physical and verbal isolation) are not  fully qualified empties. Even the empties 
that arise during the mental isolation are not necessarily  fully qualified empties.  
  This is why I ask you to read before coming to class so when I summarise these things in class, you can check whether you have arrived at the same  conclusio n.  
  
When are the fully qualified empties generated on the path?  The fully qualified empties are 
generated on the path during the example clear light of the final mental isolation. Why is this so? It is because during the final mental isolation, all the w inds are able to dissolve into the 
indestructible drop (at the heart) just like they would naturally do at the time of death.  
• During the time of the basis, the fully qualified empties arise only at the time of death.  
• At the time of the path, the fully qualified empties arise only during the final mental 
isolation.  
 
There are differing views on this. Some experts even claim that the empties which arise during physical isolation are fully qualified empties. For our purp oses, what we need to know is what I 
have just said: The fully qualified empties only arise during final mental isolation at the time of 
the path and the reason why this is so.  
 
Lesson  39          Page 265 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
During final mental isolation, all the winds including the pervasive wind dissolve into the 
indestructible drop and through that dissolution, the fully qualified empties arise. Although the empties do arise during the physical and speech isolations, they are not the same as the empties that arise due to all the winds dissolving in the indestructible drop during (final) 
mental isolation. The (empties) that arise prior to (final) mental isolation are not fully qualified empties.  
 Question: After the final mental isolation, i.e, after one has achieved the example clear light (of final mental isolation), henceforth the four empties of the basis of the forward process will 
never ever occur again because they have been purified?  
Answer : Yes.  
 Question:  With reference to the four empties, what is the meaning of “empty” in this context?  
Answer : When we talk about the four empties  in general, not about the path,  the word “empty” 
refers to their being empty or free from the 80 indicative conceptions. When we divide the 80 indicative conceptions according to the first three empties:  
• the first empty has 33 indicative conceptions  
• the second empty has 40 indicative conceptions and  
• the third empty has 7 indicative conceptions,  
For example, when the mind of white appearance manifests, all the minds of the 80 indicative conceptions  are stopped.  
 Question: Although the example clear light (at final mental isolation) is said to be a fully 
qualified empty, is there still dualistic appearance at that time?  
Answer: During the time of the basis, one has to understand when the fully qualified four 
emptie s arise and when they do not arise. During the time of the basis, the fully qualified four 
empties only arise at the time of death. The four empties also arise during the time of deep sleep but they are similar in type but are not fully qualified empties.  
 At the time of the basis, when does the clear light arise? The clear light arises at the time of death, i.e. when the mind of clear light of death manifests. What must happen during the time of the basis for the fully qualified clear light to arise? The time of death when all the winds naturally dissolve into the indestructible drop.  
 When we are talking about the path, the fully qualified empties do not arise during physical 
and verbal isolations. The fully qualified empties do not necessarily arise during mental 
isolation but the fully qualified empties arise during the final  mental isolation.  
 
Question:   Is the example clear light during final mental isolation an inferential cognition of 
emptiness?  
Answer:  The example clear light is not a direct perceiver. The example clear light is an 
inferential cognition which makes it a conceptual consciousness. It is a conceptual valid 
cogniser.  
 Question: (With reference to the earlier question), what are the empties of the forward process 
 
Lesson  39          Page 266 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
at the time of the basis “purified” of?  
Answer : Instead of using “purified,” one should understand this to mean will never occur again. 
After one realises the example clear light (of the final mental isolation), then what? After that , 
the empties of the reverse process arise. Simultaneously with the first empty (of the reverse 
order), one arises into the impure illusory body.  
 Answer to student’s question: During the time of the basis, when the white appearance arises, 
it is empty of the 80 indicative  conceptions. (If this is so), then at the time of the path,  of 
course (these 80 indicative conceptions) will stop. In order for it to be the wisdom of white appearance, it has to be free from the 80 indicative conceptions.  
 In this conte xt, “fully qualified” means the real thing. Although the empties do arise when we 
are sleeping they are not the real empties. The real empties arise during the time of basis, at the time of death, when all the winds dissolve naturally into the indestructible drop. Why do the real empties only arise during the time of the basis at the time of death? This is because at the time of death, the winds dissolve into the indestructible drop.  
When you understand this, then it will be easy for you to understand what happens at the time of the path.   During the time of the path, the actual (real) empties only arise during the final mental isolation. The similitudes do arise during physical and verbal isolation but they are not the real 
empties.  
 
The wisdoms of appear ance, increase and near -attainment that arise during mental isolation 
are not necessarily  the real things but the actual  wisdoms of appearance, increase and near-
attainment do arise during final  mental isolation. There is a basis for this difference. Why is 
there a time when they are not fully qualified and a certain time when they are? The difference comes in whether the winds actually completely dissolve into the indestructible drop or not. You must understand this very clearly. It is only when all the wi nds dissolve into the 
indestructible drop –  be it at the time of the basis or the time of the path that the fully 
qualified empties of the respective states arise.  
 In Highest Yoga Tantra, one tries to join two things – emptiness and bliss. Depending on the 
tenet system, emptiness can refer to:  
1. the emptiness of the self -sufficient substantially existent person.  
2. the emptiness of subject and object being different substantial entities  
3. the emptiness of existing by way of its own uncommon mode of subsistence w ithout being 
posited by the force of appearing to a non- defective awareness.  
4. the emptiness of inherent existence  
 From the perspective of the sharp -facultied trainees of the Guhyasamaja Tantra, the view of 
emptiness of those jewel -like disciples is the view of the Consequence Middle Way School in 
which all phenomena are empty of existing by way of their own character. But, on the path, the emptiness that can be conjoined with great bliss can also be the emptiness that is posited by the Autonomy Middle Way School or the Mind Only School. The emptiness of the self- sufficient 
substantially existent person is not mentioned in the text, i.e., that that can be conjoined with 
 
Lesson  39          Page 267 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
great bliss.  As to the reason why this is so, I am not sure.  One can analyse this furthe r: Can the 
bliss that arise during physical and verbal isolations be conjoined with the emptiness 
expounded by the lower schools such as the Autonomy Middle Way School or the Mind Only School?  
 Here we are talking about the emptiness that is to be conjoin ed with bliss but the bliss we are 
referring to here has to be the bliss that is generated from the completion stage of the physical 
isolation onwards which is the bliss that arises due to the winds entering, abiding and 
dissolving in the central channel. For a person on the completion stage at the level of physical or  verbal isolation, can that person conjoin the bliss he has generated with the emptiness that is expounded by the Autonomy Middle Way School and the Mind Only School?  
  Questions for discussion on Sunday, 23
rd August 2009  
 
1. What is difference between mere and special mental isolations?  
 
2. Is the wisdom of appearance arising from the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the 
central channel necessarily a completion stage?  
 3. (a) Does one transfer from physical isolation to verbal isolation when the wisdom of 
appearance arises through meditating on the life -force exertion of the mantra drop at the 
heart?  
 
3. (b) At that time, do the winds dissolve into the heart level of the centr al channel?  
 4. After one achieves the example clear light, will one definitely achieve enlightenment in that lifetime or not?  
  
 
 
 
 
Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
  
 
Lesson  39          Page 268 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 40   DATE: 23RD AUGUST 20 09  
 The sutras say that the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha are the objects of refuge for those seeking 
liberation. We should reflect on why they are  objects of refuge and why we need to depend on them especially for those who are seeking liberation.  
 
What is refuge? It is the understanding that the Buddha, Dhar ma and Sangha  are definitely 
able to protect us from the fears of the suffering of samsara, particularly the suffering of the 
lower realms. This is the faith of conviction that they have the ability to do this. How do they protect us? When we analyse this and see from the (depths of our hearts) that the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha  are able to do so, we will really develop faith in them.  
 This is important and we should try and see whether we can develop this refuge. All of us consider ourselves to be Buddhis ts. Some of us may even say we have been Buddhists for a 
long time. We may  also say we have been practising for a long time but when we actually check to see whether real refuge -  that thing that determines whether we are Buddhists or not 
– exists in our hearts, I guess it will probably be difficult to say with conviction that we are 
really Buddhists.  
 Therefore, refuge is not simply a verbal exercise. We should strive to practise the real refuge 
that arises in our hearts and minds. It is important we try  to do this for the next five minutes, 
reflecting and seeing whether we are able to produce this sense of real refuge in our hearts.  
 
If you were asked, “Where is the Buddha that you take refuge in? Where does he abide?” what 
will be your answer?  
 Geshe -la: Is the Buddha on the throne, at the altar or everywhere? What do you think? It is not 
easy. You are a Buddhist and you go for refuge but you don’t even know where the Buddha is. Someone asked a Muslim: “Where is Allah?” He replied that Allah is everywhe re. That is why 
they do not have anything on their altar. Do you think it is same for Buddhists?  
 Geshe -la (in response to students’ answers):   
• If you say Buddha is everywhere and you have to sit on something, you will have no choice 
but to sit on the Buddha!  
 
 
• If you say every sentient being is a buddha, that means you are a buddha. Yes, there is 
buddhanature but buddhas and sentient beings are different. If you are a buddha, you cannot be a sentient being. If you are a sentient being, you cannot be a buddha.  
• If you say that a buddha depends on what you believe in, does that mean that if you believe 
someone is a buddha that someone becomes a buddha?  
• Or do you think that the thangkas and statues are buddhas?  
 Some of you say that the Buddha is everywhere, some say the statue is the Buddha and some 
say the thangka is the Buddha. Where exactly is Buddha? So actually we don’t know. How then 
 
Lesson  40          Page 269 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
can we have strong devotion towards and faith (in him)?  
 
(If you say that in the Sanghatasutra, it says that the Buddha abides  there), why did you only 
choose the Sanghatasutra? First you need to identify and posit what is the Sanghatasutra? Even that is difficult to recognise.   
 When we think of the Buddha, what should we be thinking of? When we say we take refuge in 
the Buddha and we think about how Shakyamuni Buddha got enlightened and so forth, that is 
comfortable for the mind.(But beyond that….).  
 
*****************  
Mental isolation is generated through the coming together of the two conditions -  the internal 
and external co nditions - when the four root  and five secondary winds dissolve into the 
indestructible drop and the four empties are generated serially. First there is (the wisdom of) 
appearance, followed by increase and near -attainment, culminating in clear light. The four 
empties that arise at this stage of mental isolation bear some similarity to but are not fully 
qualified empties.  
 This person who has achieved mental isolation is literally the mental isolationist. By  depending on the internal and external conditio ns and repeatedly meditating on them, this person will be 
able to cause all the winds, including the pervasive winds which abide in all the joints of the 
body, to dissolve into the indestructible drop such that the four empties –  the minds of white 
appearance, red increase, black near- attainment and clear light -  which normally arise during 
the time of death, are generated serially. They become the four fully qualified empties and this 
culminates in the realisation of the example clear light at the final me ntal isolation, which is a 
conceptual consciousness that realises emptiness conceptually.  
 
One will not be able to liberate oneself from samsara when one does not realise emptiness. In 
this context, until one actualises the example clear light at the final mental isolation (which is a 
realisation of emptiness), one will not  be able to free oneself from samsara. This is the 
distinguishing feature of Tantra. It is in Highest Yoga Tantra that one is introduced to the  most subtle mind. When one realises empti ness with this mind, then there is hope for one to achieve 
enlightenment.  
What is mental isolation? Mental isolation is produced in dependence on the two conditions which are the internal and external conditions. By depending on them, the winds, which refe r 
to the four root and five secondary winds, dissolve into the indestructible drop at the heart. When this happens, the four empties - the wisdoms of appearance, increase, near- attainment 
and clear light - are generated serially. From the moment the wisdom of appearance is 
generated, one is abiding on the state of mental isolation and is, literally, a mental isolationist.  
 Again by depending on the internal and external conditions, when one is able to cause all the 
winds (including the pervasive winds that abide in all the joints) to dissolve into the 
indestructible drop, the three empties (appearance, increase, near -attainment) are generated 
serially, culminating in the fourth empty, clear light. This clear light is the example clear light of the final mental isolation.  
 
Lesson  40          Page 270 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
• Are the three empties (appearance, increase, near -attainment) of mental isolation 
necessarily fully qualified empties? No.  
 • Do (the wisdoms of) appearance, increase and near- attainment exist during  mental 
isolation? Yes.  
 
In relation to mental isolation and the empties, we only talk about the three empties (i.e, appearance, increase and black near- attainment). We do not talk about the four empties. The 
question then arises, “Does that mean  clear light does not exist during  mental isolation?” No, 
clear light does exist.   
 
“Then why are we only talking about the three empties?” Because clear light is subsumed 
within the third empty of near -attainment and not specifically mentioned.  
 “Why do we not talk explicitly about the fourth empty?” Because the near -attainment and the 
clear light of mental isolation are similar in possessing duality, which has not subsided. It is only when one has actualised the meaning clear light that the fourth empty, clear light is mentioned separate ly because the meaning clear light is a direct realisation (of emptiness) with complete 
subsidence of all duality. Therefore, it is mentioned separately in the fourth stage.  
 If it is a clear light of mental isolation, is it necessarily the example clear light of final mental isolation?   
Geshe -la: Automatically, the answer must be no. You must get this idea. If you don’t get this, 
then you are not getting anything. Give me an illustration of this…..  
 
If it is an example clear light of the final mental isolation, is it necessarily an example clear 
light of mental isolation?  
 Is the example clear light of mental isolation necessarily a fully qualified clear light?  
The answers to the questions I am posing have already being explained and I am asking these questions to see whether you understand those explanations.   
 Geshe -la: You must first know the boundary between the fully qualified and not fully qualified 
clear light.   
 Regarding that, someone says: It follows that if it is any (of the three: white) a ppearance, (red) 
increase or (near) attainment of mental isolation it is pervasive that it is actual (dissolution) because those actual states commence from mental isolation.  
 
Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion because although it is stated that actual (dissolution) 
commences from mental isolation it is not stated that any of the three (types of) primordial awareness of mental isolation are actual (dissolution). That is because although the Ornament of Realisation ( mngon rtogs rgyan) states that signs of  irreversibility (phyir mi ldog pa ) occur 
from the Great Vehicle path of preparation on, if one is a practitioner of the Great Vehicle path of preparation it is not pervasive that one obtains the signs of irreversibility.  
 
Lesson  40          Page 271 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
(Also your assertion) is unaccept able because in order for the actual (white) appearance, (red) 
increase and (near) attainment to occur at the time of the path, all the action winds ( las rlung ) 
must dissolve into the indestructible (drop) at the heart in just the way they do in the stages  of 
death. And though one obtains mental isolation there are many who are not capable of gathering all the pervasive winds in the heart. (Pgs. 43 –  44 of the root text)  
 
The text is saying that if it is the example clear light of mental isolation, it is not  necessarily the 
fully qualified clear light which requires that all the action (karmic) winds must  dissolve into the 
indestructible drop at the heart.  
That being the case, one has to say that when one generates the example clear light of mental 
isolat ion, all the pervasive winds do not necessarily  dissolve into the indestructible drop.  
 Student : I am having problems with the terminology here. You use the term, example clear 
light which I understand to refer only to the clear light that arises at the s tage of final mental 
isolation. It now sounds like example clear light actually refers to any clear light which arises during the stage of mental isolation, which is something completely different.…………….  
 Ven. Gyurme:  So you are operating from the premise that if it is an example clear light, it is 
necessarily the example clear light of the final mental isolation.  
 
Student : Yes. Is that understanding correct?  
 
I have already clearly established earlier that if it is an example clear light of mental isolation, it 
is not necessarily an example clear light of final mental isolation.   
 Geshe -la: That one must be clear.  
 Question: Does that mean that the term “example clear light” is used to refer to any clear light generated during the process of mental isolation, be it a fully qualified clear light or not? Basically, what is the boundary of the example clear light?  
Answer : The boundary is mental isolation.  
 It was established earlier that if it is an example clear light of mental isolation, it is not  
necessari ly an example clear light of final mental isolation.   
The point here is the process by which we reach this conclusion:  The text is basically saying that if it is an example clear light of mental isolation, it is not necessarily the fully qualified (actua l) clear light because for the actual clear light to arise, all the karmic winds must dissolve 
into the indestructible drop at the heart. But an example clear light of mental isolation does not necessarily arise from the dissolution of all the karmic winds  into the indestructible drop.  
 Question:  Can we say that the reason for calling it an example clear light as opposed to the 
non-fully qualified clear lights of physical and verbal isolations is because that clear light of 
mental isolation has already bee n absorbed into the indestructible drop? That is why we call it 
an example clear light even though it is not fully qualified.  
Answer : Of course the actual  example clear light is the example clear light of the final mental 
 
Lesson  40          Page 272 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
isolation. But example clear light on its own, why is it called “example” clear light?  It 
symbolises (or is an analogy for) the meaning clear light. It symbolises the fruit of the cause.   
 The actual example clear light occurs during final mental isolati on. That means prior to that,  
the path clear light is not generated  
 Question: What is the substantial cause of the example clear light of the final mental isolation? 
I am trying to clarify whether it is the wisdom of mental isolation or is it fully qualified clear 
light of the basis .  
Answer : I guess one can posit the example clear light of mental isolation to be the substantial 
cause of the example clear light of the final mental isolation. The winds which are the mount of the example clear light of  mental isolation are the co -operative conditions for the generation of 
the example clear light of the final mental isolation.  
 This is something we really have to understand: what is the substantial cause, i.e., the main producer, of the example clear lig ht of final mental isolation:  
• What precedes the example clear light of the final mental isolation?  
• It is the mind of the black near -attainment.  
• What comes before the mind of the black near -attainment?  
• It is the mind of red increase.  
• What comes before the mind of red increase?  
• It is the mind of white appearance.  
• These are the stages of the different minds arising during the forward process: The mind of 
white appearance   the mind of red increase  the mind of black near attainment  
culminating in the clear  light.  
 Earlier, I had posited that the example clear light of mental isolation is the substantial cause of the example clear light of the final mental isolation. But  
the example clear light of the final mental isolation is necessarily preceded by the mind of black near- attainment? Is that mind of black near -attainment the substantial cause that continues on 
to become the example clear light of the final mental isolation?  
 
Let us talk about the death dissolution process where the sense consciousnesses di ssolve into 
one another in relation with the four elements.  What does it mean when we say the earth 
(element) dissolves into the water (element)? Are we saying that the earth becomes water? If not, then how does the earth dissolve into water?  
 When we say  the earth dissolves into water, it means that the ability of the earth element to 
act as a support for the consciousness has diminished and it is no longer able to function as that element. It does not mean that earth becomes water.  
 The sense consciousne sses will gradually dissolve into one another and there will come a time 
when the sense consciousnesses cease to manifest. At that time, the minds of the 80 indicative conceptions will arise. Have the sense consciousnesses transformed into the entity of th e 
minds of the 80 indicative conceptions? No. The minds of the 80 indicative conceptions  
 
Lesson  40          Page 273 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
gradually dissolve in a certain order and cease to operate. This also happens in stages: first the 
33 indicative conceptions related to appearance dissolve and ceases  to operate, then the 40 
indicative conceptions related to increase manifest (and dissolve) and so forth (up to) the seven indicative conceptions related to near attainment  
 When we say the 33 indicative conceptions related to appearance dissolve and ceas es to 
operate, it means the ability of this mind to apprehend its respective objects degenerates. This 
is what we mean by “dissolves.”  
 In relation to the 80 indicative conceptions, at the end of the dissolution process, the mind of white appearance arise s which then dissolves and the mind of red increase arises. The mind of 
red increase dissolves and then the mind of black near- attainment arises. When the mind of 
black near -attainment dissolves, the mind of clear light then arises.  
 These are the stages in which the mind arises but the qualm is this:  
• Does the mind of white appearance become the mind of red increase?  
• Does the mind of red increase become the mind of black near -attainment?  
• Does the mind of black near -attainment transform into the entity of clear light?  
Earlier on, we had categorised the body and mind into three levels: coarse, subtle and most (extremely) subtle. Can the coarse mind then become a subtle mind? If one says that the coarse mind can transform into the entity of the subtle mind, then the reverse must also be true: that the most subtle mind can become a subtle or coarse mind. It is very difficult to say 
that the most subtle mind can become coarser. That can never happen.  
 
  
We had also talked earlier about the indestructible dro p, of which there are two: (1) the 
indestructible drop pertaining to this life and (2) the everlasting indestructible drop. The latter 
is referring to the most subtle wind and mind which will remain forever like that. It is very difficult to accept that the most subtle mind can become coarser.  
 That being the case, what then is the substantial cause of the example clear light of the final mental isolation? Where does it come from?   
    
 
Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivi en Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  40          Page 274 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 41   DATE: 25TH AUGUST 20 09  
 We should reflect on the meaning of the prayer of refuge and generating bodhicitta:  
• With respect to going for refuge, we have to identify the object of refuge and generate the 
faith of conviction.  
• With respect to the I who is going for refuge, we should refl ect on how that I exists as 
something merely designated through the force of conceptuality.  
• We should see whether we have faith in the Three Jewels and whether that faith moves the mind.  
 
When we recite this prayer, we should be affirming our practice of refuge and our faith in the 
Three Jewels and seek out the Three Jewels so that we can be of benefit to all living beings. This is something we should pray for all the time and reciting the refuge prayer is a verbalisation of that wish.  
 When we talk abou t sentient beings, we should focus on the people around us, sitting on our 
left and right and check whether we can see the reasons as to why we should have compassion for them. Once that is done, we can try and see whether we can develop that compassion. W e 
should try for the next five minutes to reflect on these points and see whether there is some sort of feeling in the heart.  
 
It is really important to meditate on refuge and bodhicitta because one will accumulate the 
collection of merit and by generating  the altruistic intention, one purifies a lot of negativities 
and one will naturally stop engaging in activities that will harm others.  
 When our practice of refuge and bodhicitta is good, whatever virtuous activities we undertake, such as listening to the  teachings or doing our  daily commitments, we will do them happily. 
Since the majority of you have studied quite a bit, you should be able to understand the point behind the statements I have made –  such as, “There is a lot of benefit to going for refuge 
because one can accumulate a lot of merit” -  and the reasons that render them true.   
 It is said that going for refuge and generating the altruistic intention are extremely important. We should try our best to do this in our daily lives even though we can  spend no more than one 
or two minutes on it. This is something we have to do everyday.  
 
2.1.3.1.2.1.2.2.2  THE CONCENTRATION S OF TWO TRUTH S 
 
This has two (subdivisions):  
1 Completion stage of the individual two truths  
2 Completion stage of the indivisible two truths  
 
2.1.3.1.2.1.2.2.2.1  COMPLETION STAGE OF THE INDIVIDUAL TWO T RUTHS.  
 This has two (subdivisions):  
 
Lesson  41          Page 275 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
1 Completion stage of the relative illusory (body)  
2 Completion stage of the ultimate clear light  
 
2.1.3.1.2.1.2.2.2.1.1  COMPLETION STAGE OF THE RELATIVE ILLUSORY (B ODY)  
 
The completion stage (practice) (1) from establishing the actual body of the deity adorned with signs and marks through the metaphoric clear light of the final mental isolation acting as the co-active condition (lhan cig byed rkye n) and the fundamental winds ( gnyug rlung) that serve 
as its mount acting as the substantial cause (nyer len), concurrent with establishing near attainment of the reverse order through the winds slightly moving from the metaphoric clear light of the final mental isolation, (2) up to generating the proximate causes which are the 
means of (achieving) the actual clear light, is the nature of the stage of the illusory body.  
 (Interpreter ’s correction: The first heading should read as “ THE CONCENTRATION OF TWO 
TRUTHS .”)  
 When the wind which is the mount of the example clear light of the final mental isolation stirs, the mind becomes coarser. When the mind of black near -attainment of the reverse order 
manifests, concurrently that is the time when the impure illusory body is achieved (or first established).  
• The substantial cause for the impure illusory body is the subtle wind upon which the 
example clear light of the final mental isolation is mounted.   
• The co -operative condition for the impure illusory body is the example clear light of the 
final mental isolation.  
By depending on these two conditions, one achieves the impure illusory body which is said to be the actual body of the deity adorned with the signs and exemplifications.  
 
In relation to the (minds of) ap pearance, increase and near attainment;  
• The forward order is the process by which the mind becomes subtler i.e. the mind moves 
from the coarse to a subtler level. First the coarse sense consciousnesses dissolve into one 
another followed by the dissolution of the minds of the 80 indicative conceptions. After that, the mind of white appearance manifests and then dissolves into the mind of red increase which dissolves into the mind of black near- attainment, culminating in the most 
subtle mind of clear light.  
• The reverse order is the opposite of the forward order in that the mind becomes coarser. Starting from the most subtle mind of clear light, the next minds which are coarser than 
that are the minds of black near - attainment followed by red increase, white a ppearance 
and the 80 indicative conceptions after which all the sense consciousnesses start to 
manifest.  
  When you do not understand the forward and reverse orders, then you will not understand how the mind becomes coarser from the mind of clear light. For example, (you will not understand) how when the mind of near -attainment arises, how that is concurrent with 
entering the intermediate state.   
 
 
Lesson  41          Page 276 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
The example clear light of the final mental isolation is the most subtle mind. What kind of mind 
will arise after that? It is the mind of black near -attainment and concurrent with the 
manifestation of that mind is the  actualisation of the impure illusory body, i.e., the impure 
illusory body arises concurrently with the mind of black near- attainment of the reverse process 
from the example clear light of the final mental isolation.  
 In order to achieve the impure illuso ry body, it must be preceded by the example clear light of 
the final mental isolation.   The deities’  bodies that are meditated on during the generation stage and completion stage of the physical, verbal and even mental isolations are not the actual bodie s of the deities.  They 
are mere mental projections of the mind and it is a meditation through mere belief. The actual deity’s body only arises at this time.  
 The boundary of the impure illusory body is said to be “ up to generating the proximate causes 
which are the means of (achieving) the actual clear light.” That is the nature of the stage of the 
illusory body.  
 This part is difficult. If you don’t want to look at the definition in greater  detail but prefer to keep it simple, you just need to know that the impure illusory body exists from the time of the 
mind of near -attainment of the reverse order which arises from the example clear light of the 
final mental isolation up to just before one attains the meaning clear light. Everyone should know when the impure illusory body exists: It is from the time it becomes into being up to just before the meaning clear light.  
 But when one analyses the definition further, it doesn’t  say the illusory body exists up to prior 
to the attainment of the meaning clear light.  
 Just keep this in your mind: This illusory body exists from the near -attainment of the reverse 
process up to but not including the attainment of the meaning clear ligh t.  
 I am not stating this as the definitive conclusion but I think we may have to differentiate the impure illusory body from the stages of the impure illusory body, that there is a difference between the two. The definition in the text describes the enti ty of the stage of the (impure) 
illusory body.  
 The impure illusory body  is established concurrently with the mind of near -attainment. After 
that mind is the mind of increase followed by the mind of appearance. This is the reverse order and these are the stages of the illusory body. There are also the stages of the forward process 
– appearance, increase and near- attainment – which can also be posited as the stages of the 
illusory body.  
 After one has achieved the illusory body, one meditates repeatedly on the stages of dissolution 
of the two concentrations (apprehending the entirety and subsequent destruction) in order to try to achieve the meaning clear light until one receives a sign that one is about to achieve the meaning clear light. I think we can po sit that sign to be the proximate cause.   
 
Lesson  41          Page 277 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Prior to achieving the meaning clear light, one goes through the (minds of) appearance, increase and near- attainment of the forward process again which then culminates in the 
meaning clear light. That meaning clear light together with the three minds preceding it are posited to be the stages of the meaning clear light.  
 This is my view. If we take this sign to be the proximate cause, after one has received the sign 
then one is going to actualise the meaning clear light. But before one can do that, one has to go 
through the appearance, increase and near- attainment of the forward process again. These 
three are not clear lights but they are stages of the meaning clear light. Including the meaning clear light, those four are also not stages of the (impure) illusory body.  
 When we posit such a difference, then we can explain the definition in the text which tries to establish the boundary of the illusory body “ up to generating the proximate causes which are 
the means of (achieving) the actual clear light .” (Actual clear light = meaning clear light)  
 When does the impure illusor y body  exist? It exists from the time it comes into existence up to 
just before achieving the meaning clear light.  
 To understand what I have just said, it shows how important it is to look at the material continuously as everything is interrelated. If you  do not understand the stages of mental 
isolation, example clear light and the stages of the meaning clear light, then you will find it difficult to understand whatever I have said so far.   
 
This is what I think. I think that it is better to posit the app earance, increase and near-
attainment that precede the meaning clear light to be the stages of the meaning clear light. If not, one will run into difficulties.  
 It will be good if you are interested in the definition and look at it in more detail and discuss it among yourselves. If not, at least you need to understand how this impure illusory body comes into being when the two conditions –  the substantial cause and the co -operative condition – 
come together.  
 
• The illusory body here is the actual  body of th e deity. It cannot be the coarse body of the 
person who has the realisation as it is something separate from the coarse body.  
• At the time of achieving the illusory body, what arises is not only the deity’s body but the 
entire supported and supporting mandala, which arise from the mere winds and mind.  
• The impure illusory body is a fully qualified wisdom body the nature of which is  
consciousness. It is not consciousness but it is the reflective appearance of the mind of 
clear light.  
• The impure illusory body is also referred to as a vajra body but it is not the actual (or fully qualified) vajra body. It is something similar. Why not? For it to be a fully qualified vajra body, it has to be immutable but the continuum of this vajra body of a similar type is severed and ceases upon achievement of the meaning clear light so it is not immutable and therefore not a fully qualified vajra body.  
 
 
Lesson  41          Page 278 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Keep in mind what has been said and on this basis, read the text (again)  and then discuss 
among yo urselves and see whether there are any contradictions. In this way, both of us will 
benefit.  
 
• When one achieves the illusory body, there is no more intermediate state. Such an illusory 
body is the path sambhogakhaya .  
• I have mentioned earlier that when one  achieves the example clear light of the final mental 
isolation, that is the thing that eliminates ordinary death. In place of ordinary death, one 
achieves the example clear light of the final mental isolation which is the path dharmakhaya.  
• Why is the impu re illusory body called “impure”? It is so called because it is not purified of 
the obstructions to liberation (afflictive obstructions) and is also termed the contaminated body.  
 From this we can see that in order to cut the continuum of samsara, one must achieve mental isolation. Cutting the continuity of afflictions is not an easy thing because one cannot do it without mental isolation. In order to develop mental isolation, it mu st necessarily be preceded 
by the realisations of verbal isolation, which in turn is preceded by physical isolation. Before that is the generation stage.   Sentient beings have both a gross, temporary body and mind and a more subtle, fundamental body and m ind.  As long as the gross body performs actions such as moving and so on, for that 
long the fundamental body does not arise in a similar aspect (bzhin lag). If one stops (chad) the 
gross body performing actions such as moving and so on, by the strength of dissolving all gross 
winds without exception in the indestructible drop at the heart, the fundamental body arises in a similar aspect (bzhin lag) and performs the actions of coming and going.  
 Although both gross and subtle mental consciousnesses simultaneously exist in the continuums of sentient beings, it does not contradict sutra nor is there the error that in consequence there would be two continuums because for as long as the gross mind performs the actions of 
holding its focal object and aspect, for that long subtle mind does not hold its focal object and aspect. When the subtle mind holds its focal object and aspect, the gross mind is stopped and does not exist. (Pg. 47 of the root text)  
 We have both a coarse and subtle body and mind. When the coar se body and mind are 
functioning, although the most subtle body and mind are there, they are not functioning. The 
most subtle body and mind only function when the coarse body and mind have ceased. As long 
as the coarse mind performs the action of apprehend ing its object, the most subtle mind 
cannot do likewise.  
 With respect to the place the illusory body arises, there are three schools of thought:  
• One school of thought asserts that the illusory body arises only internally which refers to inside the heart in the central channel..  
• Another school of thought asserts that the illusory body arises only externally, i.e., outside 
of one’s body.  
 
Lesson  41          Page 279 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• Yet another school of thought asserts that the illusory body can arise both internally and 
externally which means that t he yogi has a choice. It depends on how he projected his 
intention. If he intends for the illusory body to arise internally, then the illusory body will arise internally. If he has projected his intention for the illusory body to arise outside of his body,  then it will arise outside the body. It is up to the yogi.  
 Jetsun Chokyi Gyaltsen  believes the third school of thought through quoting scriptural 
authority. He asserts the illusory body can arise both internally and externally. When we look at the monastic texts of both the upper and lower tantric colleges, they assert the illusory bod y 
necessarily arises externally. Whereas Khedrub Nolsan Gyatso and Galwa Ensapa assert that 
the illusory body initially  arises internally.  
 Ngawang Palden: One should analyse which of the three assertions is the (final) intention of Je Rinpoche. (Pg. 48 o f the root text)  
 What I have said pertaining to the arising of the illusory body can be found in pages 47 and 48 of the root text. Upon reading, if your conclusion is different from what I have mentioned, you 
can bring it up.  
 
You need to know the follow ing: 
1. The time the illusory body is attained.  
2. The illusory body is:  
• in the entity of consciousness and is a fully qualified wisdom body  
• similar to the vajra body but is not a fully qualified vajra body  
• a fully qualified deity’s body with signs and exemplifications which is different from the ordinary coarse body  
3. It is called an impure illusory body because it is not purified of the obstructions to liberation.  
 Question: The minds that accompany the impure illusory body, what are those minds?  
Answer:   The example clear light of the final mental isolation is the condition for the impure 
illusory body to arise. The impure illusory body arises concurrently with the mind of near -
attainment. So when the mind of near - attainment manifests, the example clear  light of the 
final mental isolation ceases.   Only when the example clear light of the final mental isolation ceases can  the coarser mind of near- attainment manifest. When the mind becomes (even) coarser, the mind of near -
attainment ceases and the mind o f increase manifests and so forth.  
 At that time the illusory body is present. It is not the most subtle mind. It is in the nature of the most subtle wind but it is not the most subtle mind. There are different views on this as some assert that the illuso ry body is form and is not consciousness and neither is it atomically 
established.  
 Is the illusory body a path? Yes, it is. In Highest Yoga Tantra, a path is not necessarily a 
consciousness.  
 
Lesson  41          Page 280 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Question: Does the coarse body still exist at the time of the impure illusory body?  
Answer : At that time of the impure illusory body, the relationship with the coarse body has not 
yet been severed.  
 Question: What does the sense consciousnesses of that coarse body perceive at that time?  
Answer : Everything appears as pure.  
 (Interpreter ’s correction: On page 46 of the root text, “ Differentiating the subtle and gross 
bodies through the strength of meditation; Differentiating the subtle and gross bodies through karma and affliction, ” the word “differentiating” should read as “separating.” )  
     Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
Lesson  41          Page 281 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 42   DATE: 27TH AUGUST 2009  
 
I have been saying that meditating on refuge and generating bodhicitta is very important. 
When we say we receive the blessings of the Three Jewels, the real b lessing is when we 
develop refuge and are able to generate the altruistic intention in our minds. That is the real 
blessing of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha .  
 
When we make requests to the Three Jewels, we say, “Please grant me blessings. Please bless 
me.”  In Tibetan, the word “blessing” or “jin lab” has the connotation of transforming into 
something better, to improve (oneself).  
 
When we have refuge in our hearts and develop the altruistic intention that is when the 
blessings of the Three Jewels enter our mental continua. What happens then? As I had 
mentioned before, along with those blessings, we accumulate an immeasurable collect ion of 
merit and purify a vast amount of negativities.  
 
It is not enough simply to receive those blessings, but from our side we have to ensure that 
they enter our hearts by our generating refuge and bodhicitta. By bringing the objects of refuge to our mi nds and thinking about suffering, we go for refuge to the Three Jewels and, through 
our contemplation of the suffering of sentient beings, we develop compassion and bodhicitta.  
 We should try to do this in the next five minutes and see whether we are able  to develop those 
feelings of refuge and bodhicitta in our hearts and produce a happy mind as we do so. When we manage to generate some sort of feeling from this, then we would have received the blessings of Three Jewels within this short time.  We stand to gain from that. Meditation and 
reflection are not about the mind becoming very dull or not thinking of anything at all. Meditation is done with an alert and active mind.  
 
*****************  
The completion stage (practice) (1) from establishing the actual body of the deity adorned with signs and marks through the metaphoric clear light of the final mental isolation acting as the 
co-active condition (lhan cig byed rkyen) and the fundamental winds ( gnyug rlung) that serve 
as its mount acting as the substantial cause (nyer len), concurrent with establishing near 
attainment of the reverse order through the winds slightly moving from the metaphoric clear 
light of the final mental isolation, (2) up to generating the proximate causes which are the 
means o f (achieving) the actual clear light, is the nature of the stage of the illusory body . (Pg. 
46 of the root text)  
“Up to  generating the proximate  causes” means “includes generating the proximate causes.” It 
should read, “ Up to but not including generating t he proximate causes, ” because the proximate 
causes for achieving the meaning clear light are part of the stage of meaning clear light and not part of the stage of the illusory body.  
 
 
Lesson  42          Page 282 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
In relation to this definition, as I said in the last lesson, one has to differentiate the illusory 
body from the stage of the illusory body.  
• When does the impure illusory body exist?  It exists from the second moment when one 
arises from the example clear light of the final mental isolation up to but not including the attainmen t of meaning clear light.  
• When does the stage of the illusory body exist?  That exists from the mind of near -
attainment of the reverse order, after arising from the example clear light of the final mental isolation, up to but not including the generation of the proximate causes for 
achieving the meaning clear light.  
 The reason why I say that there is a difference between the illusory body and the stage of the illusory body is due to the (above) definition which is of the stage of the illusory body. The 
boun dary is up to but not including generating the proximate causes which are the means of 
achieving the meaning clear light. Otherwise, if we do not make such a differentiation, we are 
going to have problems.  
 In order for the person who has obtained the impure illusory body to achieve the meaning clear light, he meditates over and over again on the stages of dissolution of the two concentrations (apprehending the entirety and subsequent destruction). Through that meditation, he will receive a sign that he is about to achieve the meaning clear light. On his way to achieving the meaning clear light, he will generate the mind of appearance which will dissolve and the mind of increase will arise. This mind of increase then dissolves and the mind of near -attainment  arises, subsequently culminating in the meaning clear light.  These three 
minds (white appearance, red increase and black near- attainment) prior to the meaning clear 
light are the stage of the meaning clear light and not the stage of the illusory body.  
 
The achievement of the meaning clear light is not necessarily  preceded by the impure illusory 
body. For example, in the case of Shakyamuni Buddha, when he was on the Sutric path and on 
the 10
th bodhisattva ground, he was conferred the third initiation, the  wisdom knowledge 
initiation. Through receiving that initiation, he generated the minds of appearance, increase, and near -attainment and subsequently, he manifested the meaning clear light. In the text, at 
which path did Shakyamuni Buddha enter Tantra? He entered the Tantric path at the fourth stage of meaning clear light. Those three minds (white appearance, red increase and black near- attainment) prior to that are necessarily the stage of the meaning clear light.   
 If you want to keep it simple, then pertaining to the impure illusory body, it exists concurrently with the mind of black near -attainment of the reverse order (after arising from the example 
clear light of the final mental isolation) up to just prior to th e achievement of the meaning clear 
light.  
 
Question:  The beginning when the impure illusory body exists and the beginning of the stage of 
the illusory body –  are they the same?  
Answer : The impure illusory body is achieved concurrently when the mind of near -attainment 
of the reverse order is manifested from the example clear light of the final mental isolation. 
The stage of the illusory body starts with the mind of near -attainment.  
 
 
Lesson  42          Page 283 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Question:  When does the impure illusory body and the stage of the illuso ry body end?  
Answer:  In terms of terminology, we say that the impure illusory body “ceases” but there is no 
terminology describing the cessation of the stage of the illusory body. If we want to look at its 
cessation, w e can say that the stage of the illuso ry body ceases when the mind of white 
appearance prior to the achievement of meaning clear light arises. When that mind of white appearance arises, that is the stage of the meaning clear light. Since that is not the stage of the illusory body, it ceases at  that point.  
 Question: At the last class, it was posited that the proximate causes are attaining the signs for the (impending) achievement of the meaning clear light. Now it sounds like the proximate causes are achieving the mind of white appearance prior to the arising of meaning clear light. 
So do the proximate causes and the mind of white appearance (prior to the achievement of the meaning clear light) arise serially or concurrently?  
Answer : When we posit that the stage of the meaning clear light starts  from the mind of white 
appearance prior to the achievement of meaning clear light, what is the fault in saying this?  
 Question:  That means the signs of achieving the meaning clear light falls under the illusory 
body and they are not the proximate causes,  right?   
Answer : When one is about to achieve the meaning clear light, one will get a sign but this sign 
is not the cause of the meaning clear light. “Proximate” means near to, i.e., one is near to the 
achievement of meaning clear light. This is something  worth pondering over. If we do not posit 
in such a way, then we will have difficulty dealing with the definition.  
 
******************  
When one has achieved the meaning clear light, the impure illusory body dissolves into the meaning clear light.  
 What is the basis for actualising the impure illusory body? The basis is the  example clear light 
of the final mental isolation. When compared to the meaning clear light, this example clear light would be considered coarse so when one achieves the meaning clear lig ht, the mind 
becomes subtler.    The impure illusory body, which is the mount of the example clear light of the final mental isolation, dissolves into the meaning clear light. This is according to Khedrup Je’s view. There is also a qualm related to this view.   
• We are trying to establish the reason why the impure illusory body ceases upon the achievement of the meaning clear light.    
• The qualm is this: if both the example clear light of the final mental isolation and the meaning clear light are extremely subtle minds, how does one posit that one mind is subtler than the other?  
• The answer is that the example clear light of the final mental isolation which is mounted on the impure illusory body is a conceptual consciousness while the meaning clear light is a  
non-conceptual consciousness. When the meaning clear light manifests, the example clear 
light of the final mental isolation has transformed into the entity of a direct perceiver. Therefore, both the winds and the mind (the example clear light of the final  mental 
isolation and the impure illusory body) dissolve into the meaning clear light.  
 
Lesson  42          Page 284 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Question: What is the reason for the impure illusory body dissolving when the actual clear light is generated?  
 Ngawang Palden: The Notes of the Teachings of Khedrub J e states:  
 
When the actual clear light first dawns, the winds which are the mount of the 
primordial awareness of metaphoric clear light become extremely subtle and by the 
strength of that, the impure illusory body also condenses (bsdus) and dissolves into 
clear light.  
 However, both the metaphoric clear light of the final mental isolation and the actual meaning clear light are fundamental minds and similarly both the winds that are the mounts of those two are fundamental winds. Therefore one must analyse ho w a gross and subtle difference 
exists.  
 Although both the metaphoric clear light of final mental isolation and the actual meaning clear light are similar in being extremely subtle fundamental minds, there is a difference in their being conceptual and non -conceptual (rtog med). Since all gross and subtle conceptions 
together with (their) winds must dissolve at the time of actual meaning clear light, the winds that are the mount of conception and act as the direct substantial cause of the illusory body 
must dissolve. ( Pgs. 49 –  50 of the root text ) 
 
The impure illusory body is “purified” upon achievement of the meaning clear light which 
means that it no longer exists. Here we are trying to establish the reason why the impure illusory body ceases upon the achievement of the meaning clear light.  
 It is not easy to understand the reason why the impure illusory body disappears upon the achievement of the meaning clear light. What is the reason stated in the text? The answer is this: What is the basis of actualising the impure illusory body? The basis upon which the impure illusory body depends is the example clear light of the final mental isolation which is a conceptual consciousness. When one actualises the meaning clear light, the extremely subtle mind transfor ms from the entity of a conceptual consciousness into a direct perceiver. Due to 
this transformation, the impure illusory body that was dependent on the earlier conceptual consciousness disappears because that conceptual consciousness, which is its basis, has ceased 
and disappeared.   
 
Before you analyze and discuss this, you have to understand what the text says about this issue. You need to understand why the impure illusory body, which is a deity’s body, disappears upon the achievement of the meaning clear light.    
Question: Is the b asis of actualising the impure illusory body and its substantial cause the same 
thing?  
Answer : It is not the same. The basis for actualising the illusory body is both the subtle wind  
and mind.  
 
 
Lesson  42          Page 285 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Question: During the stage of the illusory body, when the exam ple clear light manifests, does 
the illusory body exist?  
Answer : Yes, there is no reason for it to cease (at that time ).  
 
You must understand why the impure illusory body ceases upon the achievement of the meaning clear light. The text is saying that when  the meaning clear light is achieved, all the 
conceptual consciousnesses must necessarily dissolve which means the example clear light of 
the final mental isolation must necessarily dissolve. When this happens, the impure illusory 
body which depends on tha t example clear light must also dissolve because that example clear 
light is the basis for actualising the impure illusory body.  
 
***************  
We had talked earlier about the indestructible drop of which there are two:  
1. the indestructible drop pertaining  to this life  
2. the everlasting indestructible drop  
 The everlasting indestructible drop refers to the extremely subtle wind and mind which are immutable because they last forever. If one accepts this, does the example clear light, which is an extremely subtle mind, go out of existence? (If it does go out of exis tence, that means) the 
example clear light which is an extremely subtle mind is not indestructible and not immutable!  
 
Is the nature of our extremely subtle wind and mind the same as the Buddha’s? In The 
Tathagata Essence , it is said all sentient beings po ssess buddha lineage, i.e., all sentient beings 
can become buddhas. The factor of clarity and knowing is posited to be the conventional 
buddha lineage. The ultimate buddha lineage is the emptiness of that factor of clarity and knowing.  
 From the perspective of Highest Yoga Tantra, all sentient beings not only possess buddha lineage but they also possess the extremely subtle winds and minds that enable them to actualise the Buddha’s form and truth bodies since beginningless time. The extremely subtle mind acts as the cause to actualise the dharmakaya (truth body) while the extremely subtle winds act as the cause to actualise the rupakaya (form body).  
 That being the case, the extremely subtle mind will go all the way to enlightenment. It follows then that t he example clear light of the final mental isolation goes all the way to clear light…..   
 The impure illusory body that is attained is a deity’s body but that deity’s body is separate from the original body that one has. Although this is so, does it mean that one has severed the connection with one’s original body?  The answer is no.  
 When one achieves the impure illusory body in this life, at that time one has not severed the connection with the coarse body. The impure illusory body is not able to fully discard the coarse body and therefore has to re -enter it. That does not mean that the impure illusory body 
is stuck inside the coarse body. It can separate from it and go out to do other tasks. The impure illusory body will then re -enter the coarse body after completing those tasks. This is what is 
meant by mixing (or blending) of birth with the nirmanakaya of the waking state.  
 
Lesson  42          Page 286 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• When one achieves the example clear light of the final mental isolation, that is the mixing 
of the dharmakaya.  
• When one achieves the impure illusory body, that is the mixing of the sambhogakaya.  
• When the impure illusory body re -enters the coarse body again, that is the mixing of the 
nirmanakaya.  
 In the last lesson, I had mentioned that the impure illusory body is a vajra body but is not a fully 
qualified vajra body because it is not immutable. This is because it ceases upon the 
achievement of the meaning clear light.  
 You need to remember this:  
• The impure illusory body is established from the subtle wind which is the mount of the exam ple clear light of the final mental isolation .  
• The impure illusory body that one achieves has not severed its connection with the coarse 
body of this life.  
• When one achieves the meaning clear light, the impure illusory body ceases.  
• The impure illusory body ceases because the basis for its coming into being,  the example clear light of the final mental isolation, which is a conceptual consciousness, dissolves when 
one manifests the meaning clear light. Since its basis has disappeared, the impure illusory  
body will also cease.  
 Having said that, this qualm arises: The example clear light and impure illusory body are the extremely subtle winds and mindd and if they can go out of existence, it is akin to saying the extremely subtle winds and minds can go out  of existence. Do one’s extremely subtle winds 
and minds go on to enlightenment? If they do go on to enlightenment, what about the example clear light?  
 If one is very certain that one’s extremely subtle winds and minds will go to enlightenment, then one s hould not doubt the example clear light.  
 In response to a student’s assertions (inaudible): One can analyse your assertion in this way:  
You accept that the extremely subtle winds and mindd will go to enlightenment, but you say 
that the example clear ligh t is a conceptual consciousness and (therefore) will not go to 
enlightenment. If it does not go on to enlightenment, it follows that it is a coarse mind. It follows that a coarse mind is a conceptual consciousness. It follows yours is a subtle mind and therefore is a direct perceiver. That is the consequence. (Your assertions are completely 
wrong!)  
 It is good to debate about this as there are many things to think about. What you are bringing up is good because you will learn. People who are shy and don’t say anything will not learn anything. If you keep quiet and at the same time think that you know the material that is no way to learn.   When you bring things up for discussion and are able to present your points, 
then you can really say that you understand .  
 
 
Lesson  42          Page 287 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Of course when we are debating it is natural for us to blush or feel embarrassed because of our 
ego. What we are doing here is the real cause for learning the subject. There is no reason to feel ashamed for making mistakes because we are all learning a nd this is part of the process. 
For those who laugh at those who make mistakes, do you think they understand? I think it is difficult to say they do.  
 Question: At the time of the basis, when all the 80 indicative conceptions have dissolved into 
the four empties, since all the conceptual consciousnesses have dissolved, can we say that the 
clear light of death which manifests is a direct perceiver though we do not realise it since we 
are in a fainting state?  
Answer : What does such a direct perceiver perceiv e?  
Student : It is a non -valid direct perceiver!  
 Question:  Are the extremely subtle winds and mind impermanent phenomena?  
Answer : Yes, one is form and the other is consciousness and they are impermanent 
phenomena, undergoing momentary change.  
 Question: W here are the predispositions of karma  deposited?  
Answer : The predispositions of karma are something very difficult (to explain) . To make it easy, 
is it all right to say that they are deposited on the most subtle mind? Do you feel comfortable with this statement?  
 I think it is all right because it is the most subtle mind that goes from life to life and therefore they have to be the carrier of the karmic imprints. That is why we are in samsara because what 
make us circle in samsara are these karmic imprints.   
 The imprints of what one does are placed by the coarse mind and at that time, one’s subtle mind is not manifest. If that is so, how can we place something on it? This particular point is extremely complicated. When we don’t think about it, things seem easy . In the twelve links, 
there is the link of compositional activities (karma) and in the end, we say that the karmic imprints are planted on the consciousness which moves from life to life and so forth.  
 The reality is that nothing is easy because all the things that look very easy become difficult when we start to think about it.  
 
We will try to finish the section on the illusory body in the next class. Please try to read up the 
section on the illusory b ody again and it will be good if you can bring up some good questions 
pertaining to this topic in the next class  
    Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  42          Page 288 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
  
 
LESSON NO: 43   DATE: 1ST SEPTEMBER 2009  
 There is a saying which goes, “If one doesn’t see the hell realms, one w on’t have faith in the 
Buddha”. To have real refuge in our hearts, we must first generate the refuge that is shared with the persons of small capacity and develop the fear of the suffering of samsara in general 
and, in particular, the suffering of the lowe r realms.  
 
If we are unable to develop the refuge of the persons of small capacity, then there is no way we can develop the refuge of the persons of medium capacity. Without that, we can forget about generating the refuge of the (persons of) great capacity.  
 Therefo re, it is very important for us to strive in the beginning to develop this refuge (of the 
persons of small capacity) not just today but continuously. We will spend the next five minutes to reflect on the suffering of the lower realms and see whether or not a real fear of that 
suffering arises in our minds.  
  
********************  
Impromptu quiz:  
1. What is the final basis for actualising the illusory body?  
2. What are the boundaries for the illusory body?  
3. Is the illusory body a buddha or not?  
4. After one achieves the illusory body, does one achieve enlightenment with that illusory body?  
5. After having achieved the illusory body, does one achieve enlightenment in that same lifetime or not?  
 There are different explanations in answer to Question 5.  
 
Now, (someone says :) a jewel -like disciple does not attain enlightenment in one life and one 
body because when obtaining union he must exchange his former gross body.  
 Ngawang Palden: There is no pervasion because there is no pervasion that in exchanging his gross body he d iscards it.  
 Moreover, in the notes composed by our guru Yanchen Galo (dbyangs can dga’ blo) to the statements of Shingza Rinpoche (shing bza’), it is stated that when the former Panchen (Lama) conferred the empowerment of Guhyasamaja at Drak yepa (brag g.ye pa) to (the monks of) Gyuto, he stated that the Tibetans had asked Atisha whether attaining enlightenment in one body and one life existed. To this Atisha replied that attaining enlightenment in one life existed but attaining enlightenment in one body did not exist. ( Pg. 49 of the root text)  
 There is the view that a jewel -like disciple can achieve enlightenment in one lifetime and in one 
body but according to this text, Lama Atisha had said there is enlightenment in one life but not in one body . When one achieves the learner’s union, one exchanges the body but one does not 
 
Lesson  43          Page 289 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
discard it.  
 
Even when one achieves the impure illusory body, one has not severed the relationship with the coarse body. The impure illusory body still has to re -enter the co arse body whereas the 
pure illusory body has severed the relationship with that body. It can enter the old coarse body again and abide there but it does not necessarily have to do so. In fact, the pure illusory body is able to enter and abide in another bo dy other than one’s own coarse body.  
 
**************  
 To help us to gain an understanding of the illusory body, 12 analogies are used to illustrate it:  
 (Concerning) the illusory body, the Compendium of the Vajra Primordial Awareness (ye shesrdo rje kyi kun las btus) states the twelve examples such as the illusory, the moon in water and so on to illustrate (the illusory body).  
 When it is generated as the body of Vajradhara from mere winds and mind:  
 1. It is like an illusory person since it is nothing but mere wind and mind though it is complete in all the main and secondary limbs.  
2. It is like the (reflection of the) moon in water since it pervades everywhere.  
 It arises everywhere to thos e who are to be subdued.  
 
3. It is like an hallucinated (mig yor) shadow body of a man, since it lacks flesh and bones etc.  
4. It is like a mirage (smig rgyu) since it moves in each moment.  
5. It is like a dream body separated from the gross body in a dre am, since it is a body 
established from mere wind and mind.  
6. It is like an echo (brag ja) since it appears to others though it belongs in the same continuum 
as the maturational body.  
7. It is like the city of Gandharas (dri za’i grong khyer) since it is the supporting and supported mandala of that body.  
 The city of Gandharas refers to the smell eaters. When they appear, the city they live in appears also. Likewise when the illusory body arises, it does so together with the the 
supporting and supported m andala.  
 
8. It is like a apparition (mig ‘phrul) since it is one but appears as many.  
 It is like seeing one moon appearing as two moons.  
 9. It is like a rainbow (‘ja’ tshon) since the five colours of the body appear unobstructed and unmixed (ma ‘drespa).  
 The illusory body is said to be able to emanate five -coloured lights without the colours mixing 
up and these lights are said to radiate for a great distance.  
 
Lesson  43          Page 290 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
10. It is like lightning in the midst of clouds since it abides inside the aggregates of the maturation body.  
11. It is like a bubble (chu bur) erupting (rdo!) in extremely clear water since it arises suddenly 
(thol) from within an empty state.  
 The illusory body arises from clear light (suddenly) like bubbles appearing suddenly on the 
water surface.  
 
12. It is like the appearance of a reflection (gzugs brnyan) of Vajradhara in a mirror since it is complete in all main and secondary limbs. ( Pg. 50 of the root text)  
 Amongst these analogies, a dream body is said to be the best one. As we fall asleep, we have almost similar experiences of the (minds of) the appearance, increase and near -attainment 
which then culminates in the clear light of sleep. Within that state, a dream body can arise from the clear light of sleep and when the dream body re -enters the coarse body, one wakes 
up from the dream.   Question: Does the dream body leave the coarse body when one dreams? Do the winds have to enter the central channel for the dream body to come about?  
Answer : When we dream, we have a subtle dream body. Is it necessary for the winds to enter 
and dissolve in the central channel during the dream state? I don’t see why that is necessary. As for the dream body, I guess the dream body does not need to remain within the coarse body.   
Question: What is the experience of achieving the impure illusory like? For example, if I were to sit in the same room as the yogi having this realisation, would I be able to see his illusory body? Does it mean when the yogi looks at his coarse body, he sees a deity’s body instead?  
Answer : Remember the three assertions of how the illusory body can arise -  internally, 
externally or both? You have to know these assertions.   What is the basis for attaining the illusory body? The basis for at taining the illusory body is the 
extremely subtle wind and mind of the final mental isolation. The illusory body is something separate from the coarse body so obviously it is not the coarse body that becomes the deity. In the case of a Guhyasamaja practiti oner, when he achieves the illusory body, that illusory body 
looks exactly like Guhyasamaja complete with the faces, hands and so forth. It is not the coarse 
body that becomes the deity but rather it is the (subtle) wind that is the mount for the example 
clear light of the final mental isolation.  
 It is like when we dream, we have a dream body which arises from mere wind and mind and is not the coarse body. It is mentioned in many teachings that it is more difficult to understand the illusory body than (to understand) clear light.  
 Question: When a being is reborn in the lower realms, not from the womb and so forth, is that a manifestation of the subtle winds?  
Answer : Yes, it has to do with the subtle winds.  
 
 
Lesson  43          Page 291 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Question: (inaudible)  
Answer :  It is difficult to say that the illusory body arises as an animal because the illusory body 
is a deity’s body. One is trained to see everything that manifests as the deity. If the illusory 
body appears as an animal, then one cannot say everything appears as the deity.  
 Question : It is said that the illusory body arises concurrently with the (mind) of near- attainment 
of the reverse process. Since the illusory body is the mount of the example clear light, if at the 
time when the illusory body arises and the example clear ligh t is not manifest, how then does 
the illusory body arise externally?  
Answer : The example clear light of the final mental isolation is the basis that allows one to 
actualise the illusory body.  The illusory body arises concurrently with the arising of the mind of 
near- attainment of the reverse process. At that time the example clear light of the final mental 
isolation has already ceased.  
 
The illusory body is not a subtle consciousness and is not a consciousness. It is subtle form. We are not saying that the  mind of near -attainment of the reverse process is the illusory body 
because the illusory body arises concurrently  with the mind of near -attainment of the reverse 
process from the (example clear light of the) final mental isolation.  
 The illusory body is achieved as something separate from the coarse body. The illusory body exists during the mind of near -attainment of the reverse process, it exists during the mind of 
increase and also during the mind of appearance. The impure illusory body is there until o ne 
has achieved the meaning clear light. If one accepts what has been said so far, then what are the difficulties that one will encounter?  
 Student : I can accept the existence part. When it exists, it does not necessarily manifest. For 
example, the most subtle mind exists while the coarse consciousness is manifesting. Likewise, the illusory body exists but it doesn’t necessarily manifest. My qualm is  that the mind of which 
this illusory body is the mount is the example clear light. So although this example clear light exists, but when it is not manifesting, the impure illusory body should not manifest. So I have problems with the first moment of its e xternal manifestation being asserted to be concurrent 
with the mind of near -attainment.   
Response :  When the illusory body is attained, it is not consciousness, it is  subtle form. At the 
time when the illusory body arises, the example clear light, subtle mind, has already ceased. Its 
arising is concurrent with the mind of near- attainment of the reverse process. The mind of 
near- attainment is not clear light. Is there a problem?  
 Nine mixings (or nine blendings)  
A. There are three mixings of the waking st ate. 
• One meditates on the four empties, especially the all empty, using that mind to ascertain emptiness. That is the mixing of the dharmakaya  of the waking state.  
• One arises from that clear light as an illusory body. That is the mixing of the illusory bo dy of 
the waking state.  
• The illusory body then re -enters the heart of the old body in the form of a wisdom being, 
that is the mixing of the nirmanakaya of   e waking state.  
The fully qualified three mixings of the waking state only occur when one achieve s the example 
 
Lesson  43          Page 292 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
clear light of the final mental isolation from which one  one arises as the illusory body which 
then enters the coarse body. This practice of the three mixings of the waking state can also 
occur at the level of verbal and mental isolations.  
 
B. There are three mixings of the sleeping state:  
• Mixing the clear light of sleep with the dharmakaya.  
• Mixing the dream body with the sambhogakaya  
• Mixing of the waking with the nirmanakaya.  
 C. There are three mixings during death.  
• Mixing the clear ligh t of death with the dharmakaya.  
• Mixing the intermediate state with the sambhogakaya  
• Mixing of rebirth with the nirmanakaya.  
 You just need to know what these nine mixings are. In general, we talk about the three mixings:  
 
• the mixing of the  dharmakaya  
• the mixing of the sambhogakaya and  
• the mixing of the nirmanakaya.  
 
When these are expanded, there are the three mixings of the waking state, the three mixings of the sleeping state and the three mixings during death.  
 
In order to be able to do the three mixings during the sleeping state and during the time of 
death, one must be proficient in doing the three mixings during the waking state.  
 
In order to be able to do the three mixings of the three bodies during the completion stage, this must be preceded by the proficient practice of taking the three bodies into the path during the generation stage. This is one of the reasons why the generation stage is the ripener of the completion stage.  
 It is mentioned in the teachings that the merits accumulated from just the mere understanding of the illusory body is similar to (that accumulated from) having consummated the generation stage. The benefits one will experience with just an understanding of the illusory body are inconceivable.   
 
****************  
Paths an d grounds of Highest Yoga Tantra.  
 
Generation stage  Path of accumulation  
Physical isolation  Heat level of the path of preparation  
Verbal isolation  Peak level of the path of preparation  
Mental isolation  Forbearance level of the path of preparation  
Impure illusory body  Supreme mundane quality level of the path of 
preparation  
 
Lesson  43          Page 293 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
When one achieves the impure illusory body on the supreme mundane quality level of the path of preparation, that acts as the substitute for accumulating merit over the three gr eat 
countless eons mentioned in the Paramitayana. Here, “substitute” refers to comparing the same level of realisation. That means when one achieves the impure illusory body at this level of the path of preparation, the merit one accumulates is equal to the merit that one accumulates on the Sutric path over three great countless eons.  
 Question: On the Sutric path, the merit accumulated on the paths of accumulation and preparation only covers one countless great eon?  
Answer : Yes, but this is the tantric pat h of preparation!  
 These are the things you must know:  
1. The illusory body is established from mere wind and mind.  
2. It is something that is separate from the coarse body.  
3. At the time when this impure illusory body achieves the meaning clear light, it dissolves like 
a rainbow dissolving in the sky.  
4. The impure illusory body is purified when one achieves the meaning clear light and you have to understand the reason for this. The main reason that is given in the text is that the example clear light is a co nceptual consciousness and the meaning clear light is a non -
conceptual consciousness. When the meaning clear light is achieved, the example clear light 
dissolves and when this happens, the impure illusory body, which is dependent on that 
example clear ligh t necessarily dissolves as well. It is not sufficient just be able to say this. 
You have to read the text to understand this.  
 Question:  The lifetime that is posited in the text, when we relate it to the four stages of 
existence, when does this lifetime e nd?  
(Answer to follow in next class)  
     Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  43          Page 294 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 44   DATE: 3RD SEPTEMBER 2009  
 Bring to mind the three causal objects of refuge – the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha  and on that 
basis, see whether one can develop the thought: “How wonderful it will be if I myself can become the Three Jewels.” It is important to see whether one is able to generate refuge for one’s own purposes and for the purposes of others. We will sp end the next few minutes to 
check on this.  
 Developing that thought for oneself and generating the interest in attaining the Three Jewels through reflection are extremely important. It is not an easy thing to do because in order to develop that intention, one really has to understand what the Three Jewels are, their powers and their qualities. One should have an understanding of this: “If I were to become the Three Jewels, what benefit would I get and what good would it do me ?”  
 On the other hand, one also  needs to understand very clearly the disadvantages of oneself not 
becoming the Three Jewels. This approach towards the Three Jewels applies to everything one works for in this life. The reason one wants something is because one understands its value and benefits and the faults and disadvantages of not having that object  
 When one understands the value of the object, there will be strong interest in getting that 
object and one will put in the time and effort to be able to do so.  
 
One of the reasons we are  still stuck in samsara and not achieving any spectacular results or 
improvements despite having practised the Dharma for a long time is because our practice of refuge is not good. Real refuge is  the interest in wanting to become the Three Jewels ourselve s. 
This is what refuge is.  
 This is something we must think about since all of us here consider ourselves to be Buddhists. We should reflect on whether we have that real refuge in our hearts. This refuge which is the heartfelt desire of wanting to attain the Three Jewels is something we should strive to achieve 
at all times.  
 I have mentioned this before. At the end of the day, one of reasons for these studies, be they Sutra or Tantra, boils down to generating and improving our practice of refuge. If we c ondense 
the subject matter of all the teachings, they are basically explaining what is the Buddha, what is the Dharma and what is the Sangha . The purpose of studying here is to clarify our 
understanding of what the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha  are so that we will  develop the wish 
to achieve them.  
Summary of information regarding the Final Basic Program Examination in 2010:  
• Review questions -  which will determine the scope of the examination questions -  to 
guide our revision will be supplied by the FPMT Inter national Office  by mid-January 
2010.  
• The Final Exam will take place in mid - April 2010 . The exam paper will also be set by the 
International Office   
 
Lesson  44          Page 295 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• Revision classes will be conducted next year to run alongside the regular program of 
classes.  
Geshe -la pointed out that the important thing is to review the materials we had studied. The 
purpose of the examination will be fulfilled if, during the course of our revision, we learn 
something from the materials we revise.  
 
Who is qualified to sit for the exams ? 
• The rule is that to qualify as a candidate for the exams, the student should have participated in ALL the modules.   
• From Geshe -la's side however, he feels it is all right to sit for the examination if  the 
student has only missed the  Lam Rim  and Lojong mo dules. This is subject to clearance 
with the International Office.  
• Anyone who has not participated in all the modules but still wishes to sit for the examination is advised to speak to Geshe -la personally.  
 Geshe -la advised everyone to take a break in No vember and December to recharge their 
batteries before  starting revision.       
 Those who wish to sit for the Final Examination are requested to submit their names to their group leader as soon as possible. Group leaders are requested to submit the names o f 
examination candidates from their respective groups by latest Wednesday, 9th September  to 
Cecilia so that she can compile the information for Geshe -la.  
 
*******************************  
2.1.3.1.2.1.2.2.2.1.2  COMPLETION STAGE OF THE ULTIMATE CLEAR LIGHT  
The completion stage (practice) (1) from the proximate causes which are the means for 
manifesting the actual clear light (2) up to (but not including) the obtainment of union (zung 
‘jug)’ is the nature of the clear light of the fourth stage. ( Pg. 52 of the  root text)  
The entity of the meaning clear light is the completion stage starting from the proximate causes which are the means for manifesting the meaning clear light up to but not including the obtainment of union.  
 I think it should be all right to posit the proximate causes to be the (minds of) appearance, increase and near -attainment of the forward process that precede the manifestation of the 
meaning clear light. “Union” here can be posited as the abandonment union. (I have 
mentioned before that there are two types of union: (1) the abandonment union and (2) the realisational union.)   One must also distinguish between meaning clear light  and the stage of meaning clear light . 
The definition presented here is the definition of the clear light of the fourth stage  and is not  
the entity of the meaning clear light.  
 Question:  Are the proximate causes themselves the stage of the meaning clear light?  
 
Lesson  44          Page 296 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Answer:  They are not  the same because the proximate causes are subsumed by the stage of 
the meaning clear light.  
 
Do you have any further questions about this definition? If not, we will continue with the class.  
 Meaning clear light is basically the most subtle mind that re alises emptiness directly. When the 
most subtle mind realises emptiness directly for the first time, at that time, that mind becomes 
meaning clear light.  
 
The minds of appearance, increase and near- attainment precede the manifestation of the 
meaning clear light so they are the stages leading up to the attainment of the meaning clear light. Therefore they are part of the stage of the meaning clear light. Are those minds clear 
lights? No, they are not but they are the minds that precede the meaning clear light and are therefore subsumed by the stage of (meaning) clear light.  
 The clear light of the fourth level is explained to be external manifest purification (phyi mngon byang) through being the unique component (Idog cha) manifesting at the time of dawn 
through transcending the three external states: the moon, sun and evening darkness. It is explained to be internal manifest purification (nang mngon byang) through being the unique component (Idog cha) of all empty clear lig ht through the dissolution of the three internal 
(states): appearance, increase and near attainment . (Pg. 52 of the root text).  
 The meaning clear light is called:  
• the external manifest enlightenment because it manifests at the time of dawn which is 
the time that has transcended the three external states of the  moon, the sun and the darkness.  
• the internal manifest enlightenment because the meaning clear light is achieved 
through the dissolutions of the minds of appearance, increase and near -attainment.  
 
Obtainment of the actual clear light of the fourth level, perceptual comprehension (direct realization) of emptiness through innate great bliss, obtainment of the Highest Yoga Tantra path of seeing and obtainment of the first ground of that (path) are sim ultaneous. (Pg. 52 of 
the root text ).  
 Question: What does ‘transcend the three external states of the moon, the sun and the 
darkness’ mean?  
Answer: This means that when the meaning clear light manifests for the first time, it does not 
do so when the sun or moon are shining brightly or at night, when it is dark. I guess there is some external reason for this since the mind tends to be more alert and fresh early in the morning. Guru Shakyamuni Buddha manifested the clear light at dawn. This is something for  us 
to think about: Is it necessary for the meaning clear light to be actualised for the first time at dawn? If so, what is the reason?  
 If clear light is classified by mode of expression (sgras brjod) there are two:  
1. Object clear light (yul ‘od gsal)  
2. Subject clear light (yul can ‘od gsal).  
 
Lesson  44          Page 297 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
1. The first is equivalent to emptiness.  
2. Again, regarding subject clear light, gross mental awareness {yid shes rags pa) 
comprehending emptiness is for example the common general meaning of clear light of the 
perfection vehicle and the three lower tantras. Melted bliss (zhu bde) comprehending emptiness is for example the common genera meaning of clear light of the generation  stage. 
Metaphoric clear light of mental isolation comprehendingemptiness is clear light of the hidden meaning (sbas don) because appearance is a hidden state (sbaspa) of mind, and that is 
metaphoric clear light.  
The metaphoric clear light subsuming the s tages of physical isolation, verbal isolation and the 
illusory body is also clear light of the hidden meaning because I think stating hidden meaning to be three is the main (presentation). Also the Commentary of the Compendium of All Vajra Primordial Aware ness states that vajra recitation and physical isolation are subsumed within 
the hidden. (pg. 53 of the root text) 
The real clear light refers to the object clear light (also translated as objective clear light) which 
is emptiness.  
 There are different ways of explaining the subjective clear light:  
• There is the clear light that is common or shared with the Paramitayana, the three lower 
classes of Tantra and Highest Yoga Tantra which is the coarse mind that realises emptiness.  
• There is also a way of positing the clear light that is shared by the generation and 
completion stages of Highest Yoga Tantra which is literally referred to as melted bliss. The 
bliss here refers to the bliss that arises from the melting of the constituents and it is that 
blissful mind that realises emptiness.  
• The uncommon explanation of the clear light according to Highest Yoga Tantra is the 
example clear light and the meaning clear light.  It says here that the example clear light 
occurs not just on the stage of mental isolation but also during verbal and physical 
isolations.  
 I believe I mentioned before that the example clear light occurs only  on the stage of mental 
isolation. That is a mistake. The example clear light  occurs also on the stages of verbal an d 
physical isolations, i.e., there is the example clear light of physical isolation, there is the example clear light of verbal isolation and there is the example clear light of mental isolation. All these are example clear lights.  
Actual clear light is f inal actual clear light because the final meaning is not taken to be the final 
progression on the path, but it is taken to be the final comprehension of thatness by innate bliss. ( Pg. 53 of the root text).  
 The reason the meaning clear light of the fourth  stage is called the final meaning clear light  is 
because it is the final realisation of the emptiness, having realised emptiness in its entirety, i.e., there is nothing more about emptiness to be realised.  But the meaning clear light of the fourth stage is not the final meaning clear light because it has reached the end of the path as there is 
 
Lesson  44          Page 298 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
still some way to go.  
 
This meaning clear light of the fourth stage is the final uninterrupted path which is the direct antidote to the obstructions to liberation (afflictive obstructions) in accordance with Highest Yoga Tantra.  In order to achieve enlightenment, one must enter the Tantric path, in particular, the path of Highest Yoga Tantra.   
 
How about those bodhisattvas who have progressed to the tenth ground o n the Paramitayana 
path or who have done so in dependence on the path of the three lower classes of Tantra? At 
what level do they enter the path of Highest Yoga Tantra?  
 According to the Paramitayana (Sutric) path, there are two types of bodhisattvas on th e tenth 
ground:  
1. Bodhisattvas who will achieve enlightenment in that lifetime.  
2. Bodhisattvas who will achieve enlightenment in one more lifetime.  
 The bodhisattva on the tenth ground who enters the path of Highest Yoga Tantra at a certain level,  is that bodhisattva who will achieve enlightenment in that very lifetime, i.e., he is in his 
final existence as a sentient being.  
 What about the bodhisattvas who are at the first to the ninth grounds of the Paramitayana 
path? Do these bodhisattvas enter the Tantric path at any  point? Most scholars assert that 
bodhisattvas who have achieved the arya path do not enter the Tantric path. Once the 
bodhisattva is on the Paramitayana path, he remains (on the Sutric path) from the first to the 
ninth ground. It i s only when such a bodhisattva is in his final existence as a sentient being on 
the tenth ground that he will enter the Tantric path.  
 Question: At which point does this tenth ground bodhisattva who is in his final existence as a sentient being enter the Tantric path?  
Answer : One can posit that to be at the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum (of a 
sentient being).   
 While in meditative equipoise, that bodhisattva in his final existence (as a sentient being) will be roused by the buddhas  who wi ll say to him: “You will not achieve enlightenment by  
remaining in meditative equipoise. In order to achieve enlightenment, you have to manifest 
the meaning clear light.”   
 At midnight, the buddhas  will confer the wisdom initiation upon the bodhisattva and through 
that, the bodhisattva generates the minds of  appearance, increase and near- attainment but he 
does not manifest the meaning clear light yet.  
 During that time before the bodhisattva manifests meaning clear light , the buddhas will 
instruct him on clear light and unification (union). The  buddhas then bestow on the bodhisattva 
the fourth initiation, the word initiation. In the early hours of 3 – 4am, that bodhisattva 
manifests the meaning cle ar light and arises with the (pure illusory) body of the learner’s 
union. At the third part of that time of dawn, at first light, the bodhisattva achieves the 
 
Lesson  44          Page 299 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
unification of no -more learning.  
 
There are different explanations on how bodhisattvas who have progressed to the tenth ground by depending on the Paramitayana path or the path of three lower classes of Tantra enter the path of Highest Yoga Tantra and achieve enlightenment. Let us use the above explanation as the basis for further discussion.   
Quest ion: If a practitioner propounds the view of emptiness of the lower tenet systems, how 
can he, in the next moment, directly realise emptiness in accordance with the view of the 
Consequence Middle Way school? It seems that the result does not accord with its cause.  
Answer : One can re -phrase the question by asking whether the example clear lights of the 
three isolations realise emptiness?  Are there example clear lights of the three isolations that do not realise emptiness?  
 The emptiness asserted here is that propounded by the Consequence Middle School and not that of the lower tenet systems. The example clear lights of verbal and mental isolations do realise emptiness. However, there is some debate as to whether one realises emptiness during physical isolat ion, i.e., at the beginning of the Highest Yoga Tantric path of preparation, 
through the union of calm abiding and special insight. Some say that there is no realisation of emptiness by the example clear light of physical isolation.  
 
But the discussion do esn’t end there. One may wonder are there proponents of the Mind- Only 
School who have attained verbal isolation? Are there proponents of the Autonomy Middle Way 
School who have attained verbal isolation? Basically it does not mean that if one is a physical or 
verbal isolationist, one necessarily achieves the realisation of emptiness according to the Consequence Middle Way School.  
 For our purposes, let us say that there are realisations of emptiness in verbal and mental isolations but whether this happens at physical isolation is debatable.  
 Question: If one has to achieve enlightenment on the basis of having received empowerments, 
how did the first Buddha achieve enlightenment?  
Answer : Is there a first Buddha in the first place? Our most subtle wind and mi nd do not have a 
beginning nor will they come to an end.  
 
Student : The statement in the text that the meaning clear light of the fourth stage is the 
realisation of emptiness in its entirety and relating this to the earlier question, it sounds like it 
doesn ’t matter if you realise the emptiness of the lower schools before the level of meaning 
clear light as long as that direct realisation of emptiness is based on the emptiness posited by the Consequence Middle Way School!  
 Response : It boils down to whether the example clear light of the final mental isolation realises 
emptiness or not? Does it necessarily have to realise emptiness? Emptiness here is that asserted by the Consequence Middle School. The example clear light of the final mental isolation must realise emptiness because in order to cut the root of samsara, one must realise emptiness. So it is very clear that the example clear light of the final mental isolation definitely 
 
Lesson  44          Page 300 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
realises emptiness.  
 
Question: Is the meaning clear light a non -conceptual co nsciousness ? 
Answer: Yes.  
 Question:  The bodhisattva on the first to the ninth grounds of the Paramitayana path has to 
enter the Tantric path on the tenth ground. When he is on the tenth ground, the bodhisattva 
manifests the meaning clear light which is the direct realisation of emptiness. H ow is that direct 
realisation of emptiness different from the direct realisation of emptiness that he has already 
achieved on the first ground? Are those two emptinesses the same?  
Answer:  I guess one of the reasons you raised this question is because you didn’t understand 
the text when it referred to the common general meaning of clear light.   
 There is a way of explaining clear light that is shared with the Paramitayana, the three lower classes of Tantra and Highest Yoga Tantra. This is the coarse wisdom t hat realises emptiness. 
The bodhisattva from the first to the tenth ground of the Paramitayana path do realise emptiness.  There is no difference in the object, emptiness, that is realised but there is a difference in the mind that realises emptiness.  
 The bodhisattva on the tenth ground of the Paramitayana path realises emptiness with a 
coarse mind. It is insufficient to have coarse wisdom realising emptiness. One must realise 
emptiness directly with the extremely subtle mind. That is the reason why the tenth ground 
bodhisattva who depends on the Paramitayana path or the path of the three lower classes of Tantra have to manifest the meaning clear light.  
    Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
  
 
Lesson  44          Page 301 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 45   DATE: 8TH SEPTEMBER 2009  
 
You can spend the next five minutes in silence meditating on a subject of your choice. During 
that time, whether you are doing analytical or placement meditation, the main thing is that the 
mind should be very alert. If the mind becomes alert due to that m editation, then you have 
achieved the purpose of meditating. Otherwise when the mind is too relaxed, laxity  sinks in.  
 
Sometimes we think of meditation as a form of relaxation. That is not real meditation. You 
don’t get anything out of it. Why do we medi tate? The whole point is to benefit the mind, to 
transform it for the better. For meditation to be a positive experience, the mind has to be very 
alert as change comes from that alert state of mind. Otherwise if the mind is not alert, how is it 
possible to  get any kind of positive experience?  
 
To a certain extent, it can’t be helped because it is the end of the day and you come from work so you are a bit tired. Because you are tired, when we meditate, those five minutes actually 
become a rest period and th e mind becomes very dull and relaxed.  
 
It is really important to put aside time to do meditation every day, even for    five or ten minutes. You really have to train to do this. When we talk about  meditating, it doesn’t mean you must sit in the meditation  posture and not move. If the objective is to develop calm 
abiding or when you are doing analytical meditation, your physical posture helps a lot and you shouldn’t be moving about. But it doesn’t mean that analytical meditation must only be done by sitting  still. You can also do analytical meditation by moving around or even when you are 
lying down because analytical meditation is basically just thinking about, reflecting and analysing things.  
 The main thing is you have to know the importance of keeping t he mind  alert during 
meditation, be it analytical or placement meditation as positive change and transformation can only come from within that state of alertness. That is not going to happen overnight and one should develop the habit of  meditating every day for five or ten minutes.  
 
*************************  
Impromptu Quiz  
1) What is the meaning of non- dual (inseparable) bliss and emptiness?  
2) What does the indivisibility of the two truths mean?  
3) Is the impure illusory body the substantial cause of the Buddha’s form body?  
4) Is the meaning clear light of the fourth stage necessarily an uninterrupted path that is a 
direct antidote to the afflictive obstructions (obstructions to liberation)?  
 What is the meaning of non- dual (inseparable) bliss and emptiness?  
(Geshe -la asks the students for their answers).  
 This phrase “inseparable bliss and emptiness” is commonly used in Tantric literature so it is important to know its meaning. In this context, what does bliss mean and what does emptiness refer to? The term basically means the bliss that realises emptiness.  
 
Lesson  45          Page 302 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
As I have mentioned before, that bliss realising emptiness is of two types: (1) a conceptual consciousness  and (2) a direct perceiver. There is a conceptual bliss that realises emptiness and there is th e bliss that realises emptiness directly.  
 The bliss that realises emptiness conceptually obviously cannot be inseparable (with emptiness) because that realisation is not of one taste with emptiness. The real inseparability of bliss and 
emptiness only come s when that bliss realises emptiness directly.  
 
When the bliss that realises emptiness does so directly, that experience is like pouring water into water. The bliss and emptiness become one taste, such that to the mind these two are inseparable, appearing  as one entity. When the mind is in that state, that blissful mind realises 
emptiness directly. That is when the real inseparability of bliss and emptiness occurs.  
 Question: When you say, “bliss realising emptiness,” “bliss” seems to refer to the mind re alising 
emptiness whereas in English, this word “bliss” means great happiness. Can you please clarify what is the meaning of “bliss”? The term, “inseparable bliss and emptiness” suggests to me that the subject is the mind, the object is emptiness and these  two are inseparable. Are the 
winds the substantial cause of this bliss?  
 Answer : Through the method of striking the vital points of the vajra body, one causes the white 
bodhicitta to melt. When that happens, a special form of tactile contact arises and ba sed on 
that, the body consciousness experiences this physical feeling of bliss.  Due to that, the mental consciousness is also transformed into the entity of bliss and it is this mental consciousness 
that is used to realise emptiness.   
 What does the indiv isibility of the two truths mean?  
(Geshe -la asks students for their answers).  
 In this context of Highest Yoga Tantra, the two truths are:  
- the conventional truth which is the illusory body and  
- the ultimate truth which is the meaning clear light.  
 In the context of the learner’s union , the union of the two truths means the union of meaning 
clear light and the illusory body.  
 If it is a union, is it necessarily the union of the two truths?  
 The meaning clear light of the fourth stage is the uninterrupted pa th which is the direct 
antidote to the afflictive obstructions. In the second moment, hasn’t one abandoned the afflictive obstructions already? At that time, isn’t the learner’s union attained when the afflictive obstructions are abandoned and one becomes an arhat (foe destroyer)? In other words, when one initially becomes an arhat, has one achieved union?  
 Response to student’s answer: If you say you have achieved union upon the abandonment of the afflictions, is that the union of the two truths?  
 
Lesson  45          Page 303 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
There are two types of learner’s union:  
1. the abandonment union and  
2. the realisational union.  
 In term of the sequence of achieving these unions, one first achieves  the abandonment union followed by the realisational union.  
 
The union of the two truths refers to  the union of the illusory body and the meaning clear light, 
specifically, it is the union of the pure illusory body and the meaning clear light (which does not refer to the meaning clear light of the fourth stage) . 
 I guess it is all right to posit the re alisational union and the union of the two truths to be the 
same thing. The “meaning clear light” of the union of the pure illusory body and the meaning clear light refers to the uninterrupted path that is the direct antidote to the knowledge obstructions.  That meaning clear light in unification with the pure illusory body is the union of 
the two truths.  
 If that is the meaning of the union of the two truths, then going back to the original question: If it is a union, is it necessarily the union of the two truths?  
 
With respect to the union of the two truths, in the first place you have to know what the two 
truths are:  
- the conventional truth refers to the illusory body and  
- the ultimate truth refers to the meaning clear light.  
The union of these two truths means the unification of the illusory body and the meaning clear light.  That is the minimum you must know but it is not enough just to be able to say what the two truths are and what union means. You have to think about what it really means. The more you think about it, the clearer it becomes. We are not just looking at the words but we have to reach an ascertainment that it is based on reasoning so that we can explain when we are asked this question.   Is the impure illusory body the substantial cause of the Buddha’s form body?  
For those of you who say no, then if a fully qualified deity’s body cannot be the substantial cause of the Buddha’s form body, what can act as the substantial cause?  
 We had been searching for the real  cause of the Buddha’s form body in Sutra and Tantra. In 
both Sutra and the three lower classes of Tantra there are no explanations on how to actualise the Buddha’s form body. Such an explanation appears only in Highest Yoga Tantra.  
 When one achieves mea ning clear light, the example clear light, which is a conceptual 
consciousness, dissolves along with the impure illusory body, the basis of which is that example clear light. If that impure illusory body dissolves into the meaning clear right, how can it g o on 
to achieve enlightenment? When one achieves the meaning clear light, one’s extremely subtle wind and mind cease.   
 
 
Lesson  45          Page 304 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
What does it mean when we say the impure illusory body is purified? When one purifies one’s 
negative karma, does one transform it into virtue? When the impure illusory body is purified, it ceases (disappears).  
 Geshe -la : Why does it need to disappear?  
 We have to think about this because in all the texts it says the impure illusory body is purified 
when one achieves the meaning clear light of the fourth stage. What does purified mean?  
Does it mean going out of existence?  
 One of the reasons why the impure illusory body is purified when one achieves the meaning clear light of the fourth stage is because the basis from which it came is co ntaminated. Since 
the impure illusory body is based  
on something that is contaminated, therefore it has to be purified. That being the case, I guess the impure illusory body can be called the contaminated body.  
 Since it is a contaminated body, therefore  it has to be purified. It has to be removed and cease. 
In that case, the impure illusory body cannot progress to enlightenment.  
 Does our coarse body go on to enlightenment?  
 
Geshe -la: We also need to think about this: This physical body goes to enlighte nment or not? 
(The answer is) not easy.  
 
 
  Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  45          Page 305 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
  
 
LESSON NO: 46   DATE: 10TH SEPTEMBER 2009  
 The purpose of meditation is to make the mind alert and within that alert state of mind, one attempts to transform the mind into a virtuous st ate. When the mind is alert, the imprints that 
are placed on the mind will be stronger. So whatever meditation one is going to do, be it 
analytical or placement meditation, it should be done with an alert mind.  
 It is recommended for beginners like us to attempt to visualise the Buddha clearly. There are inconceivable benefits for doing this. We are accumulating the merit to meet the Buddha in the future.  
 So, for the next five minutes, with an alert state of mind, try to transform the mind into a virtuou s state. The teachings always mention that simply reciting the name of the buddhas 
alone can purify eons of negative karma. If that is the case, it goes without saying that remembering the Buddha and visualising him will bring great benefit as well.  
 
****************************  
 The last question of the four that I brought up in the last class was: If it is the meaning clear 
light of the fourth stage, is it necessarily an uninterrupted path that is the direct antidote to the 
obstructions to liberation? I guess the answer is yes.   The Sun of Siddhis (of the) Actual Completion Stage (rdzogs rim dngos dngos grub snyi ma)  
states:  
 
The (stage) prior to being able to directly generate the illusory body through properly loosening (grol) the channel knots is subsumed in mental isolation. The (stage) from 
being able to directly generate the illusory body up to purifying that is subsumed in the stage of self blessing. Then, manifesting the meaning of thatness (de kho na nyid) and the proxima te causes that are the means (for attaining) that are called ‘the stage of 
clear light’ and ‘the stage of actual enlightenment’. (Pg. 52 of the root text)  
 (Interpreter ’s comment: “The Sun of Siddhis ” should read as “The Cluster of Attainments” ) 
 The term “ self blessing ” refers to the illusory body. In the Guhyasamaja Tantra, the illusory 
body is called the illusory body. In the Heruka Chakrasamvara Tantra, the term “self blessing” is used to refer to the illusory body. In the Vajrabhairava (Yamantaka) Tant ra, the term “yoga of 
shape” is used.  
   The basis of the designation of the label “I” or person is the extremely subtle wind and mind. When this extremely subtle wind and mind is transformed into the deity’s body, due to that transformation (or blessing),  it is called self -blessing. This is because we have transformed the 
 
Lesson  46          Page 306 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
basis of designation of the person or the ‘I’ into the deity’s body and in that sense, the self is 
blessed.  
 Question: At the end of the quotation, what is “ the stage of clear light”  and “the stage of actual 
enlightenment” ? 
Answer : They refer to the same thing.  
 
(Interpreter ’s comment: In Tibetan, the same term mngon byang is used. “Actual 
enlightenment” and “manifest purification” means the same thing and normally this is 
translated as “manifest enlightenment,” so it should read as “the stage of manifest enlightenment .”) 
 As mentioned before, the meaning clear light of the fourth stage is called the external manifest 
enlightenment and the internal manifest enlightenment.  
 Someone says: It follows that the explanation that the proximate causes for manifesting actual clear ligh t are the fourth level, is unacceptable because the third stage exists in the continuum 
of one about to obtain actual clear light. That is because the impure illusory body in their continuum is the third stage, because that is the impure illusory body.  
 Ngawang Palden: That is either not pervasive or otherwise it should be examined. ( Pg. 55 of 
the root text)  
 The qualm is that the three minds of white appearance, red increase and black near -
attainment precede the manifestation of the meaning clear light and  are therefore, not the 
fourth stage of clear light. Instead, they should be the stage of the illusory body. Is this the position of this text? Are these three minds part of the third or fourth stage? And is this the fourth stage or  
the stage of the fourth stage?  
 The fourth stage  necessarily  refers to the meaning clear light but there is a need to distinguish 
between the fourth stage and the stage of the fourth stage because of the definitions of the clear light of the fourth stage and the stage of the ill usory body.  
 The completion stage (practice) (1) from establishing the actual body of the deity adorned with 
signs and marks through the example clear light of the final mental isolation acting as the 
cooperative condition and the fundamental winds that s erve as its mount acting as the 
substantial cause, concurrent with establishing near attainment of the reverse order through the winds slightly moving from the example clear light of the final mental isolation, (2) up to but not including generating the pr oximate causes which are the means of achieving the 
meaning clear light, is the nature of the stage of the illusory body. ( Pg. 46 of the root text ) 
 The completion stage practice (1) from the proximate causes which are the means for manifesting the actual clear light (2) up to (but not including) the obtainment of union (zung 
jug) is the nature of the clear light of the fourth stage. ( Pg. 52 of the root text ).  
 
 
Lesson  46          Page 307 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
 By looking at these two definitions, we can see the difference between the meaning clear light  
of the fourth stage and the stage of the fourth stage. We can conclude that the minds of white appearance, red increase and black near -attainment that precede the manifestation of the 
meaning clear light are stages of the fourth stage and not  stages of t he third stage.  
 
You have to understand how we arrived at this conclusion by comparing the two definitions 
which define not the illusory body and meaning clear light but are definitions of the stage of the illusory body and the stage of the  meaning clear light.  
 The proximate causes which are the means for manifesting the meaning clear light are basically these three minds of white appearance, red increase and black near -attainment that 
immediately precede the manifestation of the meaning clear light. During the time of the proximate causes, does the impure illusory body exist? Yes, it does.  
 2.1.3.1.2.1.2.2.2.2  THE COMPLETION STAGE OF THE INDIVISIBLE T WO TRUTHS  
 The completion stage (practice) (1) from when one arises in the pure illusory body simultaneously with the slight movement in the wind from the actual clear light of the fourth stage dependent on the wind which is the mount of that clear light acting as it s substantial 
cause and the mind of clear light acting as its co -active condition (2) up to the actual clear light 
at the limit of the learner (ground) is the nature of learner’s union or the completion stage of the indivisible two truths.  
 Arising in nea r attainment of the reverse order from the actual clear light of the fourth stage, 
obtaining the pure illusory body, obtaining the abandoning union, abandoning afflictive obscurations (nyon sgrib), transferring to the second ground and obtaining the path o f 
meditation are concurrent. This is (asserted) from the perspective of those of definite Highest (Yoga) mantra lineage. One must assert that the clear light etc., occurring at the end of the other paths is primordial awareness of the tenth ground and I wo nder whether learner’s union 
is indivisible from the ninth ground of meditation.   
 Innate afflictions are abandoned by the clear light of the fourth stage and the Illuminating Lamp states that they are abandoned at the time of first obtaining learner’s uni on. ( Pg. 55 of 
the root text)  
 
• The illusory body exists from the time it comes into existence up to and before the 
(manifestation of the) meaning clear light of the fourth stage which acts as the direct antidote to both the intellectually acquired and innate obstructions to liberation ( afflictive 
obstructions).  
• When there is a slight movement in the wind from the meaning clear light of the fourth 
stage, that meaning clear light of the fourth stage acts as the cooperative condition and the 
wind that it is mounted on acts as the substanti al cause for one to arise as the pure illusory 
body.  
 
Lesson  46          Page 308 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• From the time one arises as the pure illusory body up to the meaning clear light at the limit 
of the learner’s ground is “ the nature of learner’s union or the completion stage of the 
indivisible two trut hs.” 
 Now we will discuss some qualms regarding the above definition of the learner’s union which defines the entity of the learner’s union or the completion stage of the indivisible two truths.  
• Is the first moment of achieving the pure illusory body a learner’s union?  
  
• The definition is posited to be the entity of the learner’s union and the completion stage of 
the indivisible two truths but are these two the same thing?  
 
The definition is saying that the learner’s union and the completion stage of the indivisible two truths are the same thing since both share the same entity. If that is the case, let us refer to our discussion in the previous lesson on the meaning of inseparable bliss and emptiness and the indivisible two truths. The two truths are: ( 1) the conventional truth which is the illusory body 
and (2) the ultimate truth which is the meaning clear light. The indivisible two truths mean the indivisibility of these two. Is the entity of that the same as the entity of the learner’s union?  
 We have  to ascertain these two things:  
• The meaning clear light of the fourth stage is the direct antidote to the obstructions to 
liberation (afflictive obstructions).  
• Immediately after the afflictive obstructions are abandoned, the mind of near- attainment of 
the reverse order arises. Concurrent with that, one arises as the pure illusory body.  
 The substantial cause of this pure illusory body is the extremely subtle wind which is the mount of the meaning clear light of the fourth stage. At the same time when one ac hieve the pure 
illusory body, it is said one achieves the learner’s union. This is clearly stated in the text: “Arising in near attainment of the reverse order from the actual clear light of the fourth stage, 
obtaining the pure illusory body, obtaining the  abandoning union, abandoning afflictive 
obscurations (nyon sgrib), transferring to the second ground and obtaining the path of 
meditation are concurrent.”  
 Union means bringing two things together so when the pure illusory body is achieved, at that moment  the learner’s union is achieved. What is unified here? In order to understand this, you 
need to know that there are two kinds of learner’s union: (1) the abandonment union and (2) the realisational union. Of these two, it is the abandonment union that is achieved concurrently with the attainment of the pure illusory body.  
• At the time when that person achieves the pure illusory body, has that person achieved 
the realisational union? No.  
• When the person has achieved the pure illusory body, has that person  achieved the 
meaning clear light? Yes.  
 One achieves the learner’s union when one first attains the pure illusory body. One has to know that at that time when one achieves the pure illusory body, one also attains the 
 
Lesson  46          Page 309 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
abandonment union. The abandonment union is the union of: (1) the pure illusory body and (2) 
the state of abandonment of afflictive obstructions.  
 According to the definition, at the time of achieving the abandonment union, one also achieves the completion stage of the indivisible two truths. If that is the case, one has to say that the two truths here are: (1) the conventional truth which is the pure illusory body and (2) the ultimate truth which is the state of abandonment of the afflictive obstructions.  
 According to the Consequence Middle Way School, the state of abandonment of the afflictive obstructions is the ultimate truth. The Autonomy Middle School says the state of abandonment of afflictive obstructions is a conventional truth.  
 The learner’s union can also be be divided into two: (1) the principal and (2) the ordinary.   Although it is not stated clearly in the text, by following the same line of reasoning, I guess it should be all right to look at the completion stage of the indivisible two truths in the same way, i.e., there is a main (completion stage of the indivisible two truths) and (2) an ordinary (completion stage of the indivisible two truths).   You need to know:  
1. What a union is?  
2. When is that union achieved ? 
3. There are two kinds of unions: (1) the abandonment union and (2) the realisational 
union.  
 Question: Is a union necessarily the union of the two truths?  
Answer : I don’t see any problem. If it is the completion stage of the indivisible two truths, it is 
not necessarily the main one which means it is not necessarily the realisational union, i.e., it can also be the abandonment union.  
 In general, when we talk about the indivisible two truths, we are refering to the pure illusory 
body and the pure mind of meaning clear light.  
 Question: Why is the state of abandonment of the afflictive obstructions an ultimate truth according to the Consequence Middle Way School?  
Answer : When the mind which is accompanied by the afflictions is  separated from the 
afflictions, that factor of having abandoned the afflictions is not something separate from the mind. It is the nature of the mind. So when the afflictions are separated f orm the mind, then 
we say the nature of the mind is revealed .  
 That factor of having abandoned the afflictions is true cessation which is a permanent phenomenon and is the emptiness of the mind.  
 Question: Why does the Autonomy Middle Way School posit that to be a conventional truth?  
 
 
Lesson  46          Page 310 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Answer:  According to the Autonomy Middle Way School, they posit that factor of having 
abandoned the afflictions which is true cessation to be a conventionality and not emptiness.  
 
 Question: When Shakyamuni Buddha entered the path of Highest Yoga Tantra at the meaning clear light of the fourth stage which includes the minds of white appearance, red increase and near- attainment that precede it, did he have an illusory body?  
Answer : The Buddha at that time does not have an ill usory body, be it impure or pure. 
According to the Paramitayana, the bodhisattva on the 10
th ground who is about to achieve the 
meaning clear light of the fourth stage does not have an illusory body but has a mental body adorned with all the signs and exem plifications. As stated earlier, that is an exception. That 
bodhisattva at that time has yet to achieve the pure illusory body.  
 Question: Can we say that the consciousness of a sentient being is not necessarily an impermanent phenomenon?  
Answer : If it is a consciousness, it is necessarily impermanent.  
 Question: But isn’t true cessation a mind and that is permanent?  
Answer : No, it is the emptiness of the mind. Is there a mind that is permanent?  If the mind is 
permanent, then there is no hope because there is no way to achieve enlightenment since the mind cannot be transformed. So the mind is definitely impermanent.  
    Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
  
 
 
Lesson  46          Page 311 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 47   DATE: 15TH SEPTEMBER 2009  
 
Try to bring to the mind how:  
• the objects of refuge -  the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha - are mere designations, merely 
labelled by the mind;   
• the person who goes for refuge is merely designated through the force of conceptuality;  
• the merits and virtues accumulated are merely designated through the force of 
conceptuality; and  
• the Three Jewels we will attain by depending on that merit are also merely designated 
through the force of conceptuality.  
 
How wonderful it will be when we attain the state of the Three Jewels! We must definitely d o 
so. In relation to Tantra, the practice of refuge is related to the cultivation of pure appearance. 
Whatever appears is empty and that emptiness is bliss. When taking refuge, see whether you 
are able to bring to the mind how everything is a display of em ptiness and how that emptiness 
is great bliss.  
 
***************  
 There are two types of union:  
(1) the ordinary union which refers to  the abandonment union of the pure illusory body and the state of abandonment of the afflictive obstructions; and  
(2) the principal union which refers to the union of the two truths,  meaning clear light and pure illusory body.  
 Between the abandonment and realisational unions, the abandonment union is achieved first. The realisational union is the union of the holy body which is the pure illusory body and the holy mind which is the meaning clear light. It is a union of a pure body (the pure illusory body) and a pure mind, a mind which is purified of the afflictive obstructions.  
 
The meaning clear light of the fourth stage acts as the direct antidote to the afflictive 
obstructions. Simultaneously with the abandonment of the afflictive obstructions one achieves 
the pure illusory body. The meaning clear light of the fourth stage is the uninterrupted path. 
Subsequent to t hat, one arises with the mind of near -attainment of the reverse order.  
 
With regards to that mind of near- attainment of the reverse process, there is a discussion as to 
whether that mind  is a wisdom of  meditative equipoise, i.e., basically whether it is the path of 
thorough release (translated as “ liberated path” in the text)?  
 Different masters have different views. From the Sutric point of view, the uninterrupted path and the path of thorough release occur in a single session of meditative equipoise. The uninterrupted path is the antidote to the afflictions (which are being abandoned) and the path of thorough release is the time when those afflictions are abandoned. Both are wisdoms of meditative equipoise as both occur in one session of meditative equipoise.  
 
 
Lesson  47          Page 312 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, the meaning clear light of the fourth stage is the 
uninterrupted path which is the direct antidote to the afflictive obstructions. When the afflictive obstructions are abandoned, that mind is already the mind of black near- attainment 
of the reverse order. When one arises from the meaning clear light of the fourth stage, i.e. when one arises into the mind of near -attainment of the reverse order, although there are 
different positions as to what that mind of near -attainment is, I guess it would be all right to 
assert that it is a path of thorough release.  
 If we take that position, asserting the mind of near- attainment of the reverse order to be the 
path of thorough release, then we have to consider whether that path of thorough release is a 
mind that realises emptiness. This is because the meaning clear light of the fourth stage is a mind that directly realises emptiness.   If that mind of near -attainment of the reverse order is a path of thorough release, does i t have 
to realise emptiness directly? The answer is no, it is not a direct perception of emptiness:  
• Why? Because it is a conceptual consciousness.  
• Why is it a conceptual consciousness? Because the minds of appearance, increase and near -
attainment are neces sarily conceptual consciousnesses. Therefore it follows that the mind 
of near -attainment of the reverse order that arises after the meaning clear light of the 
fourth stage is a conceptual consciousness and therefore it does not realise emptiness directly.  
 There is a difference in the subtlety of these two minds: the mind of near -attainment of the 
reverse order and the meaning clear light of the fourth stage. The latter is an extremely subtle 
mind while the mind of near- attainment of the reverse order is c oarser. The consciousness that 
precedes the meaning clear light of the fourth stage is a subtle mind. The consciousness that 
precedes the mind of near -attainment is likewise a coarser mind.  
 
Can the extremely subtle mind be transformed into the entity of the mind of near -attainment? 
No, that is not possible. That being the case,  
(likewise) the mind of near -attainment cannot become the extremely subtle mind.  
 The extremely subtle mind (or the fundamental mind) is never changing, i.e., it will always remain in the entity of an extremely subtle mind and it will not become coarser. That is why it is called “forever indestructible.”  The extremely subtle wind upon which the extremely subtle mind is mounted is also forever indestructible and always remains extremely subtle.  
 There are various views with regards to this point. It is not that we cannot hold different views. I am not saying that this is the only view and the correct view but we take this position as a starting point and work from here.  
 There is also much debate about the nature of that mind of near - attainment. It is a path of 
thorough release but is it the wisdom of meditative equipoise? There are man y masters who 
say that it is not the wisdom of meditative equipoise but it is the wisdom of subsequent attainment.  
 
 
Lesson  47          Page 313 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
There is a particular view of some masters that for it to be a wisdom of meditative equipoise in 
this case, it has to be an extremely subtl e mind. When one arises from that meditative 
equipoise of the extremely subtle mind, whatever one arises into have to be the wisdom of subsequent attainment. Do you have any qualm regarding this?  
 Question: The qualm is that when one arises from the meaning clear light, one achieves the pure illusory body concurrently with the mind of near- attainment. The pure illusory body is the 
extremely subtle wind which is one entity with the extremely subtle mind (which is the meaning clear light). So when the pure illusory body is achieved, at that time, it seems that the meaning clear light should be manifest because they are one entity. If that is the case, are there two minds manifesting at the same time?  
Answer:  In the first place, the pure illusory body is not  a consciousness. It is form. Its causes are 
both the extremely subtle wind and mind but it is not consciousness. At the time of achieving the pure illusory body, one achieves the abandonment union.  
 At the very first moment when one achieves the pure illuso ry body, does the meaning clear 
light manifest? What will be the problem if the meaning clear light manifests?  
 At the initial moment when one achieves the pure illusory body, the meaning clear light is not manifest. This is because concurrent with that in itial moment of achieving the pure illusory 
body, one achieves the abandonment union. If the meaning clear light manifested at that time, 
that would not be an abandonment union but a realisational union which would mean that one 
achieves the abandonment union and the realisation union together!   
At the initial moment when one achieves the pure illusory body, the extremely subtle mind is not manifesting. (What manifests) is the mind of near -attainment. If we say the extremely 
subtle mind manifests (at that time), then that extremely subtle mind will have to be the meaning clear light.  
 Question: What is the nature of the pure illusory body?  
Answer:  It is like the subtle body of the intermediate state being and  similar to the dream 
body. It is a subtle body that is separate from the coarse body. We have discussed this earlier in the illusory body of the third stage. When the impure illusory body arises from the extremely subtle wind and mind, it is said that it is something separate from our coarse body.  
 
Question : At the first moment of achieving the pure illusory body, it is concurrent with the 
mind of near -attainment. At that time does the practitioner have the extremely subtle mind – 
the meaning clear light?  
Answer : Yes, the practitioner has the extremel y subtle mind but it is not manifesting. At the 
first moment of achieving the pure illusory body, the meaning clear light is not manifesting 
because (the arising of the pure illusory body) is concurrent with the mind of near -attainment. 
That time coincides  with the abandonment union which is the union of the pure illusory body 
and the state of abandonment of the afflictive obstructions. At that time the meaning clear 
light has yet to be achieved.  The meaning clear light does exist but it does not manifest.  
 
 
Lesson  47          Page 314 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Response from student:  Yes, the pure illusory body is manifesting but my qualm is that they 
(i.e., meaning clear light and pure illusory body) are one entity with two isolates…..  
Answer : At that time, one would not say that the pure illusory body is one entity because for it 
to be of one entity, there must be at least two things. Here, only one is manifest and the other 
one is not manifest. So at that time, we cannot say it is a single entity.  
 Question: Can we say that that pure illusory body is in the same entity of the state of 
abandonment?  
Answer:  I think you are permitted to say that.  
 
Question: So where does the extremely subtle mind abide when it is not manifesting?  
Answer : It abides quietly!  
 Let us not talk about illusory body. Let’s talk about ourselves. Do we have the extremely subtle wind and mind?  
 Question: What then is the consciousness isolate of the impure illusory body?   Answer : Why must the impure illusory body be of one entity with something?  
 Student : Because I am trying to account for the substantial causes of each stage that produce 
the preceding consciousness and form. In this case, the substantial cause of the impure illus ory 
body of the third stage is the subtle wind of the example clear light of the final mental isolation. But the mind which is the same entity with the impure illusory body has not been 
accounted for yet ………  
Response : When one arises as an illusory body b e it impure or pure, the illusory body is form 
and it is not consciousness. But in the continuum of the person who possesses that illusory body, at that time the mind of near -attainment manifests. It is not the extremely subtle mind 
that manifests.  
  
You h ave to remember this: The extremely subtle mind must come from a previous moment of 
the extremely subtle mind. According to Tantra, this extremely subtle mind cannot transform to something that is coarser. The coarse mind can never become the extremely sub tle mind. 
You have to keep this in your mind.   
Again, since there is a difference in subtlety of both clear light and near attainment and also a 
difference in their individual continuums, they are not similar to the two paths explained from another perspe ctive. This clear light and near attainment are different in subtlety because the 
former is a fundamental mind and the latter is slightly grosser, and because it is pervasive that any of the three: appearance, increase and attainment are not fundamental minds, and because if a fundamental mind becomes a non -fundamental mind it would not be suitable to 
explain it to be an innate mind. (Pg. 56 of the root text).   
 Look at this statement: “The three: appearance, increase and attainment are not fundamental 
minds, and because if  a fundamental mind becomes a non- fundamental mind it would not be 
suitable to explain it to be an innate mind.”  
 
Lesson  47          Page 315 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
“Since there is a difference in subtlety of both clear light and near attainment and also a difference in their individual co ntinuums, they are not similar to the two paths explained from 
another perspective ”: This statement is basically saying that the (minds of) clear light and near - 
attainment came from separate continua and they are  separate continua.  
 This is a difficult point. It means the mind of clear light, that extremely subtle mind, must come 
from a previous moment of the extremely subtle mind. Similarly, the mind of near- attainment 
must come from a previous moment of the mind of near -attainment. Likewise the mind of 
increase must come from a previous moment of the mind of increase and the mind of 
appearance must come from a previous moment of the mind of appearance. If it is a coarse mind, it must come from a previous moment of a coarse mind.  
   If that is the case, must we always maintain that there is a continuum of a similar type? Must the non- virtuous state of mind always be preceded by a non -virtuous state of mind? Must the 
virtuous state of mind always be preceded by a virtuous state of mind?  
 Won’t you have to say that there isn’t a sentient being that has never developed a virtuous thought? Because of (the fact that every sentient being has developed a virtuous thought), we 
say that Buddha’s activities pervade all sentient beings.  
 
If it is a virtue in the continuum of a sentient being, it is necessarily the enlightened activity of 
the Buddha.  If that is the case, won’t we have to say that the Buddha’s enlightened activities pervade all sentient beings? If one accepts that, is it possible  to find an instant in our past when 
one has never developed a virtuous thought?  
 In terms of the virtuous and non -virtuous minds, must they  necessarily arise from the previous 
moment of a mind of a similar type? You must think about this in terms of the continuum of a similar type.  
 In this context, when we talk about the mind of near -attainment, the question arises: Must this 
mind of near -attainment necessarily  arise from a previous moment of a mind of near -
attainment? Must there be that continuum of a similar type?  
 If your answer is no, you have to give a reason. Did the mind of near -attainment arise from the 
extremely subtle mind? The conclusion is that the mind of near- attainment must come from a 
former moment of the mind of near -attainment.  
 The m inds of appearance, increase and near -attainment are necessarily  conceptual minds 
whereas the fundamental innate mind of clear light can be either a conceptual or non -
conceptual mind.  
 Question:  What is the substantial cause of the meaning clear light of the fourth stage?  
 
Lesson  47          Page 316 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Answer : What if we say that it is the example clear light of the final mental isolation? What else 
could it be other than this? We have to posit something. There must be a mind that existed 
prior to (the meaning clear light of the fourth stage). That is the example clear light of the final mental isolation.  
 When one posits the example clear light of the final mental isolation to be the substantial cause of the meaning clear light of the fourth stage, won’t that mean a conceptual 
conscious ness can be the substantial cause of a non -conceptual consciousness, i.e. the 
conceptual consciousness is transformed into the entity of non -conceptual consciousness?  
 
 What is the problem in saying that? Isn’t there a difference in subtlety?  
 From anothe r point of view, the example clear light of the final mental isolation is 
contaminated and the meaning clear light of the fourth stage is uncontaminated.  
 Earlier on, we had looked at the reason why the impure illusory body has to be purified because it i s based on a contaminated phenomenon. If that is the case, doesn’t the meaning 
clear light of the fourth stage also need to be purified since it is dependent on a contaminated phenomenon, the example clear light of the final mental isolation.  
 From this, one can see that this (issue) is not so straightforward. When we really think about it, 
there are so many things to think about. That process is so important. It is not just saying yes or 
no but we have to think over the reasons for our answers. We have to  arrive at our conclusions 
based on this process of thinking and reasoning.  
 Going back to my question: Is there any sentient being who has never ever developed a virtuous mind? What is your answer: yes or no? Please give the reasons for your answer.  
 Response to student’s answer : Are you saying that all sentient beings will become enlightened? 
Every sentient being becoming enlightened does not necessarily prove that everyone must have had a virtuous thought in the past. It does not mean that if you have not had  a virtuous though t before you cannot achieve enlightenment.  
   
 
 Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  47          Page 317 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 48   DATE: 17TH SEPTEMBER 2009  
 
Impromptu Quiz:  
1. There are two types of union: the abandonment union and the realisational union. Give an 
illustration of each of them.  
2. Give an illustration of the inseparable bliss and emptiness.  
3. Give an illustration of the afflictive obstructions and the knowledge obstructions that are 
posited in Tantra.  
4. Is the extremely subtle wind and mind the ‘I’ or person?  
5. Is the illusory body the ‘I’ or person?  
6. In HYT, it said that one can achieve enlightenment in one brief life time of this degenerate age. Is his or her body a buddha?  
 
Question 1  
Response to student’s answer to Question 1:  The mind of near - attainment when one arises 
from the meaning clear light of the fourth stage, is that an abandonment union? What is the 
abandonment union a union of?  
 
Geshe -la: If you say yes, you must have a reason and if you say no, you must have a reason. 
Why you say yes, why you say no. I thought we had al ready covered what is abandonment and 
realisational union? I thought we made it clear in the last class.  
 Response to student’s answer:  The question is asking whether near - attainment is 
abandonment union or not? Not the other way round. You can see that this is not so straight 
forward. Usually we go through class, thinking we are getting it but when a question is asked, it shows that we got nothing.  
 Question 2:  
Is it all right to posit the meaning clear light of the fourth stage as an illustration of in separable 
bliss and emptiness?   
 
Is it all right to say the pure illusory body is an illustration of abandonment union?  
 
We are not talking about pervasion here. The question is whether this can be an illustration or 
not? In this case, we are not saying whether it is necessarily so or not?  
 
Is the clear light at the end of the learner’s union an illustration of realisational union?  Is there any fault in positing that as an illustration?  
 Response to student’s answer: You are saying that when you enter the meaning clear light of the last moment, the illusory body is dissolved or purified?  
 Question 3 : 
 
Lesson  48          Page 318 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Response to student’s answer:  According to Tantra, he is saying the afflictive obstructions are 
posited as ordinary conceptions and the knowledge obstructio ns as ordinary appearances. This 
is something that you must remember.  
 
It is not that I did not mention this in class but the point of bringing up these questions is to help you to remember some of these things. You should have the wish to want to know. If you 
don’t know, then you should memorise it.  
 Question 4:  
Response to student’s answer:  Your most subtle wind and mind are you? They are sleeping 
now, aren’t they? But you are not sleeping….  
 Response to student’s answer:  It doesn’t mean that because we grasp at it therefore it is an I.  If whatever that is grasped by the mind is valid, then whatever we grasp at is necessarily correct. But most of our minds are mistaken. Because we grasp at the I, therefore we think it exists. If we use this as the reason, it is an invalid reason.  
 You also gave the reason that the extremely subtle wind and mind that move from life to life are the I because the I is the person who moves from life to life. Therefore that is the I. But that also is not necessarily the reason to prove that is the I. Whatever goes from life to life is not 
necessarily the I.  
 Response from student: They are the I because they have the entity of immutability and they go on to enlightenment.  
 Response to student’s  answer :  Is the person the extremely subtle wind? Is the I form?  
Answer from student: Yes  
 Is the extremely mind the person also?  
Answer from student: Yes  
 So, there are two persons?  
 Response from student:  No pervasion, one entity two isolates. Person is both mind and form.  
 
Response to student’s answer :  (According to you) the extremely subtle mind is the person. 
Therefore when you look for the person you should be able to find it, isn’t it? The imputed 
object when searched for can be found. When you l ook for the person, you should be able to 
find it, isn’t it?  
 Likewise, at the end of the analysis, if the extremely subtle wind is the I, that means the I can be found, isn’t it? The imputed object when searched for can be found, isn’t it?  
 When we talk about the I, what is the I that exists? If it is an I, it is necessarily the I that is 
merely imputed through the force of conceptuality.   
 
Lesson  48          Page 319 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Is the I and the merely labelled I necessarily the same? They are necessarily the same. If it is an 
I, it is necessarily the merely labelled I. If it is the merely labelled I, it is necessarily the I.  
 When you say the extremely subtle wind or mind is the person, this means the I can be found when searched for.  
 Geshe -la: It is not a question of where the I is labelled. The question is: what is the I? My 
question is: are the subtle wind and mind a person or not?  
 In response to this question, the extremely subtle wind and mind are not  the person. The 
extremely subtle wind is not the person. The extremely subtle mind is not  the person. We have 
covered this in Lorig.  
• The extremely subtle wind is not the person because it is form.  
• The extremely subtle mind is not the person because it is consciousness.  
There is a basis of designation of the I or person. The coars e I and the subtle I depend on the 
basis of the designation. The subtle basis of designation of the I are the extremely subtle wind and mind. The extremely subtle wind and mind are the basis of designation of the I. The extremely subtle wind and mind which are the basis designation of the I is not I.  
 Question 5:  
Response to student’s answer: Isn’t that a fully qualified deity? Then why is it not a person? A deity is not a person? Isn’t the pure illusory body a deity? If it is not a deity, then what is it?   
 Response to student’s answer :  It is the body of the deity. It follows that you are a deity when 
you are a learner.  
 
Is the pure illusory body a person or not? Earlier on, we had already ascertained that the 
extremely subtle wind is not the person because it is form. This means that form is not the person. There is no common locus between form and person. (Common locus means you cannot posit something that is both form and person at the same time). Earlier we have already seen how the illusory body is fo rm. Therefore it cannot be a person.  
 
****************************  
 The meaning clear light of the fourth stage is the uninterrupted path which is the direct antidote to the afflictive obstructions as posited in Highest Yoga Tantra. That single uninterrupted path abandons all the afflictive obstructions.  
  
The meaning clear light at the end of the continuum of the learner abandons the knowledge obstructions. That single uninterrupted path abandons all the knowledge obstructions.  
 There are some scholars wh o assert that the meaning clear light of the fourth stage is the 
single uninterrupted path that abandons all the afflictive obstructions but when it comes to the knowledge obstructions, there are nine levels of the knowledge obstructions. According to thes e scholars, one has to generate the meaning clear light nine times in order to fully abandon 
the knowledge obstructions which are abandoned sequentially.  
 
Lesson  48          Page 320 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
For those scholars who assert that the meaning clear light at the end of the continuum of the learne r abandons all the knowledge obstructions at one time, do they also assert this 
presentation of the nine grounds? They also posit the presentation of the nine grounds but for them, these nine grounds are not posited in terms of generating an uninterrupted path and then entering a path of thorough release. They posit the nine grounds on the basis of accumulating the collection of merit for the purpose of making the meaning clear light at the 
end of the continuum of the learner powerful.  
 
First you have to keep in mind that:  
• The meaning clear light of the fourth stage abandons all the afflictive obstructions. What are the afflictive obstructions that are abandoned by the meaning clear light of the fourth stage? These afflictive obstructions are the ordinary conceptions.  
• The meaning clear light at the end of the continuum of the learner abandons all the 
knowledge obstructions. The knowledge obstructions that are abandoned are the ordinary 
appearances. When those knowledge obstructions are abandoned, one achiev es the non-
learner’s union (sometime translated as the union of no -more learning).  
 All the way up to the meaning clear light at the end of the continuum of the learner, the minds of white appearance, red increase and black near attainment exist. Once one achieves enlightenment, one is always in the state of clear light.  The minds of appearance, increase or 
near attainment are necessary conceptual minds.   
 We have two more lessons to go. We will look at the aspiration prayer at the end of the long 
Guhyasam aja sadhana and based on that, we will try to summarise the whole path.  
 
There is a debate in the text about the duration of the meaning clear light. Please read up 
these sections. The text is saying that the meaning clear light last for a very short time  and, at 
times, it can last for eons. Please think about this.  
 Question: (inaudible )  
Answer :  If one follows the first system where all the knowledge obstructions are abandoned, 
then the meaning clear light is the meaning clear light at the end of the c ontinuum of the 
learner which means tat means the realisational union has to be on the tenth ground.  
 Question: Does this mean that the second to the ninth grounds will occur during the abandonment union?  
Answer : According to this system, then would have t o say that is so since the realisational 
union only occurs at the tenth ground.  
 
 
 Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  48          Page 321 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 49   DATE: 22ND SEPTEMBER  2009  
 We will spend five minutes to adjust our motivation to ensure that whatever we do here becomes Dharma. Our actions should be conjoined with the attitude of refuge and the motivation of bodhicitta. Whatever that is done that is conjoined with refuge becomes Buddhist practice and when conjoined with bodhicitta becomes Mahayana practice.  So, in 
order to mak e whatever we do here Dharma, it should be conjoined with the attitude of refuge 
and the motivation of bodhicitta.  
 From our side, we have to put in the effort to develop these attitudes in our minds to make whatever we engage in Buddhist and Mahayana pra ctices. Otherwise, simply because the 
subject matter we are dealing with here is Buddhadharma or Mahayana Dharma does not necessarily mean that the activities we do in relation to it will become Dharma. That has to come from our side.  
 
******************** *** 
 
Question: Must we have taken the Guhyasamaja initiation to read this prayer?  
Answer: That is not necessary. As long as you have received a Highest Yoga Tantric initiation, 
you are permitted to do so because this prayer summarises what we have covered so far on 
the generation and completion stages.  
 
********************* 
 This particular Guhyasamaja Prayer was composed by Lama Tsong Khapa and is a summary of the generation and completion stages of Guhyasamaja. We are looking at this prayer as a way of concluding this Basic Program which has lasted for the past six years and use it as an 
aspirational prayer as well as a basis for making our dedications.   
 
3   
Thus, within the state of appearing as a body of a deity,  
Appearing yet empty, like an illusion  and a dream,  
In order to generate delight with marvellous bliss  
In the host of deities of the mandala of Akshobhyavajra - 
The condensed quintessence of all the countless conquerors of the ten directions  
I strive here to make outer, inner and secret offeri ngs, 
Praises, meditations, recitations and so forth.  
 
 
4 
By whatever virtue I have thus accumulated:  
 
The lines that I have just read out indicate the substance that one is dedicating.  
 
“Thus, within the state of appearing as a body of a deity, appearing yet empty, like an illusion 
 
Lesson  49          Page 322 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
and a dream ”: In this practice, all that appear are empty and great bliss. From within that 
state, one arises as a deity.  
 
Here, one makes offerings, praises and so forth to the deities of the mandala of 
Akshobhyavajra who are the combined essence “ of all the countless conquerors of the ten 
directions.” Why does one do this? It is for the purpose of generating “ delight with marvellous 
bliss.”  
 
What are the offer ings that one is making to the host of deities of the mandala of 
Akshobhyavajra? They are the “ outer, inner and secret offerings/ Praises, meditations, 
recitations and so forth.”  
 
In the context here, the roots of virtue that one are dedicating are the roo ts of virtue acquired 
from making and doing all these different offerings  and practices -  outer, inner and secret 
offerings, praises, meditations on the supported and supporting mandala, recitations and so forth.  
 Up to this point, the prayer is referri ng to the objects that one is dedicating. Then, everything 
following this shows the manner in which one dedicates. This starts with the line, “By whatever virtue I have thus accumulated.”   
 
4 (contd)  
Having seen that just as I have fallen into the ocean of existence  
Likewise too have all mother migrating beings.  
May I become skilled in the supreme mind of enlightenment  
That takes on the responsibility of liberating migrating beings.  
 
This shows the generation of aspirational bodhicitta so first one  dedicates the root of virtues 
for the generation of aspirational bodhicitta.  
 
Question: (inaudible)  
Answer: When one looks at the third verse, it starts with oneself as a deity. All Tantri c practices 
are done from within deity yoga. One always arises as the deity in the beginning.  
 
In the Nyung Na practice, there is the self- generation and front generation. One makes 
offerings to both. That is done with oneself as Chenrezig. Then one does the practice of 
Vajrasattva in the sadhana. One sees oneself as the deity but one still performs the Vajrasattva 
practice. One also performs the seven -limb prayer to accumulate merit and to purify 
obscurations. That is also done with oneself as Chenrezig ( or whatever deity one is practising). 
The point is that all these are done within deity yoga.  
 
If you have any doubts, you can clarify them in the future as we have to finish this prayer 
within two classes.  
 
5 
Having seen enlightenment cannot be achieved  
 
Lesson  49          Page 323 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
By my simply generating a mind wishing for that to come about  
Unless I also practise the three kinds of morality,  
May I train in the vows of the conqueror's children with intense effort.  
 
Here one dedicates the roots of virtue towards the generation of engaged bodhicitta.  
 
6  
When I have become a vessel trained in the common path,  
May I enter easily the holy entrance of the fortunate beings,  
The supreme of all vehicles, the Vajrayana.  
 
Here one dedicates the roots of virtue towards oneself becoming a suitable basis for Tantric 
practice.  
 
The three verses we have covered so far show that one first dedicates the roots of virtue 
towards generating the aspirational bodhicitta, followed by engaged bodhicitta. One only 
becomes a suitable vessel  after having  trained in the common or shared path. One then 
dedicates that one becomes a suitable basis for Tantric practice. After becoming a suitable 
vessel for the Tantric practice, one takes the initiations.  
 
7 
By the conferring of the vase empowerment with streams of Ganges water  
May the stains of appearance of and adherence to ordinariness be cleansed.  
By tasting the nectar of exalted wisdom during the secret empowerment  
May the winds, the source of speech, dawn as mantras.  
 
8 
By the hook of the co -emerge nt bliss of the third empowerment  
May the mind be drawn into the sphere of clear light.  
By being introduced to the meaning of union during the fourth empowerment 
May all hallucination about the ultimate aim be severed  
 
• By the conferring of the vase empower ment , the stains of ordinary appearance and 
ordinary concept are cleansed. When one receives the vase empowerment, one is 
empowered to practise the generation stage.  
• After the vase empowerment, the next empowerment to be conferred is the secret 
empowerment . The secret empowerment empowers one to practise the stages of physical, 
verbal and mental isolations and illusory body.  
• After the secret initiation, the wisdom knowledge empowerment  empowers one to 
meditate on the meaning clear light.  
• By receiving the fourth empowerment, the word empowerment , one is empowered to 
meditate on union.  
 
At the time of receiving these empowerments, one takes on various vows, pledges and 
commitments, which one has to keep purely. Therefore, the prayer continues:  
 
 
Lesson  49          Page 324 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
9 
At that time, having gained genuine conviction that 
Keeping completely pure pledges and vows  
Is the basis of achieving the two types of attainment.  
May I always guard them at the cost of my life.  
 
It is extremely important to keep the vows and samayas that one has  taken purely because, as 
mentioned clearly here: “ Keeping completely pure pledges and vows i s the basis of achieving 
the two types of attainment, ” the supreme and common attainments.  Therefore there is a 
need to keep all the vows and samayas purely.  
 
After having received the empowerments, one has to train in the generation and completion 
stages. Therefore one dedicates the root of virtues to be able to practise and generate those 
realisations of these two stages.  
 
Verse 10 summarises the generation stage  
 
10 
At that time, having gained genuine conviction that  
Of the coarse and subtle first generation stage,   
The four branches of application and approximation in four sessions,  
Which thoroughly gather the collection of great waves of deeds effortlessly   
With all the movements of body, expressions of speech, and thoughts of mind  
That have abandoned the appearance of and  
The conception adhering to ordinariness,  
May whatever appears dawn as the circle of deities.  
 
Here, in the summary of the generation stage, after having abandoned ordinary appearance 
and concept, in relation to whatever one does –  “With all the movements of body, expressions 
of speech, and thoughts of mind” -   one gathers “great waves of deeds ” (meaning merit) easily.  
 
One trains in “ the four branches of application and approximation” which are the c oarse and 
subtle generation stages. During these stages, one trains to see the environment and the 
inhabitants as the supporting and supported mandala. This is the practice that is done in the 
generation stage.  
 
The following verses then give a detailed explanation of the generation stage practice.  
 
11  
By relying on the perfect field of the mind mandala  
And acting in accordance with the rites of accumulating the collections,  
 
The practices such as making offerings within the three pure spheres,  
May my continuum be completely purified.  
 
Prior to the main practice of the sadhana, one visualises the merit field as the basis on which 
 
Lesson  49          Page 325 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
one does the practices of prostrations, making offerings, confessions, rejoicing, taking refuge 
and generating both the aspirational and engaged bodhicitta, dedicating the merit and taking 
the vows. All these practices are done in relation to the merit field: “By relying on the perfect 
field of the min d mandala.”  
 
It is called the mind (or heart) mandala because the merit field that one visualises in front is 
the merit field that one invokes. With oneself purified as the deity and emitting light rays 
from one’s heart to the ten directions, one invokes into the space in front of oneself the 
entire mandala and mandala deities which are in separable from one’s root guru. Therefore it 
is called the mind (or heart) mandala.   
 
Before one can train in the generation stage, one must first   accumulate merit. That is why 
one invites the merit field into one’s  presence and on the basis of that, one accumulates 
merit. The purpose of doing so is to thoroughly purify the mind for the practice of the 
generation stage.  
 
Even when one’s mind is thoroughly purified for the practice of generation stage, during the 
actual practice, one will probably encounter various obstacles. In order to stop or eliminate 
these obstacles, one meditates on the protection wheel. This is highlighted in the next verse:  
 
12 
By the meditative stabilisation of the glorious wrathful Akshobhya  
Encircled by the retinue often wrathful ones,  
Annihilating all those with harmful intent wandering in the ten directions,  
May enlightened activities be accomplished.  
 
We do not have the time to go into details or even to explain what the protection wheel is. For 
those of you who are familiar with the Guhyasamaja long sadhana, you can make a comparison 
by relating  these verses to the long sadhana.  
  
Next comes the actual generation stage practice which is divided into three meditative 
stabilisations or concentrations. They are:  
1. the meditative stabilisation of initial preparation  
2. the meditative stabilisation of the supreme victory mandala  
3. meditative stabilisation of the supreme victorious activities  
 
The first meditative stabilisation of initial preparation is for the purpose of “ perfecting one’s 
own welfare .” The profound meaning of initial preparation is “ initial union ” which is what is 
translated here. Verse 13 says:  
 
13 
Where all the enlightened fields have been purified, may the initial union be accomplished,  
That holy method that will manifest the state of the three bodies,  
Which acts to purify all appearances of and adherence to  
Ordinary death, intermediate state, and rebirth 
By generating in the continuum respectively the supreme vajra that accordingly carries  
 
Lesson  49          Page 326 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Death into the Truth body, intermediate state into the Enjoyment body  
And rebirth into the Emanation body  
Through the meditative stabilisation of the way of great desire,  
The quick path of perfecting one's welfare,  
Skill in the method of devoting to the Conquerors.  
 
One creates the place where one will be enlightened, the pure field. This  is basically one’s 
celestial mansion and that is done for one’s own pur pose. In order to arise into the body of the 
deity that will benefit others, one brings to the path death, the intermediate state and rebirth. 
One accomplishes that by bringing death into the path of the dharmakaya, the intermediate state into the path of the sambhogakaya and rebirth into the path of the nirmanakaya.  
 
In order to stop ordinary appearance and concept in relation to death, the intermediate state 
and rebirth, one meditates on the first meditative stabilisation of initial preparation.  
 
Ven Gyurme: I would like to highlight the translation difficulties here because Tibetan and 
English work differently. Therefore, here they have combined two verses into one and 
whichever is the later verse is translated first followed by the earlier verse.  But in Tibetan the 
verses are the other way round and the commentary is given according to the Tibetan text. So 
there may be some difficulties when we present it in English.  
 
The quick path for actualising the three bodies is the practice of entering into  union with the 
consort. “ Through the meditative stabilisation of the way of great desire” in Verse 13 refers to 
entering into union with the consort  and that is again highlighted in the second half of Verse 14:  
 
14 
Born from the bodhicitta drop which is melted by the Chandali inner fire,  
Ignited by the joining of the sphere of space and the vajra,  
And has traversed the continuous path of the Avadhuti central channel  
To reach the pistils of the wisdom consort's lotus.  
 
Verse 13 is the verse on the first me ditative stabilisation of initial preparation. Verse 14 verse 
refers to the second meditative stabilisation of the supreme victory mandala. Vijaya  is the 
Sanskrit word for victory. This second meditative stabilisation is the meditation on the 
enlightened a ctivities that accord with the pure activities of the holy body of the Buddha.  
 
14 
May I quickly accomplish the Vijaya mandala  
That thoroughly cleanses all fields of the environment and the inhabitants  
By filling the extent of space with clouds of emanations  
From the supported and supporting mandalas  
Born from the bodhicitta drop which is melted by the Chandali inner fire,  
Ignited by the joining of the sphere of space and the vajra,  
And has traversed the continuous path of the Avadhuti central channel  
To reach the pistils of the wisdom consort's lotus.  
 
 
Lesson  49          Page 327 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Next is the meditative stabilisation of the supreme victorious activities (or supreme royal 
activities). That is the time when the practice of the subtle generation stage is done with the 
repetition o f mantra and so forth. Basically this meditative stabilisation is essentially the 
meditation that accords with the activities of the holy mind of the Buddha.  
 
15 
May I thoroughly perfect the subtle yoga that sets in equipoise,  
Clearly without mixing for as  long as one wishes,  
The complete cycle of the mandala, within the insignia,  
Or within the subtle drop of bodhicitta the size of a mustard seed,  
The five coloured jewel with the nature of the five Sugatas,  
Having a radiating net of light rays,  
Residing at the tip of the path of the vitality -holding and downward- voiding winds,  
And may I perfect as well the outer and inner recitations.  
 
• The “ path of the vitality -holding” wind  refers to the upper tip of the central channel where 
one visualises a very subtle im plement of the deities.  
• The path of “ downward -voiding ” wind refers to the tip of the secret place where one 
visualises a subtle drop the size of a mustard seed.  
• After achieving stability in the coarse generation stage, one then meditates on this subtle 
drop as stated here: “ The five coloured jewel with the nature of the five Sugatas,/H aving a 
radiating net of light rays. ”  
• When one has achieved stability with respect to that, then one visualises inside that the 
entire supported and supporting mandala.  
• When one is able to sustain this visualisation “ clearly without mixing” all the subtle details 
and one is able to do that “ for as long as one wishes, ” that is the measure of having 
attained the subtle generation stage.  
• “And may I perfect as well the outer and inner recitations”:  The inner recitation refers to 
mental recitation.  
 
After the subtle generation stage and after the practice of the repetitions, one seeks to 
achieve the common attainment.  
 
16 
Then in dependence on substance, mantra, yogic exercise, and concentration  
May I accomplish the karma vijaya mandala  
Through accomplishing the eight great attainments  
And all the countless activities of pacifying and so forth.  
 
The “ karma vijaya mandala” is the supreme victory mandala. One seeks to accomplish the 
eight great attainments which are considered common attainments. They are:  
1. the ability to perceive buried treasures  
2. the pure attainment, i.e. the ability to make blessed pills  
3. the sword attainme nt 
4. the ability to fly in the sky  
 
Lesson  49          Page 328 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
5. the swift legs attainment  
6. immortality  
7. the ability to pacify sicknesses  
8. invisibility  
We always like to focus on the results but first we have to understand what the causes are and 
see whether we can achieve them. Nothing w ill happen by just thinking of the results. The main 
point is to train in the causes. When the causes are present, then the results can be achieved.   
 
The generation stage is covered up to here. The verses that follow deal with the completion 
stage. We wi ll look at these in the next lesson.  
 
 
  Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
GUHYASAMAJA PRAYER  
 
1 
By this virtue  
May I quickly attain the state of Vajradhara,  
The whole essence of all Buddhas,  
And may all migrating beings also attain that state.  
 2 
For the sake of enlightenment,  
May I practise the two conducts  
Those taught by the perfect Buddhas  
And those taught by Bodhivajra.  
 
3 
Thus, within the state of appearing as a body of a deity,  
Appearing yet empty, like an illusion and a dream,  
In order to generate delight with marvellous bliss  
In the host of deities of the mandala of Akshobhyavajra –  
The condensed quintessence of all the countless conquerors of the ten directions.  
I strive here to make outer, inner and secret offerings,  
Praises, meditations, recitations and so forth.  
 4 
By whatever virtue I have thus accumulated:  
 
Lesson  49          Page 329 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Having seen that just as I have fallen into the ocean of existence  
Likewise too have all mot her migrating beings.  
May I become skilled in the supreme mind of enlightenment  
That takes on the responsibility of liberating migrating beings.  
 
 5 
Having seen enlightenment cannot be achieved  
By my simply generating a mind wishing for that to come about  
Unless I also practise the three kinds of morality,  
May I train in the vows of the conqueror’s children with intense effort.  
 6 
When I have become a vessel trained in the common path,  
May I enter easily the holy entrance of the fortunate beings,  
The suprem e of all vehicles, the Vajrayana.  
 7 
By the conferring of the vase empowerment with streams of Ganges water May the stains of appearance of and adherence to ordinariness be cleansed.  
By tasting the nectar of exalted wisdom during the secret empowerment  
May  the winds, the source of speech, dawn as mantras.  
 8 
By the hooks of the co -emergent bliss of the third empowerment  
May the mind be drawn into the sphere of clear light.  
By being introduced to the meaning of union during the fourth empowerment  
May all hallucination about the ultimate aim be severed.  
 9 
At that time, having gained genuine conviction that  
Keeping completely pure pledges and vows  
Is the basis of achieving the two types of attainment.  
May I always guard them at the cost of my life.  
 10 
At that time, having gained genuine conviction that  
Of the coarse and subtle first generation stage,  
The four branches of application and approximation in four sessions,  
Which thoroughly gather the collection of great waves of deeds effortlessly  
With all the movements of body, expressions of speech, and thoughts of mind  
That have abandoned the appearance of and  
The conception adhering to ordinariness,  
May whatever appears dawn as the circle of deities.  
 11 
By relying on the perfect field of the mind mandala  
 
Lesson  49          Page 330 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
And acting in accordance with the rites of accumulating the collections,  
The practices such as making offerings within the three pure spheres,  
May my continuum be completely purified.  
 
12 
By the meditative stabilisation of the glorious wrathful Akshobhya  
Encircled by the retinue of ten wrathful ones,  
Annihilating all those with harmful intent wandering in the ten directions,  
May enlightened activities be accomplished.  
 13 
Where all the enlightened fields have been purified, may the initial union be accompl ished,  
That holy method that will manifest the state of the three bodies,  
Which acts to purify all appearances of and adherence to  
Ordinary death, intermediate state, and rebirth  
By generating in the continuum respectively the supreme vajra that  
accordingly carries  
Death into the Truth body, intermediate state into the Enjoyment body  
And rebirth into the Emanation body  
Through the meditative stabilisation of the way of great desire,  
The quick path of perfecting one’s welfare,  
Skill in the method of devoting  to the Conquerors.  
 14 
May I quickly accomplish the Vijaya mandala  
That thoroughly cleanses all fields of the environment and the inhabitants  
By filling the extent of space with clouds of emanations  
From the supported and supporting mandalas  
Born from the  bodhicitta drop which is melted by the Chandali inner fire,  
Ignited by the joining of the sphere of space and the vajra,  
And has traversed the continuous path of the Avadhuti central channel  
To reach the pistils of the wisdom consort’s lotus.  
 15 
May I thoroughly perfect the subtle yoga that sets in equipoise,  
Clearly without mixing for as long as one wishes,  
The complete cycle of the mandala, within the insignia,  
Or within the subtle drop of bodhicitta the size of a mustard seed,  
The five coloured jewel  with the nature of the five Sugatas,  
Having a radiating net of light rays,  
Residing at the tip of the path of the vitality -holding and downward- voiding winds,  
And may I perfect as well the outer and inner recitations.  
 16 
Then in dependence on substance, mantra, yogic exercise, and concentration  
May I accomplish the karma vijaya mandala  
 
Lesson  49          Page 331 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Through accomplishing the eight great attainments  
And all the countless activities of pacifying and so forth.  
 
17 
May I accomplish the five levels of the completion stage a long with the three conducts,  
The profound path which includes the six branches –  
Individual withdrawal, concentration, vitality -exertion,  
Apprehension, subsequent mindfulness, and meditative stabilisation  
 18 
May I generate the four joys of downward -desce nding and upward -stabilising  
Which are induced by the stages of the forward and reverse process  
Of the stream of nectar from the moon melted by the sun  
In dependence on the mind in the subtle drop at the jewel.  
 19 
Having arisen from that, may I perfect the individual withdrawal and concentration  
Of the isolation of body through the meditative stabilisation of the body vajra  
Where all appearances that have arisen  
Dawn as one hundred, five, three or a sole lineage.  
 
20 
May I gather into the indestructible drop  
The twelve winds that produce the conceptions of apprehended and apprehender  
Through familiarising with the supreme mantra drop, the king of drops,  
At the point of the lotus in the heart.  
 
21 
May I break open the eggshell of ignorance at my heart  
With  the isolation of speech, the meditative stabilisation of vajra speech,  
Through making the tones of the light drop at the bridge of the nose  
Dawn as the uncontrived three vajras.  
 22 
Having cleared away the darkness of the winds of indicative conception  
Through meditating on vitality -exertion of the substance drop  
At the point of the two supreme secret channels of method and wisdom,  
May the sun of clear light dawn at the centre of my heart.  
 23 
May I generate the isolation of mind of the three empties,  
Whic h resemble the cloudless sky  
Pervaded by moonlight, sunlight, and darkness,  
Through mediating on the vitality -exertion wind at the three drops at  
the three points.  
 
 
Lesson  49          Page 332 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
24 
By being skilled in the essential points of the oral instructions,  
Perfecting the nine types of mixing, three types for each of the three – 
The illusory enjoyment body, the clear light truth body and the diverse emanation  
Body  
 
25 
May I thoroughly perfect the apprehension  
Of the conventional illusory body and ultimate clear light,  
The subsequent mindfulness of reverse order,  
The meditative stabilisation of union,  
And the three supreme conducts – elaborate, unelaborate, and highly unelaborate.  
 26 
If, at the time of death I have not achieved the meditative stabilisation  
Which accomplishes the supreme attainment in this life or the intermediate state,  
May I be able to mix the four empties of the stages of death  
At the time of the basis with the four empties of the path.  
  27 
At the time of the intermediate state, may I mix it with  
The illusory m editative stabilisation, and at the time of taking birth  
May I take rebirth at will in a supreme place of birth,  
Just as the Enjoyment body sustains the birth of the emanation body.  
 28 
In short whether it is death, intermediate state or birth that dawns  
Having realised it as an exhortation to virtuous practice,  
A reminder of the three types of bringing into the path cultivated previously,  
May my mind overflow with joy at the time of death.  
 29 
Thus, may the culmination of this marvellous path  
Be accomplis hed accordingly without obstacles  
May it spread and expand throughout all directions and times  
And may all migrating beings be liberated by this skilful means.  
 
 
 
Lesson  49          Page 333 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
LESSON NO: 5 0  DATE: 24TH SEPTEMBER 2009  
 
We will spend five minutes to reflect on the verse:  
Do not commit any non- virtuous actions,  
Perform only perfect virtuous actions,  
Subdue your mind thoroughly  
This is the teaching of the Buddha.  
 
You can also reflect on the verse from the Vajra Cutter Sutra:  
A star, a mirage, a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,  
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud,  
See conditioned things as such.  
 
There are many ways to interpret the verse that starts with “ Do not commit any non- virtuous 
actions…”  Looking at it in a general way, “ Do not commit any non- virtuous actions”  can be 
taken to mean that one should give up all non- virtues committe d with one’s body and, 
conversely, it can also mean that one should accumulate virtue with one’s body.  
 “Perform only perfect virtuous actions” can be related to abandoning the non -virtue of speech 
and in its place, one performs only perfect actions of spe ech, e.g., doing well various 
recitations, daily prayers and so forth to stop the negative karma of speech such as meaningless speech.  
 “Subdue your mind thoroughly” can refer to whatever one does with one’s body and speech. 
One makes sure they are done wi th a good motivation and a good heart, abandoning negative 
thoughts such as the thought of harming others and so forth.  
 So, there are different ways of interpreting this verse. Generally speaking, this verse is related to the three scopes. The first line is related to the path that is shared with the persons of small capacity. The second line is related to the path that is shared with the persons of medium 
capacity. The third line is related to the path that is shared with the persons of great capacity.  
 When one reflects on that verse according to this explanation, one can relate it to oneself and 
see whether one is able to abandon the non- virtues of body and speech and whether one is 
able to cultivate the good heart and be a disciplined and calm person. When one is able to do 
that, I guess one can call oneself a practitioner.  
 For us beginners, this is where we should start. It is difficult for us to be able to generate the paths of the three types of person. But at least we should start from here to see  whether we 
can modify the behaviour of our bodies, speech and minds.  
 
One can see that from just this one verse, there are many ways of looking at and interpreting 
its meaning. There are different messages that one can extract from that verse . You can do this 
according to what was explained and put (the verse) into practice.  
 
Lesson  50          Page 334 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
************************  
 
17 
May I accomplish the five levels of the completion stage along with the three conducts,  
The profound path which includes the six branches –  
Individual withdrawal, concentration, vitality -exertion,  
Apprehension, subsequent mindfulness, and meditative stabilisation  
 This is a summary of the completion stage. This enumeration of the six branches is found in the Continuation Tantra and are: “Individual withdrawal, concentration, vitality -exertion, 
apprehension, subsequent mindfulness, and meditative stabilization.”  
 These six branches can be condensed into the five profound stages of the completion stage:  
• Individual withdrawal and meditative stabilisation are included in       physical isolation.  
• Vitality -exertion is included in verbal isolation.  
• Apprehension is included in clear light  
• Subsequent mindfulness and concentration are included in union.  
 Geshe -la: This is a summary of what we have done long time  ago. I have already explained 
everything and made it very clear in the beginning. Now is not whether you know or not because there is no time. If you want to know, you must go back and read.  
 “The three conducts ” here refers to:  
• the conduct with elaborati on,  
• the unelaborated conduct and  
• the highly unelaborated conduct.  
These three conducts are the practices to enhance one’s practice of the completion stage.  
 This is just a very brief presentation of the completion stage. When we expand the completion stage, we have:  
• the completion stage of the three isolations and  
• the completion stage of the two truths  
 The completion stage of the three isolations is:  
• physical isolation  
• verbal isolation and  
• mental isolation.  
 
When the physical isolation is elaborated, there are:  
• practices that are done in meditative equipoise  
• practices that are done in post- equipoise  
 What practices are done in physical isolation while in meditative equipoise? This is shown in the next verse:  
 
Lesson  50          Page 335 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
18 
May I generate the four joys of downward -descending and upward- stabilising  
Which are induced by the stages of the forward and reverse process  
Of the stream of nectar from the moon melted by the sun  
In dependence on the mind in the subtle drop at the jewel.  
 
The practices that are done in physica l isolation while in meditative equipoise are:  
• One visualises oneself as Vajradhara, father and mother.  
• At the secret place in the middle of the jewel, one visualises the subtle drop  
• Through focussing on the subtle drop in the middle of the jewel, the winds are gathered and cause the tumo (here referred to as the “ sun”) to blaze.  
• The sun melts the “ moon ,” which refers to the white bodhicitta at the crown. Through the 
blazing of the tumo at the navel, the white bodhicitta at the crown is melted.  
• Throug h that, the four joys of the forward and reverse processes are induced.  
 
During meditative equipoise, one generates the four joys. The bliss that is induced is used to ascertain emptiness. Here, one tries to bring together bliss and emptiness. Once one ha s 
brought these two together, one remains in meditative equipoise focussing on that.  
 After one arises from meditative equipoise, what does one do in post-  meditative equipoise? 
This is explained in the next verse:  
 19 
Having arisen from that, may I perfec t the individual withdrawal and concentration  
Of the isolation of body through the meditative stabilisation of the body vajra  
Where all appearances that have arisen  
Dawn as one hundred, five, three or a sole lineage.  
 Having arisen from that meditative equ ipoise, one trains to see whatever appears as the 
display of bliss and emptiness. This is the practice of individual withdrawal. I guess “ Where all 
appearances that have arisen” is related to the practice of individual withdrawal.  
 “May I perfect the individual withdrawal and concentration”:   “ Concentration” is translated as 
meditative stabilisation in our root text.  
• In post- meditative equipoise in the completion stage of the physical isolation, there is also 
the practice of concentration.  
• In the practice of individual withdrawal, one sees everything that appears as the display of bliss and emptiness.  
• In the practice of concentration, one sees whatever appears as the display of the 100 immaculate lineages.  
• The 100 immaculate lineages can be condensed into the five buddha lineages.  
• The five buddha lineages can be further condensed into the three lineages of the vajra body, speech and mind.  
• Those three lineages can be condensed into the great secret “ sole lineage” where one 
 
Lesson  50          Page 336 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
trains to see whatever appears to oneself as the display of Vajradhara.  
 
What happens after the isolation of body (physical isolation)? The next level is the isolation of speech (verbal isolation). During the completion stage of verbal isolation, one meditates on the 
three stages of practice:  
• meditating on the mantra drop at the heart  
• meditating on the light drop at the upper end of the central channel  
• meditating on the substance drop at the lower end of the central channel (at the secret 
place)  
 
The meditation on the mantra drop at the heart is explained in the next verse:  
 20 
May I gather into the indestructible drop  
The twelve winds that produce the conceptions of apprehended and apprehender  
Through familiarising with the supreme mantra drop, the king of drops , 
At the point of the lotus in the heart.  
 Having consummated the practice of physical isolation, one proceeds to the next practice where one visualises the red and white king of drops (i.e., the indestructible drop) at the heart in the central channel. In the middle of that indestructible drop, one visualises the supreme 
mantra drop, the white syllable AH. This is done whilst seeing oneself as Vajradhara, father and 
mother. Through familiarity with that meditation, one causes all the winds to enter, abide and 
dissolve in the central channel and through that, the four empties arise.  
 Here “twelve winds ” are mentioned: there are six winds of the apprehender and six winds of 
the apprehended. Through meditation, one attempts to gather all the twelve winds into  the 
indestructible drop at the heart.  
 The next verse describes the meditation of the light drop at the upper end of the central channel which is “ at the bridge of the nose .”  
 21 
May I break open the eggshell of ignorance at my heart  
With the isolation of speech, the meditative stabilisation of vajra speech,  
Through making the tones of the light drop at the bridge of the nose  
Dawn as the uncontrived three vajras . 
 The yogi, seeing himself clearly as Vajradhara, father and mother,  visualises the light dr op at 
the upper end of the central channel which is at the bridge of the nose. Through that meditation, the yogi tries to make the uncontrived tones (i.e., the natural tones of the inhalation, exhalation and abiding) inseparable from the tones of the three  syllables OM AH 
HUM: “T hrough making the tones of the light drop at the bridge of the nose/ Dawn as the 
uncontrived three vajras. ” That vajra recitation is meant to completely loosen the channel 
knots at the heart which is referred to in the first line: “ May I break open the eggshell of 
ignorance at my heart. ”  
 
Lesson  50          Page 337 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
The next verse deals with the meditation on the substance drop at the secret place.  
 22 
Having cleared away the darkness of the winds of indicative conception  
Through meditating on vitality -exertion of the substance drop  
At the point of the two supreme secret channels of method and wisdom,  
May the sun of clear light dawn at the centre of my heart.  
 The “method ” refers to the father and “ wisdom”  refers to the mother, the consort. The lower 
ends of “ the two supreme secrets channels ” (i.e., the two central channels of the father and 
mother) meet and it is at this meeting point that one meditates on the substance drop. This meditation causes all the winds to gather and from it, “ the sun o f clear light dawn at the centre 
of my heart .” 
 The next verse refers to mental isolation.  
 23 
May I generate the isolation of mind of the three empties,  
Which resemble the cloudless sky  
Pervaded by moonlight, sunlight, and darkness,  
Through mediating on t he vitality -exertion wind at the three drops at the three points.  
 “Through mediating on the vitality -exertion wind at the three drops at the three points ,” one 
generates “ the isolation of mind of the three empties .” Here, only three empties are mentioned.  
As I have explained before, it is not that clear light does not exist during mental isolation. It does exist but it is subsumed under the explanation of the mind of near - attainment. Therefore 
the reference is only to the three empties.  
 This is followed  by the presentation of the completion stage of the two truths which have 
different levels. There are:  
• the completion stage of the conventional illusory body,  
• the completion stage of the clear light and  
• the completion stage of the inseparable two truths.   
 In order to arise as the illusory body, one has to meditate on the oral instructions pertaining to 
the nine mixings (or blendings). Therefore the next verse says:  
 
24 
By being skilled in the essential points of the oral instructions,  
Perfecting the nine  types of mixing, three types for each of the three – 
The illusory enjoyment body, the clear light truth body and the diverse emanation Body  
 I have talked about the nine mixings before. They are:  
• the three mixings of the waking state  
 
Lesson  50          Page 338 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
• the three mixings of the sleeping state  
• the three mixings at the time of death  
 
One has to be skilled in these nine mixings.  
• In order to practise the three mixings at the time of death, one has to be able to do the practice of the three mixings at the time of sleep.  
• In orde r for one to be able to practise the three mixings at the time of sleep, one must be 
able to do the practice of the three mixings of the waking state.  
• In order for one to be able to practise the three mixings of the waking state, one must perform well the  practice of taking the three bodies into the path at the time of practising 
the generation stage.  
 
25 
May I thoroughly perfect the apprehension  
Of the conventional illusory body and ultimate clear light,  
The subsequent mindfulness of reverse order,  
The m editative stabilisation of union,  
And the three supreme conducts – elaborate, unelaborate, and highly unelaborate . 
 
The “ conventional illusory body ” refers to the impure illusory body. With the extremely subtle 
wind upon which the example clear light of the final mental isolation is mounted acting as the substantial cause and the example clear light of the final mental isolation acting as the co -
operative condition, one attains the illusory body, a fully characterised deity body that is said to be in the na ture of wisdom. That body is something different from one’s coarse body. 
Having achieved this impure illusory body, by depending on the two stages of dissolution of meditative stabilisation, one causes all the winds to dissolve, culminating in the fourth e mpty, 
clear light . The two stages of dissolution of meditative stabilisation are: (1) apprehending the 
entirety and (2) subsequent destruction  
 25 
May I thoroughly perfect the apprehension  
Of the conventional illusory body and ultimate clear light,  
The subsequent mindfulness of reverse order,  
The meditative stabilisation of union,  
And the three supreme conducts – elaborate, unelaborate, and highly unelaborate . 
 When the mind of clear light perceives emptiness directly, the yogi achieves meaning clear light or the “ ultimate clear light .” Of the six branches, he achieves the branch of “ apprehension .” 
 “The subsequent mindfulness of reverse order”: The reverse order here refers to the mind of near- attainment of the reverse order. Concurrent with the mind of near -attainment of the 
reverse order, after arising from the meaning clear light, one achieves the pure illusory body and at the same time, one achieves the abandonment union. Once the pure illusory body is achieved, the continuum of that pure illusory body will go on forever until samsara is emptied.  
 
 
Lesson  50          Page 339 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
After achieving the pure illusory body, the yogi then manifests billions of bodies going out into 
the ten directions to make offerings and so -forth in order to accumulate the merit needed to 
be able to abandon the obstructions to omniscience (knowledge obstructions).   There comes the time when the yogi achieves sufficient merit and is able to abandon the knowledge obstructions and achieve the realisational union which is able to overcome the knowledge obs tructions. Once the knowledge obstructions are abandoned, the yogi achieves 
the non- learner’s union . 
 As mentioned earlier, the three conducts -  elaborate, unelaborate, and highly unelaborated -  
help to enhance one’s practice of the completion stage and re fer to the conduct of enjoying 
the five desire objects and the ways of relying on the consort.  
• The elaborate and unelaborated conducts are performed in relation to the action seal, an actual consort.  
• The highly unelaborated conduct is performed in relati on to a visualised consort. There is 
also a particular diet to be adopted and also the practice of eating very rich foods that induce deep sleep so as to sustain the practice of sleep yoga. Besides performing the sleep yoga, the practitioner will not be do ing anything else except eat, sleep and defecate. That 
practitioner is focussing mainly on sustaining the clear light of sleep.  
 All the practices mentioned so far up to here are practices to be done for one’s whole life. What if one is not able to achiev e the example clear light of the final mental isolation and 
illusory body in this life? How does one continue to practise in future lives? The next verse deals with this in the form of prayers that one can make:  
 26 
If, at the time of death I have not ach ieved the meditative stabilisation  
Which accomplishes the supreme attainment in this life or the intermediate state,  
May I be able to mix the four empties of the stages of death  
At the time of the basis with the four empties of the path.  
 27 
At the time of the intermediate state, may I mix it with  
The illusory meditative stabilisation, and at the time of taking birth  
May I take rebirth at will in a supreme place of birth,  
Just as the Enjoyment body sustains the birth of the emanation body.  
 28 
In short whether it is death, intermediate state or birth that dawns  
Having realised it as an exhortation to virtuous practice,  
A reminder of the three types of bringing into the path cultivated previously,  
May my mind overflow with joy at the time of death.  
 Let’s say  one is unable to actualise the illusory body that will allow one to achieve 
enlightenment in this life or one is unable to achieve the example clear light of the final mental isolation at the time of death which will allow one to achieve enlightenment in the 
 
Lesson  50          Page 340 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
intermediate state.  What is one to do?  
 
If that is the case, then:  
• at the time of death, one mixes the four empties that occur at that time together with the 
four empties of the path.  
• during the intermediate state, one mixes the intermediate state w ith “ the illusory 
meditative stabilisation .”  
• at the time of taking birth, one mixes taking rebirth with the emanation body.  
 
In short, whatever arises be it death, bardo or birth, “ having realized it as an exhortation to 
virtuous practice,” one sees it a s “a reminder of the three types of bringing into path cultivated 
previously.”   The point is that through the Tantric practice of bringing the three bodies into the 
path and the nine mixings, one develops that confidence which arises at the time of death. With such practices and confidence, one is able to die joyfully and in the next life, one again attains a suitable body for the practice of Tantra. Then again in that life one trains in the two stages. That is how one gains enlightenment in successive live s.  
 29 
Thus, may the culmination of this marvellous path  
Be accomplished accordingly without obstacles  
May it spread and expand throughout all directions and times  
And may all migrating beings be liberated by this skilful means.  
 
May the practices of this marvellous path, the path of these two stages –  the generation stage 
and five levels of the completion stage –  “be accomplished accordingly without obstacles ”  
arising even for a single moment. May all the excellent explanations of the teachings on th is 
marvellous path “ spread and expand in all directions and times .” May all fortunate disciples be 
liberated from the problems of both samsara and nirvana by this skilful method.  
 
It is good to read this prayer sometimes and to think about it now that we have gone through it. 
Even though we may not understand everything, we do have some understanding. Even if we 
are not able to do these practices (now), we can pray to be able to do so using this prayer.  
 
We can now recite this prayer as a way of concluding  the six years we have spent on the Basic 
Program to dedicate the merit that we have accumulated.  
 
There will be sessions in the morning and afternoon this Sunday. It will be good if you can 
come. We will start at 10am. I am not sure what I am going to talk about this Sunday.  
   Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
Lesson  50          Page 341 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS  SUNDAY, 29TH MARCH 2009  
1. What are the different types of mandalas and what does the word “mandala” mean?  
 
2. (a) What are the initiations conferred in the four classes of Tantra?  
    (b) What is the entity of an initiation?  
    (c) What are the criteria of determining whether one has received an initiation or not?  
 
3. What are the ways of reciting mantra without deterioration of the four branches, through 
combining life -force exer tion and retention?  
 
4. What is the difference between Yoga with Signs and Yoga without Signs?  
 
5. (a) In general, there are five buddha lineages. Why are only three of them mentioned in 
Action Tantra?  
      (b) In Action Tantra, the tathagata lineage is c onsidered superior, the lotus lineage middling 
and the vajra lineage lower. Why is the tathagata lineage considered superior (the highest)?  
 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS SUNDAY, 19TH JULY 2009  
1. Why is Highest Yoga Tantra the best?  
 
2. How does the meditation of taking the three bodies into the path purify death, the 
intermediate state and birth?  
 
3. Who is the “I” that meditates on the deity?  
 4. The objects of abandonment of the generation stage are ordinary appearance and ordinary conception. What are they?  
 CLARIFICATION BY GESHE  CHONYI OF DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 4 OF 29
TH MARCH 2009  
 
Question 4: What is the difference between Yoga with Signs and Yoga without Signs?  
The non -dual yoga of profundity and clarity exists in both Yoga with Signs and Yoga without 
Signs.  
 
For Yoga with Signs, the main object of practice is the meditation on the deity’s body and the 
repetition of the mantra. The main emphasis of Yoga with Sig ns is the class of appearance.  
 For Yoga without Signs, there are the practices of emptiness and deity yoga but the emphasis is on the class of empty, i.e., the meditation on emptiness.  
 
According to this author (Ngawang Palden), the non -dual yoga of profu ndity and clarity is the 
Yoga without Signs. The emphasis here is on the meditation on emptiness. But the question to 
think about is this: Is only Yoga without Signs the non -dual yoga of profundity and clarity? Can 
there be a non -dual yoga of profundity an d clarity that is the Yoga with Signs?  
 
 
Lesson  50          Page 342 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Question: What is the meaning of the word “signs” in this context?  
Answer : The word ‘sign’ is ‘ chema’ in Tibetan. It is translated sometimes as symbol but it has 
the connotation of an appearing object. Perhaps, we ca n relate ‘sign’ here to mean dualistic 
elaborations, i.e. it relates to the class of appearance. When we talk about emptiness, it is like 
nothing is appearing so to speak.   
 Question: What is the meaning of taking the essence?  
I guess, in this context, ta king the essence means actualising the two yogas of   Yoga with Signs 
and Yoga without Signs.   Here, in this context, the purpose of entering the mandala is to be able to receive the initiations so that one can practice these two yogas and cultivate and a ctualise the path:  
• After entering the mandala, one receives the water initiation that authorises one to practise the Yoga without Signs.  
• Then by receiving the crown initiation, one is authorised to practise the Yoga with Signs.  
 The path is summarised into these two yogas: the Yoga with Signs and Yoga without Signs. Of these two, the real essence is the Yoga without Signs because that yoga serves as the direct antidote for severing the root of samsara i.e., it is the direct antidote to the afflictions.  
 Question: Can taking the essence be related to receiving the blessings of the lama?  
Answer:  One can explain taking the essence in so many other different ways. For example 
when we talk about what is the meaning of life, what is its essence and how one can take the essence of this rebirth, then practising the path that is shared with the person o f small capacity 
is one way of taking the essence.  
 
Practising the path that is shared with the person of middling capacity is another way of taking 
the essence.  
 Practising the path that is shared with the person of great capacity is yet another way of taking 
the essence.  
 Here, in this context of entering the mandala, there are many reasons why we are doing so. When you look at the ultimate essence, the whole point of entering the mandala is to be able to receive the initiation. What does one do with that initiation? So that one can actualise the path.  
  Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
CLARIFICATION BY GESHE  CHONYI OF DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 3 & 4 OF 19TH JULY 200 9  
 
 
Lesson  50          Page 343 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
Question 3: Who is the ‘I’ that meditates on the deity?  
 
The practice of the sadhana is called self -generation. If there is no I, then what generates into 
the deity?  
 Geshe -la: ‘I’ and the merely labelled ‘I’ are exactly the same or not?  ‘I’ must exis t.  
 
Whatever exists is necessarily merely labelled. If it is not merely labelled, it definitely doesn’t 
exist.  
 Geshe -la: Whatever exists, and then it is merely labelled.  
 In relation with the 'I' that is generated as the deity, is it correct to think tha t I am Vajradhara?  
 Geshe -la: Self generation is all about that. I am Vajradhara. Is it correct to do that? Is the 
thought of oneself as Vajradhara during meditation right or wrong? That is why I am asking, who is that 'I'?   When you hold on to divine pri de of yourself as deity of Vajradhara, is that mind a wrong 
consciousness? I am not Vajradhara but I believe myself to be Vajradhara and generate divine pride. Is that correct? You are not Vajradhara but you think yourself as Vajradhara. Is that a 
wrong co nsciousness?  
 
Of the seven types of consciousnesses that we studied in the presentation of the mind, the last 
consciousness is wrong consciousness. A wrong consciousness is something that has to be abandoned and is not to be adopted. We are not necessarily  saying this is not like that.  
 Geshe -la: This is a question for you to think about. We do a lot of such things. We visualise the 
whole sky filled with flowers but there are no flowers in the sky. I am not going to say whether it is right or wrong. But why  do we do these things?   
 Question 4: The objects of abandonment of the generation stage are ordinary appearance and ordinary conception. What are they?  
 Ordinary concept as you have presented it is grasping at phenomena as ultimately truly 
existent, it is  the mind conceiving the ordinary as truly existent.  Is it all right to say that? If that 
is the case, is grasping at the deity’s body as being truly existent an object of abandonment of 
Tantra?  
 Do you agree with that? Is it more than that or not? Is it  not that but something else?  
There are only two answers, either it is not that or it is something more than that. When we say, “There is something more than that,” that means that is also correct but there is something else.  
 
• There is the grasping at sentient beings as being truly existent.  
• There is also the grasping at sentient beings as being ordinary.  
 
Lesson  50          Page 344 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
Is the appearance of sentient beings as truly existent an object of abandonment of Tantra or not?    When you say ordinary appearance is the appearance of sentient beings as being truly existent 
and ordinary concept is the grasping at sentient beings to be truly existent and you posit them to be the objects of abandonment of Tantra, then the question arises, “Can those two be 
abandoned by the Sutric path? ” If they can be abandoned on the Sutric path, they are not the 
uncommon objects of abandonment of Tantra. Obviously, ordinary appearance and ordinary 
grasping must be something else.  
 If one takes ordinary appearance to mean a sentient being (who is ordi nary) appearing as a 
sentient being and takes ordinary concept to mean apprehending a sentient being just to be a sentient being, is that okay or not?  
Because when you qualify these two with true existence, they are no longer the uncommon objects of abandonment of Tantra.   Here in Highest Yoga Tantra, the purpose of the generation and completion stages are to stop ordinary appearance as ordinary, i.e., to stop sentient beings appearing as sentient beings and ordinary concept, i.e., to stop the idea that s entient beings are sentient beings.  
 
The ways to do this are:  
• through having the stable clear appearance of oneself as the deity. That stops ordinary 
appearance and  
• one develops the divine pride (identifying oneself as the deity) which stops the idea of sentient beings as sentient beings.  
 In the generation and completion stages of Highest Yoga Tantra, it is about seeing oneself and identifying oneself as the deity and seeing the environment and identifying the environment as being the inestimable mansion of the deity. Why? The purpose is to  stop this appearance of the 
ordinary as ordinary and to stop the concept of ordinary as ordinary.  
 Here when we say the objects of abandonment of the generation stage is ordinary appearance and grasping, in this context, “abandonment” takes on the connot ation of developing a certain 
mind to stop those two from arising. But you are not eliminating them. Therefore, the meaning of abandonment on the generation stage is stopping the appearance and the concept from arising.  
 Is there a need to qualify ordinar y appearance and ordinary grasping with true existence or not? 
It is not necessary because sentient beings appearing as sentient beings is enough. That is 
ordinary appearance. Whether it is truly existent or not, it is still a sentient being.  
 
Do you unde rstand why there is no need to qualify these two (ordinary appearance and 
ordinary grasping) with true existence? You need to understand why because when you affix those two with true existence, then that no longer makes them uncommon objects of abandonmen t of Tantra. That can be achieved with the Sutric path. That being the case, there 
 
Lesson  50          Page 345 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
is really no need to qualify ordinary appearance and ordinary grasping with true existence.  
 
We can simply say:  
• ordinary appearance is sentient beings appearing as sentient  beings and  
• ordinary concept is apprehending sentient beings to be sentient beings  
 Geshe -la: The ordinary environment is also included there. You must know the problem when 
you put in true existence. The consequence is already explained -  Sutra can abandon that, no 
need for Tantra.  
 Then what happens after you have achieved enlightenment? Does ordinary appearance and ordinary grasping exist?  
 Geshe -la: What do you think?  
 Does the Buddha see suffering sentient beings? When we say we abandonordinary a ppearance 
and ordinary concept, we are abandoning that mind to which the appearance appears. When we say abandoning the ordinary (appearance), this doesn’t mean to get rid of it as in if I don't want you to appear, I get rid of you! That is not the meaning  of abandon.  
 When you achieve enlightenment, you will necessarily have abandoned ordinary appearance and grasping. So does the Buddha see things as ordinary? Does the Buddha  believe them to be ordinary?  
 
I don't know. This is just doubt. Whether Buddha see ordinary things or not?  These are the objects of abandonment and the Buddha will have necessarily abandoned them. Then the 
question is, “If the Buddha has abandoned them, does he have ordinary appearance and 
grasping?”  That is the difficult point.  
    Interpreter: Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Lesson  50          Page 346 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
 
Lesson  50          Page 347 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
 
Lesson  50          Page 348 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
 
1 When the wisdom that directly perceives emptiness becomes the direct antidote to the innate afflictions, the 
bodhisattva achieves the uninterrupted path of the path of meditation. “B” in the chart refers to the innate 
afflictive obstructions which are aba ndoned from the first to the seventh grounds.  
There are seven uninterrupted paths of the path of meditation. Since there are seven uninterrupted paths of 
the path of meditation, then there are seven levels of the innate afflictive obstructions that are to be abandoned. In fact, there are nine levels of the innate afflictive obstructions to be abandoned on the path of meditation: - 
1. three big innate afflictive obstructions  
2. three middling innate afflictive obstructions  
3. three small innate afflictive obstructions  
The three big innate afflictive obstructions and the three middling innate afflictive obstructions are abandoned 
sequentially. However, the three small innate afflictive obstructions are abandoned simultaneously. Therefore, 
this makes up seven levels of i nnate afflictive obstructions. As the uninterrupted paths of the path of meditation 
are the direct antidotes to the innate afflictive obstructions, there are seven uninterrupted paths of the path of 
meditation to abandon all seven levels of the innate affl ictive obstructions.  
When a particular uninterrupted path of the path of meditation has abandoned its innate afflictive 
obstructions, the bodhisattva achieves the respective path of release of the path of meditation . Therefore, there 
are also seven paths of release of the path of meditation.  
After achieving a specific path of release, the bodhisattva will arise from meditative equipoise and enter into 
subsequent attainment (post -meditative equipoise). He then enters again into meditative equipoise to abandon 
the next level of innate afflictive obstructions. (Extract from Pg. 4, Lesson 2 of Basic Program class on  Mahayana Paths and Grounds ) 
 
2 After the seventh uninterrupted path of the path of meditation, the bodhisattva enters the path of release of 
path of meditation at the eighth ground having completely abandoned the innate afflictive obstructions. The 
bodhisattva then becomes a foe destro yer (the eighth milestone in the chart) which means that he has completely 
destroyed all the foes, i.e. the innate afflictive obstructions.  
At this point, the bodhisattva begins to overcome the knowledge obstructions which are abandoned by the 
uninterrupt ed paths of the eighth, ninth and tenth grounds which are the direct antidotes to the knowledge 
obstructions.  
There are three levels of knowledge obstructions - 
1. the big knowledge obstructions  
2. the middling knowledge obstructions  
3. the small knowledge obstructi ons 
The big knowledge obstructions are abandoned by the uninterrupted paths of the eighth ground. The middling 
knowledge obstructions are abandoned by the uninterrupted path of the ninth ground. The small knowledge obstructions are abandoned by the uninter rupted path of the tenth ground. The uninterrupted path of the last 
moment of the continuum of the sentient being is the direct antidote to the small knowledge obstructions and 
after they have been abandoned, the bodhisattva becomes a buddha. (Extract from  Pg. 5, Lesson 2 of Basic 
Program class on Mahayana Paths and Grounds ) 
 
3 Definition of an enjoyment body : It is a final form body possessing the five certainties:  
1. Certainty of abode: it abides only in Akanista  
2. Certainty of body: it is adorned with comple te manifest signs and exemplifications (or the major marks and 
minor signs)  
3. Certainty of retinue: it is surrounded only by bodhisattva superiors  
4. Certainty of doctrine: it teaches only the Mahayana Dharma  
5. Certainty of time: it remains as long as samsara is not empty (Extract from Pg. 6, Lesson 9, Module 11 of Basic 
Program, Ornament for Clear Realisations ) 
 
 
4  
Eight Dissolutions  Internal signs  
 
Lesson  50          Page 349 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                    Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
FPMT Basic Program       Transcript of the Oral Commentary by Geshe Chonyi  
 
1. Earth element dissolves into the water element  Appearance of mirage  
2. Water element dissolves into the fire element  Appearance of smoke  
3. Fire element dissolves into the wind element  Appearance of fireflies or sparks within 
smoke  
4.Wind element dissolves into consciousness  Appearance of a sputtering butter -lamp 
going  out 
5. 80 conceptions dissolve into the white appearance  At first, burning butter lamp, then clear 
vacuity filled with white light  
6. White appearance dissolves into the red increase  Clear vacuity filled with red light  
7. Red increase dissolves into the black near - attainment  At first, vacuity filled with thick darkness; 
then, as if swooning unconsciously  
8. Black near -attainment dissolves into the clear light  Very clear vacuity free of the white, red and 
black appearance; the mind of the clear light 
of death  
Extract from ‘Part 6: An overview of Tantric Paths and Grounds’ by Geshe Tashi Tsering  
 
 
Lesson  50          Page 350 
 
This transcript is restricted to those who have received a Highest Yoga Tantra empowerment                                                                                                                                                                                                                