Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L1.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.480128
================================================================================

It is said in the sutra that all phenomena are under the influence of causes and conditions. It is also said that whatever will happens in the future, and whatever you are seeking to achieve - all of these have its root in aspiration. As such, whatever aspirational prayers that we made will bear fruit in the future. What it is being said here is that if we want to achieve something, our heart has to be in it. We must really want it. Whether we call it belief or aspiration or yearning; that is what moves the mind towards the objective that we are seeking to achieve. 
A real Buddhist is someone who is seeking to achieve liberation from the very depth of his heart. That is what it meant by real Buddhist. A real Buddhist is someone who really seeking liberation. A person who merely seeks happiness of this life alone does not make the person a Buddhist at all. It is difficult to call someone a Buddhist who merely seeking the objective or happiness of this life alone. Even for someone looking for a good rebirth, that motivation alone is difficult to justify or calling that person a Buddhist. If one is practicing the Dharma for the sake of achieving some peace and happiness in this life or some kind of concentration that motivation hardly make the person a Buddhist. In fact there are techniques to achieve the different levels of concentration and formless absorption. But doing those practices again cannot differentiate oneself as a Buddhist. It is very important to get this clear. Many people turn to Buddhadharma and practice Buddhadharma just to have some peace in life – some calm, peace and happiness of mind. That does not make one a Buddhist at all. So it is important to understand this. 
As said earlier, a Buddhist is someone who is yearning for liberation from the depth of the heart. That motivation is what driving the person. That is what he is looking for, and that is where his mental attention is focus on all the time. The object of attainment is the sorrowless state; which is the complete pacification of every single suffering. 
Even if one achieves some kind of concentration to a point where one does not experience the suffering of pain and the suffering of change while in cyclic existence, this state of attainment is not permanent and doesn’t last. One has to fall back from those states of attainment and again into another rebirth in cyclic existence and again have to experience manifest suffering of pain and suffering of change. Basically, the real goal of happiness has not been achieved. 
But to achieve such a non-lasting state of happiness is not an easy feat. One has to put in so much hard work just to achieve the actual concentration of the form and formless. Those states of concentration can only be achieved on the basis of first having attained calm abiding or meditative serenity. When one has achieved those states of achievement the manifest afflictions are suppressed and one does not experience any suffering of pain and suffering of change. Despite all the hard work, at the end of the day it t is temporary and doesn’t last. When one lose that state of attainment, one has to experience the different manifest sufferings again. 
You are either a Buddhist or not a Buddhist. To be a real Buddhist, you are to be someone who is from the heart seeking to achieve liberation from cyclic existence. The main focus of life of a Buddhist is someone who put all the energy into achieving liberation. That is where the mind focuses on and that is where the mind turns towards. This is what we need to be if we call ourselves a Buddhist. 
On the basis of having this real yearning for liberation from cyclic existence, through learning and reasoning, we need to discover that our kind teacher and founder Guru Shakyamuni Buddha is a valid authority and is a valid person. We have to establish that he is valid. On the basis of establishing through reason that he is a valid person then we can establish how his speech and doctrine are valid. We have to gain that ascertainment and conviction ourselves. It is on the basis of having found firm conviction and ascertainment that the Buddha is valid and his teaching is valid, and with this as the foundation we then enter into the practice of Buddhadharma. This is how it should be done. When we say we enter into the Buddhadharma, it mean that we are entering into the practice after we have develop a firm ascertainment and conviction in the validity of Buddha and his speech. 
To be a Buddhist, we need to have pure refuge, i.e. entrusting ourselves to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. The refuge has to be pure before one can be a real Buddhist. On the basis of having develop conviction and ascertainment of the validity of the Buddha and his teaching, we come to see how important the Three Jewels - Buddha, Dharma and Sangha- are. We come to see how they are absolutely essential for our own liberation and for our own happiness. When we see all these, then the connection that we feel towards the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha will be very special. We will actually taste it with real feeling. We need to be like that. If we don’t see and feel the personal connection with the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, it is because of not understanding how essential they are for our own liberation and happiness, and our refuge will be just like that.  When we think the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha are just like something out there, then that is just about it. Then we don’t feel the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha are essential. 
We need to reach a point in time that we really feel from the heart that the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha are absolute essential for our well being, for our liberation and for our happiness. Before we can have a some sense of feeling of refuge first we must have thought well about impermanent; in particular about impending death as how it is being taught in the Lamrim - the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment - in which death is certain, we definitely have to die, our time of death is uncertain and at the time of death nothing help except the dharma. We have to have some experience on all of these before we can talk about real refuge. The point about how nothing is of use to us except the dharma at the time of death, because at the time of death, everything else is useless. If everything else is useless, then what is left and the only hope that we have is the Three Jewels. At the time of death we come to the understanding that only the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha and nothing else is worthy to mention. It is only the Three Jewels! Therefore it is really important to continually be mindful of death and impermanent. 
In order to be a real Buddhist then we need to have real refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. In order to have some real feeling of refuge, it is indispensible to have some experience of having thought about our impending death and impermanent. If we are really mindful of having thought well of our own death and impermanent then even just reciting the refuge once “I go for refuge and entrust myself to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha,” it will have so much taste because we are doing that from our heart. We have to understand all of these. 
Everybody is so excited about tantra, wanting to learn about tantra and wanting to practice tantra. We have this idea that we will become a Buddha very soon because of tantric path. Please forget about this as this is not going to happen. It is impossible! We don’t even have fundamental refuge. What we need is refuge, and before refuge can really happen, we have to think about our impermanent and our own death.  Yes, Vajrayana is the supreme of all the vehicles. But if we don’t have the working capital, then it would not become supreme for us. That is not going to happen at all. Forget about achieving enlightenment if we don’t have the fundamental. If we don’t build the correct foundation, then the practice of tantra is a cause for us to go to the hell realm. Then all our practice of tantra does not accomplish what we are seeking out to accomplish.
Yes, we are here to study about tantra. Yes, there is a time and place for that. When we learn the Buddhadharma, we should learn as much as we can. So we are here to learn tantra, and it is good for the purpose of knowing what it is. Hopefully sometime in the future when you are ready, you can put it into practice. Studying and learning is one thing. When we learn, we can learn many things. But in term of practice, there is no such thing as practicing tantra right now. We have to practice whatever is necessary right from the beginning of the path and we cannot jump. We have to be very clear on this. Studying is one thing, and when we practice, it is a completely different thing. We cannot jump.
The first thing we need to do is to make sure that we are a real Buddhist and not a nominal one. We have talked about being a Buddhist. Whether becoming a Buddhist or not, it depends on whether our practice of refuge is pure or not. As I have mentioned earlier, in order for the practice of refuge to be pure, the minimum is that we have to rely on continual mindfulness on death and impermanence everyday. And from our heart our mind has to focus on seeking liberation everyday. When we put all these things together, then we can have some kind of real refuge. Then maybe we qualify as a real Buddhist. It is with different levels of mindset, attitude and motivation, only then we engage in the learning of the Buddhadharma. We are here to learn and understand the Buddhadharma. Please keep in mind all these different attitudes and motivation.
When we say we are practicing the dharma, we have to do it in accordance to how it is being set out in the Lamrim, the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment, where it is divided into the path that is shared with the person of small capacity, the path that is shared with the person of middle capacity and then the path of the person of great capacity. First, we have to engage in the practices that are common to a person with a small capacity. The first thing is that we have to be trained in and achieved is to overcome our current preoccupation and the attachment of this life, and substitute it with a mind that is always looking for the happiness of the future lives. We are not interested in the happiness of this life. What we are looking for is the happiness in the future lives, and that has to arise naturally from the heart. That is what drives us and act as the first milestone that we need to achieve. We have to try that first.
Earlier we heard the word “belief”, “aspiration” and “what you are looking for?”  What is it that drives us? What are we seeking? What is it that we really want? If we check and what we really want is just the happiness of this life alone, and if that is what drives us day to day, then with that kind of worldview and attitude, even if we study the dharma, learning dharma, meditate on the dharma or engaging in the dharma, none of these activities or so called practicing the dharma will become dharma practice.
The great Kadampa geshes, the masters of the past said:
“What is dharma? What is not dharma? What determines it? If we are looking for the happiness of this life, nothing is Dharma”
So whatever is done with that motivation is not dharma. If one has reversed the attraction of this life and is not driven mainly by the happiness of this life, but seeking real future lives happiness from the heart, then that qualify as dharma. That is like the minimum entry level to qualify as dharma. Therefore, anything that is done motivated by the happiness of this life, even if it is studying the dharma or any meditation practice, none of it becomes dharma practice.
All of us have taken many initiations, many vows, commitments, and made huge promises to do this and that. Let’s take the example of Six Session Guru Yoga practice. For some people, even doing their daily commitment is a torture and is a cause of suffering. They find it a burden to do the Six Session Guru Yoga practice. Even when they do their practice, it doesn’t seem to solve their unhappiness in this life. In the first place, why are we doing the practice? If we are just looking for the concern with the happiness and the problem of this life, then we will find it miserable to do our Six Session Guru Yoga commitment. We are unhappy, and we can be miserable and suffering. The problem lies with the attitude of looking for the happiness of this life. But if the mind is liberated in the sense of focusing on the future lives happiness, then we won’t find doing commitment as a source of suffering.
So right at the beginning, we have to be very clear on what we are looking for. We get into problem because, still in the heart, we are concerned about this life. We want the dharma just for this life purpose, this life problems, and this life happiness. It doesn’t matter what we are doing, we can be a very miserable and unhappy person. The problem comes in that. As I have said, the very minimum motivation is that we are not really interested in this life. We focus more on the future lives happiness. If that is really what drives us everyday, then there is no difficulty in doing commitments, no difficulty in learning the Buddhadharma, no difficulty doing practice and so forth.
So this is the minimum entry level. First we have to become a person who is not interested in this life but mainly looking for the happiness of future lives. Even to achieve this is so difficult. This is not going to happen just by sitting around and doing nothing. In order for us to become a person like that, first we really have to remember death and impermanence at all time. We also have to realize how our life is very fragile as we can lose our life very easily. If we do not bring to mind this reality of life, then automatically go back into the very old ways and habits that we are going to live forever, thinking that this life is so strong and so stable, then it is very difficult. So if we don’t overcome our very strong attachment to this life, then nothing we do become dharma. Yes, we can recite lot of mantras, we can circumambulate the stupa many thousand times, we can make many offerings, we can practice generosity and so forth, and none of it will become dharma. Not only will they not become dharma, many a times when we do these things, they increase and strengthen our attachment to this life. 
We always like numbers. That is why when we accumulate many number of mantras or many number of circumambulation or how much money we gave and so forth, and because these are driven from our heart and we are still attached to this life, that attachment causes those so called practices to be a condition to be proud of and we try to advertise “I did these number of circumbulation, I gave that much of money, I did this number of mantra”, and making a big deal out of it.  That happens, isn’t it? After people finished one hundred thousand or two hundred thousand prostration, or many hundred thousands of prostration, and they feel “I did this” and wanting people to know about it and start to advertise “I did how many of these and that.”
So if we do not really check on what is it that we are looking for, there is always this danger that all these so-called dharma activities will actually become a cause for us to increase our attachment to this life.
The Kadampa masters advised:
The greatest obstacle for us to make whatever we do dharma, 
The greatest obstacle for us to become a dharma practitioner,
Is our attachment to this life happiness.
We have to be very careful about this. We really have to work at giving up our preoccupation and attachment to this life happiness. So whatever we do, whether we are learning the dharma, reflecting, meditating or whatever so called virtue that we are trying to do, we have to be careful. We have to examine to make sure that is not mixed or driven by looking for something of this life alone. Otherwise, it would be like having a plate of very delicious food but is mixed with a little bit of vomit. The food may be nice but the vomit transforms something that is otherwise good into something that is undesirable and bad. So likewise, whatever so called virtue that we want to do, whatever learning, meditation that we are doing, we have to make sure that it is not mixed or influenced by looking for attachment to this life. 
So whatever we do, we actually have to try to make it become dharma. It has to benefit the mind. That is where we need to start. When we say we practise the dharma, we cannot start right from the top. We have to start from the beginning. The minimum entry level is that we first have to transform our mind into the dharma; which means whatever we do, it cannot be mixed with attachments to this life. And we have to start from there. It is not sufficient for the practice that we are doing to become dharma. Our mind has to transform into the dharma. If our mind is not transformed into dharma, then the practice that we are doing which itself is dharma does not help. What helps is to transform our mind into the dharma. As I have mentioned earlier, if we do not loosen up the tight grip with the preoccupation to the happiness of this life, then it would be difficult for that to happen. So the extremely important point that we really have to pay attention to is that the mind has to be transformed. We have to work to give up and overcoming attachment to this life and changing our world view from our heart to seek future life.  That is when we really transform the mind; and that is what we call transformation through practice. Otherwise, just practising the dharma without transforming the mind is not helpful at all. 
By just doing the practice that is called dharma is not helpful. Some of us have been practising the dharma for a long time, maybe 10 years, 20 years, 30 years or 40 years, but still find our mind have not changed. This is an example of practicing the dharma which does not help. The mind has to change to dharma. 
When we receive the teaching from our virtuous friends, our teachers, we may be physically present but how we receive the teaching through listening does make a huge difference as well. So in whatever teaching situation that we may be in, it doesn’t matter who are present, we have to take the teaching as if that teaching is specifically meant for us alone. It doesn’t matter what other people are thinking or doing and we shouldn’t be wondering whether the teaching is meant for the particular persons. We have to look at the teachings as a personal instruction “This is a direct instruction to me telling me what I need to do and what I shouldn’t do.” It would be beneficial if we listen with this attitude. That is the reason why it is being mentioned in the teaching that it is important to have devotion in our teachers or gurus. Otherwise, we won’t take the teaching to heart and we don’t see the instruction as something that is meant for us. Instead, we will see it as meant for somebody else. Even at times, we may think it is just a general talk. 
Khen Rinpoche: The teachings just become like the news from Channel News Asia or BBC. 
That is why it makes a huge difference if we choose to receive teachings from the gurus that we have faith in.  Whatever the person says does have impact on the mind. That is our experience. That is why it is important to receive teachings from the person to whom we have faith it as the teachings will be very effective for the mind. Otherwise, receiving teachings from anybody in general would be just like accumulating information with no real impact on the mind as the heart is not moved. So, in order for the teaching to have some impact, we need devotion. As mentioned at the beginning of Lamrim, the root of the path is correctly devoting to the virtuous friend. This emphasizes the point of having single-pointed devotion towards the guru in order for the teaching to impact on our hearts. This is something very important and please keeps this in the mind. When we say “give up this life”, you have to understand why it is so important to give up attachments of this life. We have to see that for ourselves. Even we do study a lot of dharma, meditate, and reflect of what we have learned, which is called practice, but if we do it with strong attachment to this life and unable to give it up, then we have to see why that doesn’t become the dharma. Why it doesn’t help the mind? Why the mind doesn’t change at all? This is an extremely essential point that we have to realize for ourselves. Once we are able to see the point, all we have to do is to continually recollect and be mindful of our impending death and impermanence. Through continuous training and mindfulness, we will reach the point when we naturally only interested in the future lives, and will not place so much emphasis on this life. What really drives oneself is the future lives’ happiness. That will influences in everything that one does. Whatever decisions we make, the main consideration is whether that is going to help us in the future lives. When we have reached that point in time we become a person of small capacity. It is only then one is qualified to say “I am a dharma practitioner practicing the dharma”. 
Khen Rinpoche: Otherwise we cannot say that.
What I am trying to drive here is that when we do our practice but still don’t find ourselves changing, or we find doing commitment is tough and feel it is like a burden and like a chore, then we have to investigate carefully: Why we are like that? What is the cause? What is the problem? What has happened? Once we have found the source, then we have to put our attention to deal with it and getting rid of it.
If we weigh the happiness of this life and the happiness of all the future lives, which is more important? If we compare the length of time that constitute this life versus that of all the future lives (which constitutes not only next life but life and life after that), logically it is reasonable to say the future lives is much more important than this one life. But to achieve this is really not easy because our preoccupation in this life happiness and attachment is naturally very strong. If we don’t do something strong to counteract it, is not going away on its own. 
We have to work on the preliminary practices such as strong mindfulness on death and impermanence and so forth so to weaken the attachment to this life. It would be wonderful if we can completely reverse the attachment to this life. Even if we cannot do that completely, what we can do is to reduce the attachment to this life, then whatever we do such as studying the dharma, learning the dharma, meditating the dharma, or whatever virtuous practices we do will actually become dharma practice which will effectively benefit the mind. 
With those experiences and realizations of one become a person of small capacity, next is the training that is shared with the path of person of medium capacity i.e. when one has to think well about true suffering. When one has thought and understood what true suffering is, come the day when one is not interested with anything that is included in samsara, and no attachment to any samsaric perfections, then one become a person of medium capacity. 
To be a person of medium capacity, first one must realize suffering in all the aspects. The person of medium capacity is not attracted to any samsaric perfection since they have realized that everything that is included in samsara is in the nature of suffering. They don’t have any kind of grasping to any samsaric perfection. However, that alone is not sufficient. They have to understand the causal relationship between true origins and true sufferings. Ideally, the person needs to understand the whole process of entering into samsara through the presentation of the 12 links of dependent origination in the forward process and in the reverse process. And this person needs to understand that true cessation is to be attained by meditating on true path. It is very important that this person needs to feel “True cessation is really achievable and is not just some fairy tale. It is something that is really possible and I can do it myself. One day I can achieve nirvana.”  With that kind of uncontrived thought yearning for liberation, this person automatically enters the path. This kind of people does not have difficulty in accumulating merit, does not have difficult purifying their obscurations, and also have no difficulty at all to do their commitments.
Khen Rinpoche: I am talking about those who have many commitments. 
So the person who has the uncontrived yearning liberation from the heart will be able to engage in the main practice of the three higher trainings: 
Higher training in ethical discipline, 
Higher training in concentration 
Higher training in wisdom
This person will find these practices easy and not challenging at all because they are driven to achieve liberation. 
First, with the higher training in ethical discipline, the person will have no difficulty in keeping ethical discipline. Just by the higher training in ethical discipline, it helps to control many of the afflictions. And because of being able to live in ethical discipline, the non-virtuous action, mainly the activities of the body and speech are controlled, tamed and disciplined. This makes it so much easier for that person to develop concentration if he wishes to do so. Since the body and speech are well controlled, that makes it easier to control the mind. As the mind becoming peaceful, the person can engages in the practice of concentration. When that person’s concentration develops to the point of becoming stable, that stability can cause many of the afflictions not able to manifest. So the higher training ethical discipline is the foundation for the higher training in concentration because the higher training ethical discipline leads to restraint of non-virtues of body and speech. If one is able to restrain the non-virtues of body and speech, then it is so much easier for one to achieve peace in the mind and with less distraction. With less distraction, it is easier to develop a focused mind. 
In the context of the higher training in concentration it is the developing of calm abiding or meditative serenity. When calm abiding is achieved, many of the afflictions are suppressed i.e. they are not able to manifest. 
On the basis of higher training in concentration one can then achieve the higher training in wisdom. In this context here, the higher training in wisdom refers primarily to (transcendental) special insight or vipassana. This special insight is essentially a wisdom that is developed from having calm abiding. And this special wisdom is developed for the sake of cutting the root of samsara - the root of all our suffering. 
With the achievement of special insight, one attains the Path of Preparation. Through further meditation practice, come the time when one sees the truth directly, one enters the Path of Seeing. But just seeing the truth directly alone is not sufficient because at that point, the afflictions are not removed yet. One needs to familiarize oneself with the direct perception of the truth over and over again. That is why we have the Path of Meditation. When one reaches the end of Path of meditation, all the afflictions together with their seeds will be destroyed. Then one becomes an arhat or foe destroyer. Here we are talking from the perspective of the Hinayana path. 
The liberation that is talked about in the teachings means liberation from cyclic existence or liberation from the afflictions. This liberation from cyclic existence or liberation from the afflictions can be achieved both by the Hearers or Solitary Realizers. 
In terms of the path to achieve liberation, is that the end of the journey that any individual can make?
The answer is: No! That is not the end. 
Although one has achieved liberation, and all the afflictions and the seeds have been destroyed, but there is still something left over to be abandoned. That is the impressions left on the mind by the afflictions -the imprints, the predispositions or proclivities that are still in the mind. Anyone who has those obscurations is not able to do perfect work for sentient beings. Therefore, the foe destroyers have to enter the Mahayana Path, and travel through all the paths and enter the grounds till the end of the 10th  Ground when they will achieve enlightenment. 
Is this the only manner of progression? 
Does one have to enter the Hinayana Path and come back again to start the Mahayana Path? 
No, that is not the only way of progression. There are many individuals who have entered the Mahayana Path right from the onset. In order to do that, there is a systematic way of achieving it. As I mentioned earlier, first we have to renounce the happiness of this life and overcoming the attachment to this life. That becomes a person of small capacity. Then on that basis, the person needs to develop an aversion to every single samsaric perfection. On the basis of personal understanding of samsara, one realizes how everything in samsara is in the nature of suffering and also sees that everybody else is in the same situation in samsara are also suffering. With training, that individual is able to develop great compassion for every being in samsara. Then on the basis of great compassion, this person develops wholehearted resolved with the courageous thought of taking on the personal responsibility to work for others, this person becomes a person of great capacity. This person is about to but has not yet entered the Mahayana Path yet. With his very courageous thought: “I will do it alone. I will carry the burden to liberate all sentient beings and with the big heart, we could say that this person is a person of great capacity. 
Don’t think that such a person is a very unhappy person thinking “Wah! I have to take on the world” They are not like that. They are unbelievably courageous. Because they do it with a reason, they do it happily. I think these people are unbelievably happy and joyous.This person is looking to liberate all sentient beings. With this wholehearted resolved based on great compassion, he wonders “What is it that I must do in order to achieve what I am looking for? Is it possible or not? What must I do?”
That wholehearted resolved should then lead to bodhicitta because this persons thinks: “No choice already. I must achieve full enlightenment in order to achieve what I have set out to do i.e. to liberate all sentient beings”. When that real bodhicitta arises, the person becomes a bodhisattva. It is only then is the start of Mahayana Path - Mahayana Path of Accumulation. 
With this uncontrived bodhicitta, the person enters the Mahayana Path. On the first of the 5 Mahayana paths, Mahayana Path of Accumulation, the bodhisattva achieves the calm abiding that has emptiness as his focal object. Then comes the time when the bodhisattva achieves special insight focusing on emptiness, he enters the Mahayana Path of Preparation. There are 4 levels on the Path of Preparation: 
Heat
Peak
Forbearance 
Super mundane qualities
As the bodhisattva progresses through the Mahayana Path of Preparation, it is said that the dualistic appearances in the mind of the bodhisattva gradually subsides. Comes the time when all dualistic appearances have completely subsided, that leads the bodhisattva to directly perceive the truth emptiness for the first time. That is when he achieves the Mahayana Path of Seeing. So the bodhisattva sees emptiness for the first time when he enters the Mahayana Path of Seeing. That is not the end but is only the beginning of the destruction of the negative emotions because afflictions are very difficult to overcome. Although he has already realized emptiness directly, he has to meditate over and over again on emptiness in the Path of Meditation for the purpose of removing all the different layers of ignorance. The bodhisattva has to alternate between meditative equipoise and post-meditative equipoise. During meditative equipoise, he focuses directly on emptiness to cut the different layers of ignorance. Then he has to come out of meditative equipoise - post- meditative equipoise. During post-meditative equipoise, he accumulates the collection of merit to empower his wisdom consciousness. The bodhisattva alternates between meditative equipoise and post- meditative equipoise from the 1st to the 7th ground. Only when all the ignorance seeds are removed, the bodhisattva achieves the 8th ground.
Then on the 8th, 9th and 10th ground the bodhisattvas still have to overcome the knowledge obscurations - the imprint of predispositions of ignorance. The bodhisattva has to meditate over and over again on the 8th, 9th and 10th ground for the purpose of overcoming the knowledge obscurations. From the perspective of the Mahayana Sutra, the bodhisattva can travels all the way to the end of the 10th ground. So by depending on the sutra path, that is as far as the bodhisattva can go. 
Without entering the tantric path, enlightenment is not possible. So by depending on the sutric path, at the end of the 10th ground, the bodhisattva has to enter the tantric path. In the presentation of tantra, there is an explanation of the extremely subtle knowledge obscurations which can only be abandoned by the tantric path. Therefore, at the end of sutric path, the bodhisattva enters the Highest Yoga Tantra path. With that, he achieves the clear light illusory body and unification. So as the bodhisattva progresses on the tantric path, with those realizations he abandons the subtle knowledge obscurations that are presented in tantra. When those are overcome the bodhisattva becomes enlightened and becomes a Buddha.
For the next one or two lessons we will review the presentation of the grounds and paths according to sutra. If you don’t have some basic idea of that then it is going to be complicated because there is nothing for you to compare. When we talk about the tantric paths and grounds, you need some reference.  
The purpose of this particular module is to find out:  What is tantra? What is the essential point about tantra? If you want to know, then you really have to put in effort to study. You need to read and think.  It is useful to know a bit about tantra and its features because many a times there are people who have all kinds of weird ideas and wrong views about tantra. Whether we can practice it or not is a different thing but at least by knowing bit of it can remove some of those weird ideas about tantra. So it is good to know. 