Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L10.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:15.672828
================================================================================

As I mentioned before, those who are seeking to achieve liberation must enter into the Buddha teachings.  With regards to Buddha teaching (dharma), there are two aspects:
The scriptural dharma 
The realizational dharma
The scriptural dharma is the three scriptural collections.
The realizational dharma is the practice of the realizations of the three higher trainings which is the subject matter of the three scriptural collections. 
As for the stages of entering the Buddhadharma, and if we talk about entering into the realizational dharma, then entering the realizational dharma means entering into the path of the three vehicles:
- Hearer path 
- Solitary Realizer path
- Mahayana path.
So when you are entering the path, it has to be one of these three.
If you talk about entering the Buddhadharma from the perspective of the Buddhist tenets, there is the entering into dharma of the Great Exposition School (GES), the Sutra School (SS), the Mind Only School (MOS) and the Middle Way School (MWS).  
The MWS is divided into two:
The autonomy school (AMWS)
The consequence school (CMWS) 
I have been emphasizing recently that when you are listening to the teaching, you have to listen single-pointedly and try to grab hold of whatever is been said.  You have to pay attention and stay alert.
Khen Rinpoche: Stay alert.  So far ok?  We talk so many times and is not too problem.  You are alert?
Please just try your best. If you don't try your utmost best and don’t pay attention, then it is going to be difficult and you are not going to get anything at all.  Even if you do pay attention, it might not possible for you to get everything but at least you get the gistof it of what is being said and what I am trying to tell you.  
It is important that you come to the class with the desire to learn from the heart. You need to have the attitude “I really want to learn. That is why I am coming to class. I am not just coming to class, but coming to class to learn”. 
You have to keep in mind also that of the four Buddhist tenets:
-  the GES and the SS are Hinayana tenets, 
-  the MOS and MWS are Mahayana tenets
 The four Buddhist tenets can be subsumed into:
Hinayana tenets (GES and SS)
Mahayana tenets (MOS and MWS)
You also have to know that there are three yanas (vehicles):
Hearer vehicle
Solitary Realizer vehicle
Mahayana vehicle or the Great Vehicle
These three vehicles can be subsumed into:
Hinayana (Hearer and Solitary Realizer)
Mahayana (Great Vehicle)
Another thing you have to note is that the Hinayanist (or Hinayana) and a proponent of Hinayana tenets are not necessary the same thing. 
Therefore, when we are talking about Hinayana and the proponent of Hinayana tenets, we are not talking about the same thing. 
As illustration, when you hear a statement like this “there is a difference between Hinayanist (Hinayana) and the proponent of Hinayana tenets”, right away you should wonder what is the difference. You shouldn’t just sit there and accept the statement. Your mind must immediately raise the question “Why?” 
That is the different matter if you know the reason.  However, if you have the thought arising in you “Why there is a difference?”, then that is the sign that you are being alert.  
Khen Rinpoche: You alert? If you don’t have question, then you are not alert.  How many are you are alert?
First, you must have that question in your mind, and if I were to follow up with the explanation, then you will get something. 
When we talk about the Hinayana, it is the same as talking about the Hinayana path. The Hinayana path is either the Hearer or Solitary Realizer path.  
However, a person who enters a Hearer path is not necessary a proponent of Hinayana tenet. Likewise, the person who enter the Solitary Realizer path is not necessary a proponent of Hinayana tenet.
Why?  Because there could be proponent of MWS who hold the MWS view of the reality enters the Hearer path.  There could be proponent of the MOS enters the Hearer path.  Likewise, for the Solitary Realizer path. 
Khen Rinpoche: You understand? You understand the difference or not?
Likewise, a proponent of Mahayana tenet and the person who enters the Mahayana path are not necessary the same.
Why?  Is a person who enters the Mahayana path necessary a proponent of Mahayana tenet? Not necessary. 
Why? It is possible for there to be bodhisattva who is proponent of GES.  It is also possible for there to be a bodhisattva who is proponent of the SS view.
Let’s say a bodhisattva who is follower of GES.
For the perspective of tenets, he is a proponent of Hinayana tenet.
From the perspective of yana, he is a Mahayanist (a person who enters the Mahayana path).  
Therefore, a proponent of Mahayana tenet is not necessary a person who has entered the Mahayana path.
From this you will also know that there could be a difference between a proponent of Hinayana tenet and the Hinayanist (a person who enters the Hinayana path).  
For example, there, there could be a proponent of a MWS who has entered the Hinayana path:-
Such a person who is on the Hinayana path of accumulation is a Hinayanist who enters into a Hinayana path
But nevertheless from the perspective of tenets, he is a proponent of the MWS; which is a Mahayana tenet.
Khen Rinpoche: You understand?  
To summarize, when we talk about yana, there are 2 yanas: Hinayana and Mahayana.  
If we were to expand on the 3 yanas: 	
There are 2 Hinayana:
Hearer path
Solitary Realizer path
Mahayana 
So altogether there are the 3 yanas.  
How the Hinayana and Mahayana are differentiated?  As I have said in the earlier lessons, the Hinayana and Mahayana are:
Not differentiated by the basis of view but 
The difference is posited on the basis of conduct.  
Just being able to say that the Hinayana and Mahayana are not being differentiated by view but rather are differentiated by conduct is not sufficient.  As I have mentioned in the earlier lesson, you have to know the reason why the Hinayana and Mahayana are not differentiated on basis of view.  
If you don’t know the answer, right away you must have that question arising in your mind. You must be alert and wanting to know the reason why the Hinayana and Mahayana are not being differentiated on the basis of view?  
Khen Rinpoche: You have that?  Why?  Why? Why?  Why there is a difference?
The Hinayana and the Mahayana are not differentiated by views of reality because they have the same view.  The view that we are talking about is the wisdom realizing emptiness.  
As regards to the wisdom realizing emptiness, it is the same to the Hinayana and Mahayana. 
Although that is the answer but that is not the end of the enquiry. You should not stop there but must wonder why is it that you also need the view of emptiness in the Hinayana?  In the Mahayana, we talk about emptiness, but why the view of emptiness, the wisdom realizing emptiness is needed on the Hinayana?  
You can find many citations in the sutra and also in the work of Nagarjuna and his spiritual sons that talk about the need to realize emptiness, even on the Hinayana.
So the answer is that in order to achieve liberation from cyclic existence, one need to realize emptiness.  But this has to be proven and established. However, that is not the end.  If you don’t know the answer but at least you must wonder “Why one needs to realize emptiness just to achieve liberation?”
So one needs the wisdom realizing emptiness just to achieve liberation from cyclic existence, and the person who achieves that liberation is called a foe destroyer.  Why is he called the foe destroyer?  Because he has destroyed the enemy which is the affliction.  
In order to answer the question and before you can talk about liberation from samsara, there is no choice but really needs to know well what exactly samsara is and what exactly is liberation.  You cannot answer the question if you don’t know what these two are. 
Therefore, the time when one has to circle under the power of karma and afflictions, then that is samsara.
The time when one does not have to circle over and over again due to karma and afflictions, that is liberation.  
You have been told that there is something that causes us to accumulate karma or there is something that propels us to accumulate karma.  As said in the teaching, it is the afflictions. So the afflictions motivate the accumulation of karma and once we have accumulated the karma then we cycle in the samsara. 
Now you have to know what exactly the afflictions are.  We have to know in detail what exactly afflictions are.
As being said that of all the afflictions, there are 3 mental poisons: anger, attachment and ignorance.  Of the 3, it is said that anger and attachment have their roots in ignorance. That means ignorance is the source or origin from which attachment and anger arise. From there other afflictions arise. As such, the root of samsara is ignorance.
As the root of samsara is ignorance, but what exactly is ignorance? There are different ways of identifying what ignorance is in accordance with the four Buddhist tenets. There are different views among the Buddhist tenet as to what this ignorance is.  
As from the highest school CMWS, ignorance which is the root of the other affliction is self grasping ignorance or grasping at true existent. Ignorance is the mind that believes everything that exists, exists from its own side.
According to CMWS, ignorance is not simply not knowing something but rather ignorance here, which is the root of all affliction, is posited to be self grasping ignorance; grasping at true existent which is essentially the erroneous conception. It is an active misapprehension and it is not just merely not knowing something. 
Only on the basis of identifying correctly what this so called self grasping ignorance is, then we will be able to pinpoint exactly and correctly what is the root of cyclic existence. When we can pinpoint correctly what the root of cyclic existence is, then we can talk about its antidote which is the wisdom realizing emptiness. 
So in order to be free from cyclic existence, we have to cut the root of cyclic existence, which mean we have to overcome ignorance – the self-grasping ignorance. Without overcoming the self grasping ignorance, there is no way to cut the root of samsara. So in order to overcome the self grasping ignorance, we must generate a wisdom whose mode of apprehension is completely opposite to the model of apprehending of this self grasping ignorance. Without which there is no way to overcome ignorance.
After this long line of enquiry then you come to understand why is it that you need the view of emptiness even just to achieve liberation.  
If you know all the points after this long line enquiry and at the end result of enquiry, you can really know the reason why in order just to achieve liberation you need the wisdom realizing emptiness. In order to achieve liberation from cyclic existence they have to be free themselves from the root of cyclic existence which is ignorance. In order to overcome ignorance, they have to generate the wisdom realizing emptiness, which mode of apprehension is completely opposite to that of ignorance. 
In conclusion you should have known that the Hinayana and Mahayana are not the differentiated in term of view. You have to know why they are not differentiated on the basis of view.  
Khen Rinpoche:  You clear? You must be clear.  
If the Hinayana and Mahayana is not differentiated on the basis of view, then how are they differentiated?  The answer is that the Hinayana and Mahayana is differentiated by conduct.
In the uncommon Hinayana scriptural collection, there is no description of generating bodhicitta (or developing the mind generation) and on the basis of which one goes on to practice the 6 paramitas (or perfections).  These are not taught in the uncommon Hinayana scriptural collections.
Since the method for generating the mind generation and the practice of the 6 paramitas are not taught in the uncommon Hinayana collections, as such the intended trainees of the uncommon Hinayana collection would not have the opportunity to engage in this practice. The Hinayana and Mahayana are differentiated on the basis of whether there is the teaching to cultivate mind generation and the practice of paramitas. It is not present in the Hinayana but it is present in the Mahayana.  
It is called the Mahayana (Great Vehicle), and the ‘great’ here means supreme or the best, which is talking about the quality of the mind of the person who enters the Mahayana path. The mind is very expansive and is as vast as the sky, and is like an inestimable mansion.
Those are who have generated the mind of enlightenment and then trains in the path are those who have very expansive and vast mind. Those who are still under the influence of the self-cherishing and are not primarily concerned with the working for the welfare of others, their path are kind of smaller and not so as vast. As such they are called the Hinayana, literally the Lesser Vehicle. 
As said in the teachings, the Hinayana and the Mahayana are not differentiated by view but rather are differentiated by conduct.
We talked about the two yanas and when the Hinayana is divided, it is divided into:
Hearers vehicle 
Solitary Realizer vehicle
On top of that, there is a Great Vehicle (Mahayana). Therefore, there are three vehicles.
The way the Hearer vehicle and Solitary Realizer vehicle positing the path and the mode of progress on the Hinayana path are basically the same.
When we talk about the three yanas, the Hearer vehicle, Solitary Realizer vehicle and the Great Vehicle, from the perspective of relative to one another:
The Hearer vehicle is called the lower vehicle
The Solitary Realizer vehicle is called the middling vehicle 
The Mahayana is the great vehicle 
Although the way of positing the path and the mode of progress of the path are generally the same for the Hearer and Solitary Realizer but nevertheless there has to be a difference. What is the difference? This is how it is normally explained in the teaching:
The Solitary Realizer has the determination to practice the collections over a period of a hundred eons before they achieve the Solitary Realizer enlightenment. As for this reason, the Solitary Realizer vehicle is called the middling vehicle, in that the Solitary Realizer has the determination and the courage to extend their collection for a long period of a hundred eons before achieving Solitary Realizer enlightenment. 
The Hearer, unlike the Solitary Realizer, doesn’t have the determination to cultivate the path accumulating the collections for a period of hundred eons in order to achieve their fruit of their attainment. But rather the Hearer becoming a Hearer arhat in three lifetimes. As such, the Hearer yana is called the lower vehicle.
It is mentioned in the presentation of tenet that there is a difference in the fruit of attainment of the Hearer and Solitary Realizer; one is higher and the other one is lower. Solitary Realizer is supposedly of the higher attainment. Both achieve liberation from samsara. This is what the text says but we need to think what does it means and what the difference between their fruit of attainment is. 
What is the difference between their results that they have attained?
The answer is that:
The difference in the time they spent on the path to accumulate the collections and 
The difference comes in whether the collections that they accumulate are great or smaller.
Both of them are the same in that they both are liberated from cyclic existence. They are both arhats. They both have vanquished the afflictive obscuration. They are exactly the same. If that is the case, is there a high and low different in their attainment? This is something you have to think about. Since you already have finished the tenet module, you should take out your text and revisit the topic. 
The Mahayana is the yana that has the practice of cultivating the mind generation and the six perfections. The Mahayana (Great Vehicle) can be divided into two:
the causal paramitayana vehicle (causal perfection vehicle)
the resultant vajrayana (resultant vajra vehicle)
If the Mahayana is divided into the causal perfection vehicle and the resultant vajra vehicle, then how are these two differentiated? Like before, the causal perfection vehicle and the resultant vajra vehicle is not differentiated by view. Again, their difference has to come in the conduct.
You have to go beyond to what I am about to say. Generally, we can answer like this:
The causal perfection vehicle and the resultant vajra vehicle are not differentiated by view because both are Mahayana. What they are looking for is omniscience (full enlightenment). So in order to achieve full enlightenment, one needs the wisdom realizing emptiness. As such, they are not differentiated by view.
The difference between the causal perfection vehicle and the resultant vajra vehicle is made on the basis of conduct. The conduct in this context here is called the method. So they have to be differentiated by the basis of method.
You must get this important point. We say the causal perfection vehicle and the resultant vajra vehicle are differentiated on the basis of method. Basically, they are differentiated on the basis of whether there is a perfect method for actualizing the Buddha form body. 
In general, in Mahayana sutra, the causal perfection vehicle, talk about the basis, of :
the two truths, 
the path (method and wisdom) and 
the result (two bodies)
The causal perfection vehicle talks about practicing the path, that is method and wisdom, and through that one actualizes the result of the two bodies. 
Wisdom in the causal perfection vehicle refers to the wisdom realizing emptiness.
Method refers to meditation on love, great compassion and especially the mind generation. 
- In dependence on the practice of the factor of method, one actualizes the form body.
- Through practicing the wisdom aspect of the path, the wisdom directly realizing emptiness act as the direct substantial cause of the dharmakaya, the truth body.
In the presentation of the collection of merit and wisdom and in dependence upon which, one achieves the form body and the truth body respectively.
Although this is the case, when we are talk about achieving enlightenment, we talk about accumulating the two collections and in dependence upon which one achieves two bodies. But it is only in the resultant Vajrayana you will find the detailed and complete explanation that in dependence upon the two collections one comes to actualize the two bodies which is the result. You will not find this complete and the detailed explanation in the causal perfection vehicle. In the causal perfection vehicle, they only talk about achieving the form body in dependence on the collections of merit. If you look at their explanation as to how this is so, then it becomes a little inadequate. What is it that constitutes the collection of merit? From where the collection of merit comes about?
They explain the practice of method primarily to be the meditation on love, great compassion and mind generation that accumulate the collection of merit. But to posit this collection of merit as the substantial cause for the form body is extremely difficult. You will find this explanation inadequate as to how does this collection of merit act as the cause of a continuum of a similar type that can proceed to enlightenment and becoming the form body. Hence, the causal perfection vehicle explanation is inadequate.
In the causal perfection vehicle, when one is on the three pure grounds i.e. when one achieves 8th, 9th and 10 ground, the bodhisattva is said to acquire a mental body. If you think about it, it is very difficult to assert that this mental body of that bodhisattva superior will transform into the form body of Buddha.
Why is this explanation inadequate? Why is it extremely difficult to posit that the mental body of bodhisattva superior on the pure grounds acts as substantial cause for the Buddha form body? It is difficult. If you remember from the Uttaratantra module that talk about Buddha nature, the mental body of a bodhisattva superior arise from the level of the predisposition of ignorance and uncontaminated karma. How can something that arises from the level of the predisposition of ignorance act as a cause for the Buddha form body?
If you look at the causal perfection vehicle explanation, they said that in dependence upon the collection of merit which comes from the practice of method, one can achieve the form body of Buddha. Yes, they have their own explanation. However, if you really look at their explanation you will find it is really inadequate and not ideal at all. This is why you have the resultant Vajrayana. It is only in the resultant Vajrayana that you will find perfect, detailed and complete explanation as to how the form body is to be achieved. For that reason, therefore these two yanas - the causal perfection vehicle and the resultant Vajrayana- are differentiated by method.
What is this special method in which the resultant Vajrayana possesses? It is essentially the meditation on deity yoga, which is a meditation on an aspect that is concordant with the form body of the result. Such a meditation on the aspect which is concordant with the form body can be done while on the path. So this is a distinctive feature of resultant Vajrayana.
It is in the resultant Vajrayana that you will find the explanation of the practice of deity yoga which is uncommon special cause for actualizing the form body. That is the method aspect. 
With respect to wisdom aspect of the path, with regard to the mind realizing emptiness, in the causal perfection vehicle the wisdom directly realizing emptiness is explained as the substantial cause of the form body. Nevertheless, from the perspective of tantra, the wisdom directly realizing emptiness that is taught in Mahayana sutra is considered be a coarse mind realizing emptiness. As such, this coarse mind, wisdom realizing emptiness, in the causal perfection vehicle can abandon the afflictive obscuration but only can only abandon the coarse knowledge obscuration but cannot abandon the subtle knowledge obscuration. The presentation of the mind that is able to abandon the subtle knowledge obscuration is only found in tantra. It is only in the resultant Vajrayana, the secret mantra, especially in the Highest Yoga Tantra has an explanation of the extremely subtle mind. They talk about techniques to manifest this extremely subtle mind transform it into the entity of bliss. With this blissful extremely subtle consciousness causing it to ascertain emptiness and through that one progresses on the path to achieve enlightenment.
So in the Highest Yoga Tantra, it talk about using the extremely subtle mind transforming into the entity of bliss and then using that to ascertain emptiness and progressing on the path to enlightenment. It is only this extremely subtle mind which is in the entity of bliss which realizes emptiness can act as the antidote to the subtle knowledge obscuration. 
It is this extremely subtle mind directly realizes emptiness which is the substantial cause of the dharmakaya or the truth body. As such, in the secret mantra, especially in the Highest Yoga Tantra, the explanation of actualizing the dharmakaya (truth body) is even more profound than the explanation in the causal perfection vehicle.
In general we talk about the Buddha lineage that enables to transform into the Buddha body. There is general explanation in which you will find in explanation of the statement the nature of the mind is clear light. If we talk about the very entity of mind that which is clear and knowing, the factor of clarity and luminosity and awareness, and pursue that to the very end of the investigation, what we have in the deepest most profound level is referring to not only the gross mind but referring to the extremely subtle mind, which is also consciousness and which is clear and knowing. Such an explanation of the presence of the extremely subtle mind and the methods of utilizing it on the path can only be found in Highest Yoga Tantra.
In short, the causal perfection vehicle and the resultant vajra vehicle is differentiated on the basis of method. The resultant Vajrayana (resultant vajra vehicle) presents its special method for actualizing the Buddha form body.
We use the term ‘causal perfection vehicle’ and ‘resultant vajra vehicle’ for a reason. So it is good to know of what do they mean. 
Causal perfection vehicle can be briefly explained to mean:
A vehicle that has just the method for presenting the cause for actualizing the Buddha form body.
The causes are the mind generation and the practice of the six paramitas.
As such it is called the causal perfection vehicle. 
The resultant Vajrayana (resultant vajra vehicle) is so called because:
At the causal stage, there is a meditation on the path is concordant with the aspect of the four complete purities of the result. 
As such it is called the resultant vajra vehicle.
Student 1: As for the Hinayana and Mahayana is differentiated by their conduct and not their view, I understand the view and the conduct. I thought that they are also differentiated by their goal as for Hinayana is self-liberation and Mahayana is liberation for everybody or enlightenment for everybody. Is that correct?
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah.
Student 1: Just now you mentioned the Hearer vehicle in which they take three lifetimes to achieve their goal, whereas the Solitary Realizer takes hundred eons. Since both reached their goals, the Hearer path only takes three lifetimes, isn’t it more superior? 
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s think about this: Is it absolutely necessary to accumulate the merits for hundred eons before you can become a Solitary Realizer? And can one become Hearer after three lifetimes? 
When you asked that question, I am also wondering about the same time. 
I didn’t have anybody to ask. I am wondering about this question but I have nobody to ask at the moment. You understand what he is asking. He is very good. He thinks and ask. So I have to think how to answer that.
Student 2:  This is a question about a person who enters the Mahayana path and yet can hold a tenet that is not Mahayana tenet.  They will have to be saying that they don’t accept complete enjoyment body. This person at the most is a dull facultied bodhisattva. As such would have at least a doubting consciousness tending towards factual. They would have doubt their own tenet that they hold previously. How would this person even be holding a tenet that is not Mahayana tenet?   
Khen Rinpoche: What?
Student 2:  Assuming a bodhisattva who enters a path and yet holds a Hinayana tenet.  This person would at least have a doubting consciousness tending towards factual of Prasangika view. If you have doubt tending towards factual of Prasangika view, you would have doubt on the Hinayana tenet.
Khen Rinpoche: Why? 
Student 2:  How are you going to hold a Hinayana tenet …
Khen Rinpoche: Of course he believes in Hinayana tenet and don’t believe in Mahayana tenet.
Student 2: At least you have a doubting consciousness tending towards factual….
Khen Rinpoche: He doesn’t have doubting consciousness as  he totally believed in Hinayana tenet and doesn’t  believe in Mahayana tenet.
Student 2:  We say dull facultied bodhisattva before they enter the path, they must at least have a doubting consciousness tending toward factual.
Khen Rinpoche: Depending on what object you talk about..
Student 2:  So this person would have doubting consciousness towards the factual on the Prasangika view.
Khen Rinpoche: They are not the same.
Student 2:  I am just wondering how you are going to hold on to a Hinayana tenet and still enter the Mahayana path. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why cannot? They find Shakyamuni Buddha very aspiring, so be like him.
What is it that can stop a proponent of Hinayana tenet to generate bodhicitta? There is nothing to stop them from generating bodhicitta. What is it they cannot generate bodhicitta?
Student 2:  So they won’t believe in complete enjoyment body.
Ven Gyurme :  To generate bodhicitta, in the first place do you need any tenet?
Student 2:  If you don’t need tenet then this whole basis to say that you must realize, at least to have a doubting consciousness tending toward factual or correctly assuming consciousness on emptiness to think that enlightenment is possible will not hold through, right?
Khen Rinpoche: Can such a person meditate on the sevenfold cause and effect? He can see all sentient beings as their mother and realizing their kind, develop the wish to repay their kindness, ….?
The proponent of the Hinayana tenet does accept Buddha and talk about Buddahood, right?  There is nothing to stop the individual generating bodhicitta.
Student 2:  So this person would definitely have to think that enlightenment is possible because there is an example of a Buddha.
Khen Rinpoche: Of course.
Student 2:  I am trying to figure out how …
Khen Rinpoche: No problem. Don’t need to think.
Student 2 :  Sharp facultied bodhisattva would have to realize emptiness and at the most you can say is a dull facultied bodhisattva  would hold such a tenet. Previously I asked this question about what is the minimum criteria for dull facultied bodhisattva to have enter the Mahayana path and the minimum criteria is to have a doubting consciousness…
Khen Rinpoche: Bodhicitta 
Student 2:  So basically this person doesn’t even need any of this consciousness about emptiness….
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t need tenets.
Student 2:  I am reading through the Solitary Realizer arhats according to the tenet. The only part that they actually talked about these lifetimes is only the GES. Prasangika don’t really talk about it. So I assumed that they would hold similar view to the GES. But there is one part that actually says that the Hearer actually accumulate the merits for minimum of 3 lifetimes and up to 14 lifetimes in the learners’ path; so basically all the four learners path. Solitary Realizer actually accumulated hundred eons during Path of Accumulation in one sitting from the heat Path of Preparation all the way to Path of No-more-learning.  I don’t understand why solitary realizers that the Hearer accumulates merits for their four learners path, but the solitary realizer is….
Khen Rinpoche: One sitting?
Student 2:   Yeah. From the heat Path of Preparation all the way to Path of No-more-learning in one sitting. So hundred eons of merit is accumulated only on the Path of Accumulation, whereas Hearer accumulate 3 lifetimes up to 14 lifetimes within the first four path. I don’t understand why?
Khen Rinpoche: I am not sure about the one sitting…
Student 2:  It is from the root text of GES, but the rest of the tenet doesn’t talk much about how….
Khen Rinpoche: You are disputing the one sitting? Or are you are disputing the one hundred eons?
Student 2:  I am not disputing. I just don’t understand why there is this difference. Because the rest of the tenets don’t talk about…
Ven Gyurme:  You are talking about the difference in the time of accumulation of merit, right? 
Student 2:  Yes.
Ven Gyurme:  14 lifetimes versus hundred eon’s,right? 
Student 2:  Yes.
Ven Gyurme:  You are talking about the hundred eons in the Path of Accumulation, right? 
Student 2: Yes, for the Solitary Realizer, whereas for the Hearer is all the four paths.
Ven Gyurme:  You accumulate merit until you achieve arhat?
Student 2:   Yes. The rest of the school doesn’t talk about it and I assume you will follow the GES.
Ven Gyurme:  You say the Hearer accumulate merit until they become an arhat?
Student 2   And before I mean for the four learners’ path 
They are accumulating merit even on the four learners’ path and even accumulating merit on Path of Seeing up to 14 lifetimes.
Khen Rinpoche: Not sure whether it is GES
Student 2:  Even for Hearer and Solitary Realizer enter into meditative equipoise at the Path of No-more-learning. Then on path of release, they don’t get out of concentration? 
For Hearer and Solitary Realizer enter into uninterrupted path for the last Path of Meditation. Then on path of release, Path of No-more-learning. After that they won’t be out of meditative equipoise. Buddha actually emanates but arhat and solitary realizers bodies just died and their mind just within meditative equipoise never emanate anywhere, and never do anything.
Ven Gyurme:  Never emanate anywhere?
Student 2: Because Buddha will just have form body to help sentient beings. Form body of Buddha is to help sentient beings. Arhats and solitary realizers have no reason…
Ven Gyurme:  You are saying that they don’t come, they don’t go.
Student 2:   Yeah.
Ven Gyurme:  Then during Shakyamuni Buddha puja, we invite them to come..
Student 2:  Yeah I wonder what would their bodies be?
Khen Rinpoche: You are saying that they are staying in meditative equipoise forever and after ever. Is that the case?
Student 2:  Yeah I wonder what happened after that…..
Ven Gyurme:  Is that the case?
Khen Rinpoche: There is the nirvana with remainder and without remainder. What is the meaning of nirvana with remainder and without remainder according to the CMWS. It is nothing to do with the severing of the body, but whether it is being in equipoise or not in equipoise, right? 
Student 2:  Nirvana without remainder is in meditative equipoise. Nirvana with remainder is has a body.
Khen Rinpoche: Without remainder means in meditative equipoise, and when they arise from meditative equipoise then they have the nirvana with remainder. That is the meaning according to the CMWS.
So the nirvana with remainder and without remainder from the CMWS point of view is posited on the basis whether there is an appearance of true existent or not.  So basically that is saying that definitely the arhats are not always in meditative equipoise.
Ven Gyurme:  That is the implication.
Student 2:  Yes that is the implication.
Ven Gyurme:  But you are still wondering what kind of body they have? 
Khen Rinpoche: They don’t have the suffering aggregates like us, so I guess you will have to say that they have a mental body.
Student 2:  Actually I wonder why would they want to be out of meditative equipoise 
Khen Rinpoche: Too long.
Ven Gyurme:  Or when it gets too bright. You know when it gets too bright?
Student 2:  Yeah, Buddha shines light on them.
Khen Rinpoche: Buddha has the power to shine.
 Student 2: Buddha able to shine light on mental consciousness.
Khen Rinpoche: There is a question by a student on the division of the knowledge obscuration.
There are different ways of positing that. According to Sera Je textbook, the Sera Je position is that, on the 8th ground, the, the big knowledge obscuration is divided into two. But other colleges’ positions are different as they divided it on the 10th ground.
Student 3: On this topic of knowledge obscuration, the word subtle knowledge obscuration was mentioned. What exactly is that entity of subtle knowledge obscuration? Because we were taught that there are two divisions of knowledge obscuration: the seed and the manifest knowledge obscuration. What exactly is subtle knowledge obscuration and its entity? Is it an object or consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche:  I will explain in coming class 
Student 4:  We have a discussion before on whether there were different qualities of the Buddha because the cause is different and the result therefore has to be different. Now we are hearing about the level of merit accumulated by the Hearer arhats’ and the Solitary Realizer arhat. 
1. Are the arhats equal when they attained arhatship? So basically is the Hearer arhat inferior to the Solitary Realizer arhat? 
2.  In relation to entering the Mahayana path, it comes from doing this homework assignment. We are told that the arhats when they entered the Mahayana path they would still take  countless great eons to achieve full enlightenment. I have a big problem with that because it would appear that all the practice that they have been doing to achieve arhatship doesn’t seems to help them at all when they are on the Mahayana path. And I am really having problem to figuring out how come they still need three great countless eons.
Khen Rinpoche: So don’t go through that.
Student 4:  I understand that but…
Khen Rinpoche: The answer is that if you have problem with that, don’t go through that. You go direct.
Student 4:  I am just wondering whether there is something to do with the fact that all the time when they are practicing on the Hinayana path, they are practicing the wisdom realizing emptiness abandoning all the afflictions and none of this practice is conjoined with bodhicitta. I don’t know whether there is something to do with that.
Does it means that although the Hinayana arhat have abandoned afflictive obscuration still have the imprints of grasping of true existent in their mental continuum?
Khen Rinpoche: The arhat has not abandoned the knowledge obscuration. Because they have not abandoned the knowledge obscuration therefore they have the imprints of ignorance.
Student 4:  So that means that their journey is incomplete. 
Khen Rinpoche: Of course. It is incomplete that is why Buddha comes to you.
Student 4:  My biggest problem is trying to understand why the Hinayana arhat still need three countless great eon to achieve enlightenment. They take so long to practice to achieve arhatship and when they enter the Mahayana path, none of these means anything?
Khen Rinpoche: The goal is different. They worked for that goal. They achieved that. But another goal they have to work again.  
Student 4:  But it is like starting from ground zero and is like they have no realization at all.
Khen Rinpoche: That is why don’t go through that. So that is why my answer is don’t go through that. If you go through that then you have do that. No choice. No complain.
Student 4:  Can I put my question in another way then? If that is the case, we have been told that the first two path, the Path of Accumulation and Path of Preparation takes one countless great eon. The Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation takes another countless great eon and so on. When the Hinayana arhat enters the Mahayana path, are the division of the time the same or different? They have already realized emptiness. The work that they have to do is really working on the knowledge obscuration. I am wondering instead of one countless great eon, the Hinayana arhats take maybe two countless great eon to just work on the knowledge obscuration part.
Student 5:  In the Heart Sutra we talked about perfection of wisdom in the five paths. At the small Path of Accumulation, let’s say this person is holding a Hinayana tenet. So what perfection of wisdom is this person accumulating? 
Ven Gyurme : So basically posit an illustration of the perfection of wisdom in the continuum of a proponent of a Hinayana tenet on the Mahayana small Path of Accumulation?
Khen Rinpoche: You remembered something about achieving through armor? This is basically the courageous mind with the intention wanting to practice all the six perfection within the practice of each specific perfection such as the perfection of generosity. 
In the achieving through armor, we are not saying that you need the wisdom realizing emptiness but rather you need to have the intention wanting to practice all the six perfections within the practice of the specific perfection. As long as you have the wish to train in those six perfections within these six perfections, that is enough. You do not need to have the wisdom realizing emptiness. So on the path of accumulation, achieving through armor is there.
Ven Gyurme:  Why don’t you try the path of seeing? Try to posit an illustration on the path of seeing in the Hinayana tenet.
Student 5:  So perfection of wisdom is not necessary wisdom.
Khen Rinpoche : We have already settled this. A bodhisattva doesn’t really necessary have to realize emptiness. There are bodhisattvas who have not realized emptiness, right? 
Student 5:  Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: So there is no problem positing bodhisattva with Hinayana tenets. If you look at it from the Prasangika point of view, there is no way for such a person as he is not going to get anywhere.