Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L11.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:15.137262
================================================================================

In the last lesson we look at the difference between a Hinayanist and a proponent of Hinayana tenets. There is a difference. Perhaps to see that difference clearly, it will be helpful if we look at the number of permutations or possibilities that exist between the two. Are there three or four possibilities?
1st permutation: There could be a person who is a proponent of Hinayana tenets but not a Hinayanist. Illustration: A bodhisattva who is a proponent of GES or a bodhisattva who is a proponent of the SS. 
2nd permutation: Someone who is a Hinayanist but not a proponent of Hinayana tenets. 
Illustration: A person on the Hinayana Path of Seeing who is a proponent of the MWS.
3rd permutation: Something that is both a Hinayanist and a proponent of Hinayana tenets
Yes, these two are not necessarily mutually exclusive. 
Illustration: A proponent of Hinayana tenets who is on the Hinayana Path of Accumulation 
4th permutation: Something that is neither. 
You can posit many illustrations.
Likewise, there are four permutations between Mahayanist and proponent of Mahayana tenets.
You should think about this based on what I have just said about the permutations between the Hinayanist and the proponent of Hinayana tenets. If you understand that, based on that you then find the answer for the permutations between a Mahayanist and a proponent of Mahayana tenets.
Now quickly give an example of somebody who is a proponent of Mahayana tenets but not a Mahayanist.
Student: (Inaudible) 
Khen Rinpoche: First you are not Hinayana. Listen to the question.
Give an illustration of somebody who is a proponent of Mahayana tenets but not a Mahayanist.
Student: (Inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. Any other example? If have idea then say quickly. 
The Buddha was the one who turn the wheel of dharma but there are many stages or levels of turning the wheel of dharma. 
The Buddha turned the wheel of dharma that became the material for the GES and SS. Then there was a turning of the wheel of dharma that was for the MOS. Also there was a turning of the wheel of dharma that was for the MWS. With regards to the presentation of the view, the Buddha gave many versions as to what the view is. Although the views are different, all these were said by the same person, the Buddha. 
The Buddha taught the Hinayana. The Buddha also taught the Mahayana. As seen in the last lesson, the Mahayana is divided into the Causal Perfection Vehicle and Resultant Vajra Vehicle.
The Buddha gave teachings in accordance with the dispositions, interest and capacity of the disciples. As such, Hinayana teaching is called conduct without attachment. What you find in the Hinayana teachings whereby there is no exception made for attachment as attachment is considered to be something that is to be abandoned. So there is no exception whatsoever. For those people whose dispositions and capacity are only suited for such a path or conduct, then the Buddha taught them the Hinayana.
In the Hinayana, there is no exception made for the use of attachment. Attachment is something to be abandoned, so no permission is given whatsoever. This is according to the dispositions of the trainees. As long as the person is still motivated by self interest and self cherishing, the only conduct for that person is a conduct that is devoid of attachment. As long as the individual has self interest and self cherishing, then attachment will only be a fault and mistake, and it can never ever be the supporting condition for anything good. As such, the Buddha did not give any permission to these individuals to utilize attachment. In fact, attachment is solely an object of abandonment. 
Therefore in the Hinayana, there is no exception made for the utilization of attachment, but rather attachment is solely an object of abandonment. Attachment is something to be abandoned because it can never be used for anything useful or good. So for these individuals, they have to engage in a conduct that is devoid of attachment, and the conduct has to do with abandoning attachment. Through such a conduct, they are supposed to move towards enlightenment. 
For those whose aspirations are much more extensive and have bigger mind, the Buddha taught them the practice of the perfections; which is a vast conduct. Such individuals enter the Mahayana path and train in the paramitas to achieve enlightenment. Such a conduct and practice is superior to the conduct that is devoid of attachment. 
In the Mahayana paramitayana, the Causal Perfection Vehicle, there is permission to engage in the three bodily non-virtues and four verbal non-virtues. 
It is not taught in the Mahayana Paramitayana (Perfection Vehicle or Mahayana sutra) that you have to focus all your energies on overcoming attachment. Even the bodhisattvas who have entered the Mahayana path have to abandon attachment. But it is not as if that is their only mission. This is not being emphasized as something that one really have to get it and overcome it. It is not taught like that. Yes, they have to give up attachment, but nevertheless it is not taught with the emphasis that attachment is something that is solely to be abandoned. These individuals are bodhisattvas who don’t have self cherishing, and are only interested in working for the welfare of others. As such, attachment is not necessarily interferences or problems for these individuals. In fact, there are instructions on how they could utilize attachment to help others. It is true that poisons are poisons on their own, but nevertheless, there are some poisons when mix with other medicinal substances can combine to form medicinal compound or something that is helpful. So attachment in the continuum of bodhisattvas is similar to the poison. 
The bodhisattvas have bodhicitta and the thought of cherishing others. They don’t have self cherishing. Therefore they are able to utilize their attachment and make something good out of it. Basically, they can do some benefit to others through utilizing their attachment. 
As you can see now, in Hinayana, there is no permission given whatsoever for utilizing attachment. The attachment is like any other afflictions and is something only to be abandoned as nothing good can come out of it. Yet it was the same person, the Buddha, who taught in the Causal Perfection Vehicle that attachment can be utilized to benefit others. These are two vastly different methods:
One is conduct that is devoid of attachment
Another is the vast conduct where attachment is to be utilized in certain situations
Yet these two vastly different methods were taught by the same Buddha. But you have to see why.
No permission is given to the Hinayana whatsoever to engage in any of the ten non-virtues, which are solely to be abandoned. However, in the Causal Perfection Vehicle, of the ten non-virtues, there are exceptions with regards to the three bodily non-virtues and the four verbal non-virtues. There could be situations whereby the bodhisattva can engage in those otherwise generally regarded as non-virtues. But nevertheless in the Causal Perfection Vehicle, no permission is given whatsoever to engage in the three mental non-virtues. For example, the bodhisattvas are allowed to kill with certain conditions are met.
In the Causal Perfection Vehicle, attachment can be used as an aid to benefit other sentient beings. Such technique is taught but it is not taught in Causal Perfection Vehicle that attachment can be taken as the path; whereas it is only taught that attachment can be used as an aid or as a means to benefit others, but taking attachment as the path is not taught in the Causal Perfection Vehicle. 
What are the some examples of using attachment as an aid or as a means to benefit others? It is said that bodhisattvas take rebirths as wheel turning monarchs or kings and in that capacity that they produce many sons to work for sentient beings. 
If you analyze why it is that in the Hinayana no exceptions is made while in the Causal Perfection Vehicle, there are exceptions made. Why? The conclusion has to depend on whether that individual has self interest or that individual is only interested in working for the benefit of others. 
If the individual has no self interest and no self cherishing but only with the thought of benefiting others, then for that individual what is generally considered to be non-virtuous could be the supporting condition to accomplish something that is of great benefit to others.
The Mahayana consists of the Causal Perfection Vehicle and the Profound Vajra Vehicle. Since the Profound Vajra Vehicle is Mahayana, so the very basis for the Vajrayana path is bodhicitta. On top of that, in the Profound Vajra Vehicle the path of utilizing attachment is taught. Here attachment is used as a method to achieve enlightenment.  So it is a conduct that is accompanied by attachment. Such a technique is found in the Profound Vajra Vehicle. Since the Profound Vajra Vehicle is Mahayana, then the very basic criterion is that it has to overcome self cherishing with no self interest whatsoever. On the basis of this, the conduct with attachment is taught in the Profound Vajrayana.
Attachment is purposely made to manifest. 
When attachment is manifest bliss is induced. 
With the bliss that is induced from manifesting the attachment, this bliss is used to ascertain emptiness. 
With that special consciousness, one progress towards enlightenment.
This is the unique feature of secret mantra. 
You have to know these essential points as to why and how attachment is taken as the path in secret mantra. It is good to know the meaning of some of these terms. You will see terms like vajra vehicle, the method vehicle, the resultant vehicle and the secret mantra vehicle. 
Let’s talk about vajra vehicle, Vajrayana. Vajra means inseparable. So vajra here literally has the connotation of inseparable but inseparability of what? Inseparability refers to the yoga of inseparable method and wisdom. It refers to the practice whereby both the factors of method and wisdom fused together in one entity in one consciousness. In the context of deity yoga, while observing the deity’s body, at the same time that mind is cognizant of that deity’s body emptiness of existing truly. 
There is a great debate about this inseparability of method and wisdom. The conclusion is that many wise great masters have commented that inseparability here refers to the yoga of inseparable method and wisdom i.e. referring to the practice of deity yoga in that while observing the deity’s body, at the same time another part of the same mind cognizes this deity’s body emptiness of true existence. These two:
the appearance of the deity and 
the ascertainment of the deity’s body emptiness
are fused together and is present in one consciousness.
In the context of the yoga of inseparable method and wisdom:
method refers to the appearance of the deity’s body, 
wisdom referring to the mind that ascertains emptiness, in particular the emptiness of the deity’s body. 
So these two - method and wisdom- are two aspects in that one consciousness:
Appearance factor - the deity’s body appears to this mind
Ascertainment factor - this mind ascertaining the emptiness of the deity’s body at the same time
These two are fused in one consciousness.
In dependence upon method one achieves the form body.
In dependence upon wisdom one achieves the truth body. 
Generally, the practice of method and wisdom is taught in the Causal Perfection Vehicle. The Causal Perfection Vehicle also talk about the union of method and wisdom but the meaning of union of method and wisdom in the Causal Perfection Vehicle only means that the practice of method is complemented by wisdom and the practice of wisdom is complemented by method. They are not fused into one entity in one consciousness. It is only in Secret Mantrayana or Vajrayana that the real meaning of the union of method and wisdom is found in that method and wisdom are fused together in one entity in one consciousness. 
That is like the etymology of the Vajrayana. 
What about the Resultant Yana (resultant vehicle)? 
It is called the Resultant Yana because during the causal phase there is meditation on the four complete purities of the resultant stage. The four complete purities of the resultant stage are:
Pure body, 
Pure environment, 
Pure enjoyments
Pure activity. 
In the practice of mantra, meditation on these four complete purities of the resultant stage is done during the causal phase. 
Meditation on the aspects that is concordant with the pure body is done during the causal phase. This essentially refers to the practice of self-generation when we generate ourselves as the deity. On the basis of generating ourselves as deity then we meditate on clear appearance and divine pride. 
There must be result that arises from such meditation. Otherwise, it is pointless and the waste of time. At the beginning it is just at the level of imagination. It is just make belief by imagining. When we practice self-generation, there is imagination. Finally, it must lead to the actual attainment of real body of Buddha. In Highest Yoga Tantra practice, it must eventually culminate in the attainment of the illusory body which is an actual wisdom body. The details will come in the future.
In short, through these many stages of progress, eventually it will leads to the attainment of the impure illusory body and then the pure illusory body. When the pure illusory body is achieved then we can say “This is the substantial cause of the rupakaya or the form body”.
This is one of the essential points behind why the practice of tantra is absolutely necessary to achieve full enlightenment. By depending on the Causal Perfection Vehicle you cannot achieve enlightenment. This lies in the Causal Perfection Vehicle inadequate explanation of achieving the form body of Buddha. The real techniques of achieving the form body of Buddha are only found in the Secret Mantrayana. You can find the complete and perfect explanation to achieve the illusory bodies. 
Another reason why one has to enter into tantra especially in Highest Yoga Tantra is the quality of the mind that takes emptiness as its object. In sutra, there is a talk of wisdom directly realizing emptiness but nevertheless, when we look at it from the tantra perspective, even in sutra the mind that realizes emptiness directly is considered to be a coarse mind. With a coarse mind realizing emptiness, you cannot eradicate the subtle knowledge obscurations, i.e. we cannot eliminate the subtle dualistic appearances. In the Causal Perfection Vehicle we do talk about dualistic appearances but the dualistic appearances that are spoken in sutra are considered to be coarse. When we look at it from the perspective of Highest Yoga Tantra, HYT talks about the extremely subtle dualistic appearances of the white appearance, red increase and black near attainment. Without removing or overcoming these three subtle minds, there is no way to eliminate the extremely subtle knowledge obscurations. In order to eliminate them, we have to generate the extremely subtle mind and cause it to realize emptiness. Even from the perspective of the wisdom that realizes emptiness, we will only find the perfect and complete explanations in the Highest Yoga Tantra. The reason you have to understand why it is not possible to achieve enlightenment just by depending on the Causal Perfection Vehicle. You need to understand why there is a need to depend on tantra. 
Sometimes you will see statements like: “there is no difference in the view between sutra and tantra” and sometimes you will see statements like “there is a difference in the view between sutra and tantra”. You must know how to think of what do they actually mean. 
With regards to the statement “there is no difference in the view between sutra and tantra”, they are talking about the objective view i.e. the object emptiness itself. With regards to the object emptiness, there is no difference in sutra and tantra. You will not find an explanation that is more superior to the one that has already been settled and clarified by Nargajuna and his spiritual sons. 
As for the statements “there is a difference in the view between sutra and tantra”, you have to understand that to mean there is a difference in the subject in the mind that takes emptiness as its object. So when you talk about the subjective view, then there is a difference. 
In sutra, the mind that takes emptiness as its object is a coarse mind. 
In tantra, especially in Highest Yoga Tantra, the mind that takes emptiness as its object is not a coarse mind but rather it is the extremely subtle mind - the mind of clear light. In that sense, then there is a difference in the view. The view here is the subjective view, not the objective view. 
The four complete purities: 
Complete purity of body refers to the meditation on the deities’ body. In fact, such a practice has to be done during the causal phase while you are on the path. 
Complete purity of the environment refers to the meditation on the supporting and supported mandalas, in particular, meditating on inestimable mansion.
Complete purity of enjoyments refers to the practice of making offerings to the self-generation. 
Complete purity of activities  refers to the practice in Secret Mantra on the basis of deity yoga. You visualize the seed syllabus and mantra garlands at your heart with light rays going out and imagine that you accomplish the purposes of oneself and others. This is the practice that is concordant in aspect to the complete purity of the activities of the resultant stage. 
The vehicle that has the meditation on the path that is concordant with the aspects of the four complete purities of the result is called the Resultant Yana (Resultant Vehicle). 
Then you will see the terms Method Yana, Method Vehicle being used
Method Yana (Method Vehicle) is called because it is a yana that teaches the means of achieving the form body that is superior to the method that is taught in the Causal Perfection Vehicle. 
Sometimes Vajrayana is also referred to as the Secret Mantra Vehicle (Secret Mantrayana). It is called Secret Mantra. Why is it secret? Because it is something that has to be done privately in secret, not to advertise, and it is something that is to be kept secret from the unsuitable receptacles. In that sense, that is the meaning of secret. 
Mantra means mind protection - protecting the mind. When we talk about mind protection, in general there are many meanings to this. One is to protect the mind from many things, and one of the things we protect ourselves is to protect our mind from the lower realms and to protect it from samsara. 
Mantra generally means protecting the mind. There are many stages of protection. First, we need to protect ourselves from the lower realms. 
What is it that protects us from the lower realms? It is moving the mind away from the 10 non-virtues. So protecting the mind by moving the mind away from the 10 non-virtues is protecting we ourselves from the lower realms.
How do we protect ourselves from samsara? We protect the mind from the afflictions. That is how we move away from the afflictions and we move away from samsara. 
The meaning of mind protection in Vajrayana means protecting the mind from ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. For example, in the Abhidharma literature, it explains how afflictions arise. First, there must be an object and there must be a sense power. The object and sense power must come together before the afflictions can arise. Does it mean that the afflictions will necessarily arise just because the object and the sense power meets? No. In addition to those two conditions, there is the potential in the mind for afflictions to arise. We talk about predispositions, seeds of the afflictions. 
The potential for afflictions to arise already exist in the mind. When the sense power come into contact with the object, then attachment arise. 
In the context of secret mantra, mind protection means protecting the mind from ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. How do we protect from that? That is through meditation on the deities’ body and the inestimable mansion; basically by seeing everything that appears as pure. 
In Secret Mantra, it is called Mantrayana in that all the four classes of Buddhist tantra are the same in being a path that utilizes attachment. While the four classes of tantra are the same in being the path that utilizes attachment, there is a difference in the manner in which attachment is utilized or taken as the path. Because there is a difference, as such we have the four classes of tantra:
Action tantra
Performance tantra
Yoga tantra.
Unsurpassed yoga tantra or Highest Yoga Tantra. 
Action tantra is for those who are able to utilize the bliss that arises from looking at the visualized mudra but is not able to utilize the bliss arises from smiling in relation to the visualized mudra. As such, the path is called action tantra. 
Action tantra is in dependence upon the wisdom mudra, basically visualized goddess. When you gaze at the wisdom goddess, then you experience bliss. You then use that bliss to ascertain emptiness. Such a path is called action tantra. 
Performance tantra is for those who are able to utilize the attachment that arises from smiling at the visualized wisdom mudra but is not able to utilize the attachment that arises from holding hands with the visualized mudra - the wisdom mudra. Such a path is called performance tantra. 
Yoga tantra is for trainees who are able to utilize the attachment arising from holding hands with the mudra but is not able to utilize the attachment from sexual union. Such a path is yoga tantra. 
The unsurpassed yoga tantra, Highest Yoga Tantra, is for trainees who are not only able to utilize the attachment arising from sexual union with a visualized mudra, but is also able to utilize the attachment arising from union with an actual mudra, an actual consort. Such a path is called unsurpassed yoga tantra. 
For those trainees who need to rely heavily on external activities in order to engage in the practice of deity yoga and meditation on emptiness, such a path of tantra for such trainees is called action tantra. 
As such in the practice of action tantra, for example in the practice thousand arms Avalokiteshvara (Chenrezig) through nyung nay, a lot of emphasis is on the cleanliness of the abode or the practice on personal hygiene such as bathing, wearing clean cloths, eating white foods and abandoning meats, eggs, onions, garlics and so forth. Before you can make it at the practice, there is a lot of emphasis which you need to rely a lot on the external activities. These are the examples of the action tantra practice.
For trainees to actualize the tantric path where there is an equal emphasis on the external activities and the internal practice of yoga, such a path is called the performance tantra.
Another thing about the action tantra is that the performance of hand gesture practices are considered to be essential, in that there is no option to not do because if the hand gestures are not performed when they have to be performed and if it is not done then it is considered to be fault of omission.  Doing all these things is again emphasizing external activities.
Yoga tantra is the path that engages in the practise of deity yoga in the meditation of emptiness. Between external activities and internal meditation, the emphasis is on the internal meditation. There is no emphasis on the external activities. The principal is the inner practice of yoga.
An unsurpassed yoga tantra is same in completely emphasizing the inner and not the outer. Inner being is the principal and is even more superior to the yoga tantra. As such it is called unsurpassed yoga tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, I have done. My job is done, and now is your job to ask question.
Student 1: With respect to the Vajrayana whereby the mind is inseparable entity, when one is at equipoise focusing on emptiness, how does one maintain the visualization of self-generation without losing that meditation by the visualization? Similarly during post meditative-equipoise how do we maintain our visualization of self-generation without losing the meditative equipoise focusing on emptiness?
VenGyurme: Simply speaking, can I say: How is there is there an inseparable practice of method and wisdom in meditative equipoise and in post meditative equipoise?
Khen Rinpoche: With regards to the post meditative equipoise that is simple because everything that appears, it appears as illusory-like. While it appears as truly existent, the meditator cognizant of the emptiness do not exist in the way they appear; as such it is illusory-like. As for meditative equipoise this is something that needs to think about. This comes back to the meaning of method and wisdom being present in one consciousness. According to this view, therefore we say that even in meditative equipoise, both method and wisdom must be present in one mind so the deity body does appear in meditative equipoise while ascertaining emptiness. Therefore there is a difference because this is tantra. It is not possible in sutra. In meditative equipoise focusing on emptiness, nothing else appears except emptiness. But here in tantra, since the method and wisdom must be present in one mind then the deity’s body does appear in meditative equipoise while the ascertainment factor is focusing on the emptiness of that. If you assert inseparable method and wisdom then you have no choice but to say that in meditative equipoise, the deity’s body does appear. That is the appearance factor.
Student 2: When you said bodhisattva practice attachment with bliss, is sexual union the only attachment with bliss? No? What are the other examples?
Hinayanist with proponent of Hinayana tenets would be Hinayana Path of Accumulation and Preparation but from the Path of Seeing onwards, he will have to be Hinayanist with proponent of Mahayana tenets?
VenGyurme: You are saying Path of Preparation is possible and is not possible for Path of Seeing onwards?  
Student 2: Hinayanist with proponent of Mahayana tenets on all the paths - the Hinayana Path of Accumulation, Path of Preparation, Path of Seeing, Path of Meditation, Path of No More Learning - can be Hinayanist with proponent of Mahayana Tenets.
Ven Gyurme: Without illustration, it is difficult to define.
Khen Rinpoche: The person who enters the Hinayana path can exist anywhere from the Hinayana Path of Accumulation all the way to the Hinayana Path of No More Learning. You say a Hinayanist is somebody who enters the Hinayana path and therefore definitely it exists any time from the Path of Accumulation to the Path of No More Learning. For such a person, how many types are there? There are two: Hearer and Solitary Realizer
A Hinayanist is definitely enumerated either being Hearer and Solitary Realizer. What about the proponent of Hinayana tenets? That is also two possibilities: either you are proponent of GES or proponent of SS. There is no other. If you are sure about these two then you can posit illustration to clarify the position. 
Mahayanist is someone who enters the Mahayana path. As for the proponent of Mahayana tenets, there are generally two: MOS or MWS. So you have to think which pervade what? Who pervades what? You have to think how the pervasion works.
Student 2: Can I generalize a Mahayanist who is the proponent of Hinayana Tenets is only possible in the Mahayana Path of Accumulation not that after?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, you can say on the small Path of Accumulation but whether onwards then it is something to think about. Is it possible for there to be a proponent of SS on the middling Mahayana Path of Accumulation? Is it possible? Think.
Student 2: Sure. The possibility is very slim. I mean not possible.
Khen Rinpoche: Why? Is there a bodhisattva on the middling Path of Accumulation who is a proponent of MOS? In reality have or not? It is a question for everybody. Not just her.
Student 2: I think it could be possible because the bodhicitta is like gold and they don’t fall back to the path anymore. So it could be unlikely as well. If you have to realize emptiness at that stage then that realization of emptiness must be in accordance CMWS. 
Whoever that gets into the Path of Seeing, whether it is Hinayana or Mahayana, of course Mahayana no doubt, you got to be in accordance with the CMWS way of thinking for the wisdom.
Student 3: Just now was it mentioned that bliss that arises from attachment and using the bliss to ascertain emptiness? My qualm is that how can something that is clear light arise from something that is adventitious such as the attachment? It sounds very contradicting.
Khen Rinpoche: What is contradicting?
Student 3: To arise clear light from stain. It sounds contradicting.
Khen Rinpoche: With attachment as the condition, bliss arises or not? Definitely arise. Can increase that bliss or not?  What so difficult about this? Every day we do that. Now the question is whether that bliss is attachment or not? That is what we need to think. The bliss arises from attachment as the condition, but the bliss that arises is attachment or not? 
Attachment is the condition for the bliss to arise. The point here is that it is a technique that is using bliss to cease the coarser level of consciousnesses.  The coarser level of consciousnesses cease then the extremely subtle mind manifest. Then it is about transforming the extremely subtle mind to the path, and causing it to ascertain emptiness. The Highest Yoga Tantra is the technique that talks about the path to transform this extremely subtle mind into a consciousness that realizes emptiness.
Student 4:  Tantra basically hinges on the bliss that is being generated. What if the bliss cannot be generated by looking, smiling and holding hands especially the goddesses that are always being quoted.
The assumption is that there is attachment and it is a condition for bliss. If you really look at very beautiful goddesses or the very handsome gods, it is not necessarily that you will generate bliss. You can be at the extreme attached or you can be totally indifferent.
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t forget about bodhicitta for the time being. Let’s think about those things first.
Student 5: What are the differences in the phrase: 
utilizing attachment as the path, 
utilizing desire as the path, 
utilizing pleasure as the path and 
utilizing bliss as the path? 
Are they any difference? What are the differences? Is it in terms of subtlety or otherwise?
Khen Rinpoche: As long as you get the fundamental point then how you say it doesn’t really matter. The point is we are talking about the same thing. What is the meaning? The point here is attachment acts as the condition for the blissful consciousness to arise. Bliss is a consciousness. Bliss to arise and the bliss ascertain emptiness. With that blissful consciousness ascertaining emptiness then attachment itself is exhausted. This is the meaning of taking attachment as the path. If this is what is meant then it doesn’t matter how you say.
Student 6: For someone who enters the Mahayana path through the Causal Perfection Vehicle, once he enters the path, does he has to go through 3 countless great eons before he becomes enlightenment? And he cannot enter the tantra path in between to shorten it?
Khen Rinpoche: I wonder if there is absolutely need to go all the way up to the end of 10th ground before entering tantra path. I don’t think so. I guess it is possible to enter while you are on the Path of Accumulation and Path of Preparation of the Causal Perfection Vehicle. Within those paths it is possible to enter into tantra path. This I am not sure but what I think is this: once you have entered the Path of Seeing of the Causal Perfection Vehicle then you have to traverse to the end of the 10th grounds. 
Student 6: What is the reason?
Khen Rinpoche: It is stated in the perfection literature that once you attained the superior path then it is certain that you will achieve the enlightenment of that path. It implies the certainty that you will travel that path. Here we are talking about the Causal Perfection Vehicle path. I am not sure. Perhaps it has to do with the fact that once you achieve the respective superior path of whatever yana, you gain the certainty that you will definitely achieve the enlightenment of the respective path you are on. Perhaps it could be for this reason then you have to go all the way to the 10th ground.
Student 7: In the sutric Mahayana path, desire is use as an aid but whereas in the tantric path, desire can be transformed into the path. This statement seems to be very vague. Aren’t bodhicitta is also a desire to gain enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings. What is the meaning of the desire?
Khen Rinpoche: Desire means attachment.
Student 8: In the previous class it was mentioned how Shakyamuni Buddha took 3 countless eons to  reach 10th ground and he was asked by other buddhas to enter the tantra path. Why happens in between? Shakyamuni Buddha never met tantra all these while?
VenGyurme: You wonder why Buddha was so unfortunate he didn’t meet tantra until the end of the 10th ground? We all so fortunate but he didn’t get it? 
Student 8:  Tantra is quicker path. When he is the Supramundane Quality level he should have remember what he has being taught since time without beginning. So all this while don’t know what happen to the Dharmakaya pervades for all.
Khen Rinpoche : That one you have to ask Buddha Shakyamuni himself.  I have no idea why he goes like that.
, 