Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L12.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:18.392008
================================================================================

Since I have talked about the difference between the sutra and tantra, and if you were asked “What are the differences between the sutra and tantra?”, then at the very least you should be able to say the differences. 
Khen Rinpoche: Are you able to say the differences?  If someone were to ask you that question, will you be able to answer? If you cannot answer that means so far nothing goes inside. After a few classes nothing goes inside. Anybody knows just come and give the answer. 
Student 1: The difference between sutra and tantra is the substantial cause of the buddha form body.  The sutra asserts the cause of the form body is the practice of the five perfections, from generosity up to concentration, whereas the tantra asserts that the substantial cause of form body is the extremely subtle wind.  Also according to the tantra, the wisdom realizing emptiness asserted by the sutric path is the coarse mind which is unable to eliminate the extremely subtle knowledge obscuration.
Khen Rinpoche: What you have said is from the perspective of Highest Yoga Tantra. Only in Highest Yoga Tantra you will find the discussion of extremely subtle wind and mind.  This answer does not illustrate the difference between sutra and tantra because the answer you gave is only applicable in the context of Highest Yoga Tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: The senior one must come and say.  
Student 2: I think it is mainly due to the fact that in sutra all afflictions such as attachment, anger are to be abandoned  whereas in tantra we can actually use those attachments to generate the bliss that come along with it and use it to meditate on emptiness.  That supposed to give better or faster understanding of emptiness. That is why it is quick path compared to the sutra.
Khen Rinpoche:  Are you saying that you need to abandon attachment in sutra but when you practice tantra, you don’t have to abandon attachment? Are you saying that?  
Student 2: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: You don’t need to abandon attachment? 
Student 2: You don’t abandon attachment.  It is not necessary to abandon attachment in tantric path
Khen Rinpoche:  Really?  I am hearing this first time.  I don’t know.
Student 2: You don’t abandon attachment. You can use it as a path whereas in sutra you can't use it as a path
Khen Rinpoche: What do you mean “use it as a path”?
Student 2:  I cannot reveal too much
Khen Rinpoche:  Good answer. It is a secret.  Anyone?  
Student 3: For sutra, we practice love and compassion and the 6 perfections.  For tantra we have to abandon ourselves and abandon cyclic existence.
Khen Rinpoche: Anyone?
Student 4: In sutra the method and wisdom is practiced separately but in tantra, they are practiced together.  
Khen Rinpoche: What do you mean separately?
Student 4: In sutra, you don’t practice the method and the wisdom together
Khen Rinpoche: What does it mean not practise together?  
Student 4: You practise the method first and then you practise the wisdom.  You don’t practise them together.
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t practise together?
Student 4: Yeah. I don’t think they are practiced together.
Khen Rinpoche: They don’t come together?
Student 4: They come together but you don’t practice them at the same time like tantra.  You practise one after another..
Student 5: I think the sutra is actually based on the 6 perfections to achieve the two form bodies of the Buddha whereas the tantra is actually using the resultant, the deity, to achieve the full enlightenment of the form body and truth body.
Khen Rinpoche: OK. That sounds better.  Anybody else can give more detail than that?
I have already explained all of these and already there are lots of information. You should have remembered of what I have said.  
We gave the name Causal Perfection Vehicle and Resultant Vajra Vehicle. The main point behind the existence of tantra is that in tantra you will find the perfect explanation for actualizing the form body.
In sutra, the factor of method is that which is said to be the cause for the form body.  If we investigate on what constitute these methods in sutra, it is the essentially the mind generation together with the practice of the perfections.  Other than this, there isn’t other explanation for the cause of form body in the sutra.  
In tantra (secret mantra), it is posited as the meditation on the path that is concordant with the aspect of the four complete purities of the result.  There is a presentation of how such a practice can act as the substantial cause of the form body. 
Essentially, Secret Mantra is the meditation on the path that is concordant with aspect of the path of the four complete purities of the resultant stage of enlightenment. Such a path is called tantra whereas a path that is merely the cultivation of mind generation and the 6 perfections is called the Causal Perfection Vehicle.
The dividing line between sutra and tantra is whether there is meditation of the path that is concordant with aspect of the four complete purities of the resultant stage of enlightenment or not.  
Khen Rinpoche:  You understand or no?  What are the four complete purities?
Student 6: The four complete purities are 1) the complete purity of body, 2) the complete purity of environment, 3) the complete purity of enjoyments  4) the complete purity of activities  
The difference between the sutra and tantra is based on whether there is meditation on the path that is concordant with the aspects of the four complete purities of their resultant stage of enlightenment.   You must be able to say what the four complete purities are.
So, the four complete purities are:
The complete purity of body
The complete purity of environment
The complete purity of enjoyments 
The complete purity of enlighten activities
Being able to say that is one thing but you must be able to say how these are meditated in tantra as well.
Khen Rinpoche: I think I have said how to meditate on these four things?  
Student 6:  	
The four complete purities: 
Complete purity of body refers to the meditation on the deities’ body. In fact, such a practice has to be done during the causal phase while you are on the path. 
Complete purity of the environment refers to the meditation on the supporting and supported mandalas, in particular, meditating on inestimable mansion.
Complete purity of enjoyments refers to the practice of making offerings to the self-generation. 
Complete purity of activities  refers to the practice in Secret Mantra on the basis of deity yoga. You visualize the seed syllabus and mantra garlands at your heart with light rays going out and imagine that you accomplish the purposes of oneself and others. This is the practice that is concordant in aspect to the complete purity of the activities of the resultant stage. 
Khen Rinpoche:  These were already being said in the class. You must read and think. 
Sometimes you hear the terms like Vajra vehicle, Method vehicle and Mantra vehicle are being used.  
Vajra Vehicle (Vajrayana) refers primarily to the indivisible method and wisdom. That means both factors of method and wisdom is present in one consciousness.  Such a feature is not found in sutra.
Although the Causal Perfection Vehicle talks about union of method and wisdom but that actually means the practice of method is conjoined with wisdom and the practice of wisdom is conjoined with method.  They complement with one another. They assist one another but nevertheless, these two are not practice together in one single consciousness.
It is called the Resultant Vehicle because it is a path that has a meditation on the four complete purities of the resultant stage while you are on the path.
It is called the Method Vehicle because it possesses a far superior explanation of achieving the form body than is presented in sutra.
It is also called Secret Mantra because such practice has to be kept hidden from the unsuitable vessel and at the time the cultivation of such practice, one has to do it privately and secretly. 
It is called mantra because it is a mind protection.
In this context here mantra is mind protection; primarily means protecting the mind from ordinary appearance and the adherence to ordinariness. This is done with the practice of deity yoga where you elicit clear appearance and divine pride and through that you overcome ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness.
These are the methods for subduing or disciplining the mind. Whether it is a mind, consciousness or knower, we are talking about the same thing.  Here is protecting the mind from ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness.
As for protecting the mind, depending on the context, for example, in the practice of the person of the small capacity, when you look at the scriptural collection of the Hinayana, you will find teaching mainly on impermanence and the Four Noble Truths.  These are coarse method for disciplining the mind. These are methods to subdue the coarser consciousnesses.   That is why you will find a lot of explanation on the training of the precepts in related to the pratimoksha vows like the vinaya and so forth whereby there is a lot of explanation on how to discipline even the physical conduct and so forth. So these are methods to subdue or to discipline the body and the mind on the grosser level.  
The Mahayana, on the basis of pure love and compassion, there is a practice of the perfections. These are also the methods to subdue or to discipline the body and mind on grosser level.   These methods are a little bit more elaborate than what you will find in the Hinayana.
In general, in Mahayana, there is the explanation of profound emptiness and how the wisdom realizing emptiness is conjoined with the mind generation.  With these two, there is an explanation on how the two obscurations are abandoned.  We have dealt with this with quite a lot of detail when we looked at the paths and grounds.
On top of Mahayana then there is tantra. Within tantra there are three classes. The first three classes of tantra are: 
Action tantra 
Performance tantra
Yoga tantra
There is the practice of deity yoga. There is also the practice of taking bliss as the path, and through that then one progresses towards enlightenment to achieve the two bodies. So the methods of the three lower classes of tantra are methods that make that individual come even closer to enlightenment.
Particular in the Highest Yoga Tantra you will find methods that make the achievement of enlightenment even much faster. In essence, there is generation stage and the completion stage and in particular, through striking the vital points of the channel winds and drops, one come even closer to achieve enlightenment.
This is how you can see the progression in terms of the profundity to the method behind disciplining the body and mind. As you move from the Hinayana into the general Mahayana, then the three lower classes of tantra and then moving into Highest Yoga Tantra, there is a progression on the profundity of the method. You can see how these methods become increasingly more profound and that lead the individual to enlightenment more quickly. You need to have a rough idea of this.
As for the mind generation, the mind generation that is needed for the practice of tantra is said to be much more powerful than the mind generation as explained in the general Mahayana. 
Having said that, is there a difference between the bodhicitta (mind generation) of the Causal Perfection Vehicle and the Resultant Vehicle? If you say that there is a difference, that one is stronger than the other, then how is the case? You must be able to answer as well.
In the Mahayana sutra, one develops this mind generation in which the individual thinks “No matter how many eons it will take for me to achieve enlightenment and no matter how difficult it is, I will engage in the path to achieve enlightenment for others”. And you will find the special bodhicitta which say, “I must achieve enlightenment quickly and more quickly.” 
In the perspective of tantra, although the mind generation is looking for enlightenment, from one’s own perspective, one is willing to bear the hardship no matter how long it takes to finish the collections and to achieve the enlightenment. Then one also considers the perspective of sentient beings. Although one can bear with the hardship but one understands and feels that sentient beings from their own side cannot wait so long and cannot endure so much sufferings to wait for one to achieve enlightenment. Therefore, one has that strong courage to achieve enlightenment as quickly as possible for their benefit. So the courage behind the bodhicitta in tantra is even stronger than that is found in the Mahayana sutra.
In the last lesson, I talked about how the four classes of tantra are differentiated by their means of the ways in which attachment is utilized.
Regardless of the class of tantra that one wishes to enter into, first one’s mental continuum must be ripened by receiving an empowerment (initiation or wang). After receiving the wang, one must abide purely in the vows and the samaya that one took during the wang. 
When you received an initiation (wang) into action tantra, the initiation that one’s receives is only two:
Water initiation 
Crown initiation
Conferring these two is sufficient for action tantra.
In performance tantra, there are five initiations:
Water initiation 
Crown initiation
Vajra initiation
Bell initiation 
Name initiation. 
As for yoga tantra, on top of those five, you have the Vajra master initiation.
In action tantra, the water and crown initiation are usually given, but it is not incorrect to confer all the five initiations in the context of action tantra. If all five initiations are conferred, it is okay, and it is not wrong.
One receives wang (empowerment or initiation) to ripen one’s mental continuum.
After receiving the initiation, one must abide purely in the vows and commitments that are taken during the initiation. 
In action tantra, what are the vows and samaya that are to be guarded? In general, there are many but the main thing here is bodhisattva vows.
When you take an action tantra initiation, one has to take the bodhisattva vows. When you take the bodhisattva vows you have to guard against the 18 root downfalls and the 46 faults or infractions or vices. 
It is the same in the case of taking performance tantra initiation; one has to take the bodhisattva vows. As such, you have to guard against the 18 root downfalls and the 46 faults or infractions.
When you take an initiation into action tantra and the performance tantra, there is no taking of the tantric vows. As such, there is no need to protect or keep the tantric vows.
If you take the complete initiation into yoga tantra, on top of the five initiations, you have the vajra master initiation.  Once you take the vajra master initiation, you have to take the tantric vows. You will have to keep the tantric vows which involve the abandoning of the 14 root downfalls and the 8 heavy transgressions and so forth.
If initiation has the vajra master initiation, then you have to take and keep the tantra vows.
In Highest Yoga Tantra, there are vase initiation, secret initiation, wisdom-knowledge initiation and the word initiation.
One has to take, protect and keep the bodhisattva vows and tantric vows. Sometimes there is a question as to what is the difference between a vow and a samaya. Lama Tsongkhapa mentioned in his text “Clarifying the Meaning of Empowerment” that:
The vow and samaya are one entity but different isolates. 
Why is it called a samaya? Samaya means do not go beyond the prescribed boundary. 
A vow is to restraint yourself from doing something that you should not do. So from that point of view is called vow.  
If you look at the meaning, both samaya and vow are the same. It is just that both have different name. Therefore, they are considered to be different isolates. In reality they are one entity but different isolates.
There is also a question whether an individual is allowed to enter the mandala to see the mandala if the person has not receiving the initiation. For example, there are individuals who are not the suitable vessels for the practice of tantra and they are not ready yet, and such initiation is not given to them. Nevertheless, it is possible to allow such individuals to enter the mandala and to reveal the mandala for them to see. As it is said that it will confer great benefit of purifying lots of negativities, and also it establishes positive imprints and predisposition for the practice of tantra in the future.
As for the wang (initiation), in action tantra you will receive the water initiation and the crown initiation. Let’s take the water initiation for an example. How one does actually receives an initiation? When one does receives an initiation? 
In dependence of the initiation substances, in this case is the vase water, and as to whether the vase does touch to your head or whether you drink the water, if you actually generate or develop the wisdom of great bliss, then that is the best initiation.
There is a difference in degree of how much one actually receives the initiation. All this depends on the individual. It is very much depends on how much understanding they have on emptiness. Do they have any of that in the first place? Even if they have, is it a doubt tending to the factual? Is it a correct assumption? Or is it an actual realization or inference? So commensurate with how much understanding that one has on the view, and that much an initiation one will receive.
Essentially there are three different levels of receiving the initiation: 
The supreme
The middling 
The lowest. 
These are very much dependent on the individual capacity on how much understanding on emptiness that person has or doesn’t have.
When the person who is conferring the initiation, he will give an introduction and says a lot of things during the initiation such as “Now you visualize this. This is happening. Think that you have received this.” At the very least you need to imagine that you have understood what is being said and how it is being visualize for you to actually have received it. That is the minimal way of receiving an initiation. If you don’t pay attention and don’t even think like this, then you don’t receive the initiation at all.
We say we have taken initiation, but as to whether we do actually have received it or not are a question mark. We were there and we felt we have taken it. But as to whether we do actually have received it or not is something that remain to be seen.
That is also one reason behind studying. Now we know that in order to receive the initiation, we must pay full attention to what is being said and to think “That is happening. Now I have received it.” That is the very least. You must have that kind of single-pointed devotion and believe that you have understood on whatever is being said.
In the context of action tantra, you will receive the water initiation and the crown initiation. 
What is the point of receiving the water initiation? The point is:
the five stains are purified and
the five aggregates are transformed
What are you empowered to meditate on? You are empowered to meditate on yoga without signs, and in the future you will achieve the resultant truth body (dharmakaya). You must know the point of receiving the water initiation
For the crown initiation, the five stains are purified and the five aggregates are transformed.
What are you empowered to meditate on? You are empowered to meditate on yoga with signs, and in the future you will achieve the form body (rupakaya).
The water initiation leaves the potential (predispositions or imprints) in the mind to achieve the resultant truth body in the future, and you are empowered to meditate on the yoga without sign. 
The crown initiation leaves the potential in the mind to achieve the resultant form body in the future and you are empowered to meditate on the yoga with sign
As for Highest Yoga Tantra, of the four initiations, the first is vase initiation that purifies the bodily defilements, and leaves the potential to achieve the resultant emanation body in the future, and you are empowered to meditate on the generation stage.
In the beginning of the initiation, there is the flower garland initiation that leaves the potential for you to achieve enlightenment in a specific kind of lineage of the five Buddha lineages and makes it certain for you to achieve enlightenment in that lineage. It also establishes a special dependent arising to be taken care of by that deity.
In the vase initiation, we start-off with the water initiation. 
The water initiation leaves an imprint to achieve the perfect abandonment of the two stains. 
By taking the crown initiation it leaves a special potential for one to achieve the form body of the Buddha, in particular some of the major signs such as the crown protrusion. 
By taking the vajra initiation, one leaves the imprint to achieve the non-dual wisdom of the Buddha in that for one to achieve the perfect realization.
The bell initiation leaves a potential to actualize the speech of the Buddha. 
The name initiation is said to leave a predisposition for one to attain a particular name that you will be called as a Buddha in the future. 
The vajra master initiation empowers one to become a son of the lineage of Vajradhara.
In short, those five initiations plus the vajra master initiation constitutes the vase initiation in the Highest Yoga Tantra. 
When you receive secret initiation, your channel winds and drops are blessed and an imprint is planted to achieve the illusory body in the future. On the basis of achieving the illusory body, one achieves the complete enjoyment body during enlightenment.
By receiving knowledge-wisdom initiation, one purifies the mental obscurations (defilements) and is empowered to meditate on the path of clear light and is empowered to achieve the resultant dharmakaya.
In short, 
Through receiving the vase initiation, the bodily defilements are purified and one’s potential is planted to achieve the resultant emanation body. 
Through receiving the secret initiation on the basis of blessing your channel winds and drops, the defilements of speech are purified. You are empowered to meditate on the illusory body and will achieve the complete enjoyment body in the future
Through receiving the knowledge-wisdom initiation, one purifies the mental defilements and empowered to meditate on the path of clear light. You will actualize the resultant dharmakaya in the future
The word “initiation” means giving an introduction through the medium of words and causing the recipients of the empowerment to develop an understanding on the meaning of unification. 
The word “initiation” function is to leave an imprint to purify the defilements and obscuration that are collected with the body, speech and mind, and through that one is empowered to achieve the learners’ union and the non-learners’ union.
You have to know all these points. As to whether you have received an initiation or not depend on whether you know what is happening. So if you are able to think “I have received this initiation.  This was purified and I am empowered to meditate on this and so on and so forth”,  and are able to meditate accordingly then it leaves a very special imprint in the mind.
That is one reason for studying. When you are studying, you will know what to think and know what is happening when you take an empowerment. Also you will be able to think well and it naturally leaves a real positive imprint in your mind. When an initiation is given, an explanation is given on what to meditate and what to visualize. You need to think what is happening and so forth. You have to follow accordingly. If you don’t think and follow accordingly, then you will not receive the initiation at all. Generally, there are many people who are present in the initiation but have no idea what is happening and have no idea what the person who is giving initiation is saying. Neither are they able to even contemplate on what is being said and follow. They are not able to think. However, if those people who have real faith in their guru and the deity, then there still some benefits and at least some imprints and making connection with tantra. They also make good connection with the guru and the deity.
It is emphasized that keeping the vows, commitments and samaya that are taken during the initiation is very important. This is very much emphasized. So whatever vows or samayas that are received during the initiation, one has to put effort into guarding them. If you neglect this, even if you practice it, you will not get much benefit. So keeping pure vows and samayas is just like you need a field to grow crops and then harvest them. Likewise, keeping pure vows and samayas is the very foundation for all the accomplishments. 
When we take the bodhisattva vows during the initiation, we are making an extremely heavy and huge promise; because when you are taking the bodhisattva vows, you are calling all the buddhas and bodhisattvas to be your witness. Also, you are taking the vows in the presence of the gurus and calling them as your witness that you make the promise that you will work for the welfare of every single sentient being. Since that is the case, when you go against the precepts or the bodhisattva vows, then you incur the fault equal to the number of sentient beings, which basically is numberless. However, if you are able to guard your training and keep your vows, the benefits do commensurate with the number of sentient beings; which is numberless.
As I have said, for those who have developed bodhicitta, even if they engage in a small virtue, that small virtue is so powerful because that small virtue is multiplied by the number of sentient beings which basically is numberless. Even the small virtue becomes so powerful, and this comes back to the motivation and intention that focus on the welfare of numberless sentient beings. 
As said in the teachings, if you take the tantric vows and you don’t incur root downfall, and even if you don’t practice the path, it is said that you will achieve enlightenment within like 7 lifetimes or 16 lifetimes. It is very much emphasized that it is so important to keep the vows and the samayas purely. If you don’t keep the vows and the samayas purely, then whatever practice you try to do, you will not get any results whether it is enlightenment, or even a common attainment. You will achieve none of these.
If you keep the samayas and vows purely, even if you don’t do any spectacular practice, it is said that you will achieve enlightenment in 7 lifetimes or 16 lifetimes.
I didn’t get to read the text line by line but I just given you the essence. You have to read the relevant sections of the text on your own. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. That is all. If you have question then ask.
Student 1: After the initiation, as long as somebody who does not incur any root downfall, he will achieves enlightenment in 7 lifetimes. Would this apply to people who have taken the initiation but hasn’t enter the path yet i.e. he has no renunciation and no contrived renunciation. Or does it apply to those who haven’t entered the path as well as those who have entered the path?
Khen Rinpoche: I think it is better to say it applies to someone who has not entered the path. 
When we say “If you keep the vows and samayas purely and even if you don’t do any practice, you will achieve enlightenment in 7 or 16 lifetimes”, this doesn’t mean that you can just sit around and not do anything, and just keep your vows and then achieves enlightenment. This is not what it means. You cannot take it literally. It refers to a person who is keeping the vows and samayas well but doesn’t put in a lot of effort and not do any spectacular practice. He definitely has to meditate correctly.  Even he doesn’t really goes for it, he still able to achieve enlightenment in 7 or 16 lifetimes. 
On the other hand, if you are not keeping your vows and samayas purely, then it doesn’t matter what you are meditating on. You may try to meditates on this and that and even trying very hard for it but you will not achieve much or anything at all.
Student 2 :  Could you elaborate on the definition given about samaya, samaya. I heard something about not going beyond the boundary. 
Khen Rinpoche: Whether it is vow or samaya, essentially they are just different isolates. They means the same thing. They have the same entity but are differentiated by having a name. Why do they have different names? 
Why is it called a samaya? It is called a samaya (commitment) because you do not go beyond the prescribed boundary.
It is called a vow because you stop doing that which shouldn’t be doing in the first place, i.e. you restraint doing the things that you shouldn’t be doing. From that point of view, it is called a vow.
It is just different way of saying the same thing.
Student 3: In lesson 8, you mentioned that in tantra, we are dealing more with enjoyment body.  That is why we don’t beseech them to remain. Is that the case? I thought we are dealing more with nirmanakaya form and emanation body.
Khen Rinpoche: The emanation body is not the principal in tantra.
Student 3:  We received initiation like Yamantaka, Heruka, and Kalachakra, aren’t those are emanation bodies? They are not enjoyment bodies,right?
Khen Rinpoche: If you looked at the aspect, most of them are in the aspect of being accompanied by attachment. If you are looking at the sutra, you are dealing with supreme emanation body like Shakyamuni Buddha, which is in the aspect of being devoid of attachment. That is why he is a monk. When you look at tantra, most of them are in the aspect of being accompanied with attachment. For example, Tara is adorned with ornaments such as earrings, bracelets; necklaces and Buddha are not adorned with any of those things. Look at Chenrezig or Tara, from top to bottom, they wear crowns, earrings, bracelets, anklets, necklaces. These are the aspects that are accompanied by attachments.
Student 3:  So when they display with the aspect of being accompanied by attachment, they are enjoyment bodies? Or they are emanation bodies?
Khen Rinpoche: You can say that.
Student 3: The enjoyment bodies. Aren’t they in the nirmanakaya form? When you meditate and generate yourself into the nirmanakaya form first. And I thought that nirmanakaya is associated with emanation bodies and not enjoyment bodies. No? I am wrong?
(Student responded but inaudible)
Student 3:  Yes, the Manjushri is emanation form while the Yamantaka is nirmanakaya form.
Khen Rinpoche: So you are asking about Manjushri or Yamanataka? 
Student 3:  Manjushri is in enjoyment body. 
Khen Rinpoche: Before that you are a sentient being. After you being enlightenment you don’t die. 
Student 3: Is Manjushri is the emanation body and Yamantaka is the enjoyment body? Is this what you are saying? 
Khen Rinpoche: Both are enjoyment body.
Student 3:  Because Yamantaka shows the aspect of being wrathful and all that? 
Khen Rinpoche: Manjushri also same thing, in the enjoyment body.
Student 3:  Both are enjoyment bodies? Thank you.
Khen Rinpoche: You must read the book. I am going to read the book in the next class. You read the book first.
Extract from Principles of Buddhist Tantra by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche
In his Mantric Stages Tsongkhapa presents a formula applicable to all four classes of tantra: 
(1) First we need to receive an empowerment, 
(2) then we must act according to the vows and commitments we accepted during that empowerment,
(3) third we need to meditate on the stages of the path of this particular tantra, and finally
(4) we need to understand the way to manifest the resultant state. 
In action tantra initiation is conferred by the water and crown empowerments that are included within the vase empowerment. Tsongkhapa states that:
In the water empowerment, the water in the vase is generated as the deity, and the empowerment is given on the basis of that blessed water. 
In the crown empowerment, each of the five facets of the crown is adorned with the emblem of one of the five buddha families, and empowerment is bestowed after invoking the buddhas of the five families, each of whom blesses his respective emblem.
THE EIGHTEEN ROOT VOWS (https://www.lamayeshe.com/article/bodhisattva-vows)
1. Praising yourself and belittling others.
2. Not giving material aid or teaching the Dharma.
3. Not forgiving someone who has previously offended you.
4. Condemning the teachings of Buddha and teaching distorted views.
5. Taking offerings to the Three Jewels.
6. Despising the Tripitaka and saying these texts are not the teachings of Buddha.
7. Causing an ordained person to disrobe.
8. Committing any of the five heinous crimes.
9. Holding views contrary to the teachings of Buddha.
10. Completely destroying any place by means of fire, etc.
11. Teaching shunyata to those who are not yet ready.
12. Turning people away from working for full enlightenment.
13. Encouraging people to abandon their vows of moral conduct.
14. Causing others to hold distorted views about Hinayana teachings.
15. Practicing, supporting, or teaching the Dharma for financial profit and fame while saying that your motives are pure, and that only others are pursuing Dharma for such base aims.
16. Telling others even though you have very little or no understanding of shunyata, that you have profound understanding of shunyata.
17. Taking gifts from others and encouraging others to give you things originally intended as offerings to the Three Jewels.
18. Taking away from those monks who are practicing meditation and giving it to those who are merely reciting texts.
Fourteen root downfalls 
Despising or belittling my Guru
Disregarding any practice
Speaking badly of my vajra brothers
Abandoning love for any being
Giving up wishing and entering bodhicitta
Scorning the teachings of sutra or tantra
Revealing secrets to those who are unripe
Abusing my own aggregates
Denying (or doubting) voidness
Remaining close to malevolent people
Not recollecting the view (of voidness)
Causing someone to lose faith 
 Not upholding my word of honor 
 Despising women: 
Eight heavy transgressions to be protected
I shall perform all actions (first) with my left
Make offerings (to women) and never abuse them
Reject sitting in union with an unqualified (consort)
While in union, never be parted from the view (of voidness)
Relentlessly aspire to the path of (transforming) attachment
Never forsake the two kinds of mudra
 Strive mainly for the outer and inner methods
Never release seminal fluid