Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L13.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:17.947829
================================================================================

Pledge to compose.
With the wish to place imprints on my mind
and to benefit others of equal fortune,
I present a short and clear explanation of the grounds and paths
of the four classes of secret mantra.
Requesting permission to reveal tantric subjects
Through the chance to properly meditate on this method is rare,
my resolution to practice this method is not inferior.
May the Dharma lords grant me permission
to present the Dharma in conformity with their intention.
The main teaching
In explaining the principles of the grounds and paths of the four great secret classes of tantra, there are two divisions:
1. A brief presentation of the way to progress on the path of the three lower classes of tantra 
2. A detailed explanation of the way to progress on the path of highest yoga tantra
A brief presentation of the way to progress on the path of the three lower classes of tantra
The first has two divisions:
1. The actual lower classes of tantra
2. How to posit the five paths and the ten grounds for them
The actual lower classes of tantra
The first has three divisions:
1. How to progress on the path of action tantra
2. How to progress on the path of performance tantra
3. How to progress on the path of yoga tantra
The Three Lower Tantra
How to progress on the path of action tantra
This has four divisions:
1. How to become a vessel suitable for meditating on the path
2. How to keep the vows and commitments purely after becoming a suitable vessel
3. How to approximate the deity while keeping the commitments
4. How to establish the siddhis having achieved approximation
It is important to read the outlines so you can have an idea of what the text is trying to present. 
How to become a vessel suitable for meditating on the path
First train your mind well in the shared paths according to the Great Stages of the Path and the Condensed Stages of the Path. Then enter the maṇḍala of any of the three lineages of action tantra and receive empowerment in reliance on a qualified vajra master and in accord with the explanations of the different classes of tantra.
This is clear and I don’t think there is anything that you don’t understand.
In order to practise any of the classes of the Buddhist tantra, one must have received an initiation (also translated as wang or empowerment). In order to receive a wang, one does so in dependence upon a mandala. First, one has to enter a mandala and on the basis of which you receive the initiation.
What kinds of mandala are there?
What mandala is the empowerment bestow? 
Types of maṇḍalas
Question: In what maṇḍala is the empowerment bestowed?
Reply: The empowerment may be bestowed in a colored-sand or painted-cloth maṇḍala. For some special beings it is conferred in an absorption maṇḍala. The empowerment may be bestowed in a colored-sand or painted-cloth mandala. For some special beings it is conferred in a absorption (concentration) mandala.
In action tantra there is no body maṇḍala and so on. 
Even the terms body maṇḍala, relative-bodhicitta maṇḍala, lotus maṇḍala, and ultimate-bodhicitta maṇḍala are not used in the three lower classes of tantra because these four maṇḍalas are features of highest yoga tantra alone
For the three lower classes of tantra, the initiation is conferred in dependence upon either colored sand mandala or painted cloth mandala. The sand mandala is the one that you normally see that is constructed out of sand granules or small fine colored sand grains. The initiation may also be bestowed on the basis of a painted cloth mandala which is something that is drawn.
For those special beings, in terms of the person who is conferring the initiation has very stable concentration and the realization of calm abiding, and the student who is receiving the empowerment also has the similar level of concentration and calm abiding, and in those special circumstances when the conditions are not possible for them to construct a sand mandala or cannot get a cloth painted mandala, then in the context of having a special master and a special student, then the initiation can be conferred on a basis of a visualized mandala or concentration mandala.
In the lower tantra, initiations are not conferred on the basis of body mandala. Such is not present in the low classes of tantra. Body mandala is only found in Highest Yoga Tantra.
Even the terms body maṇḍala, relative-bodhicitta maṇḍala, lotus maṇḍala, and ultimate-bodhicitta maṇḍala are not used in the three lower classes of tantra because these four maṇḍalas are features of highest yoga tantra alone.
When we talk about body mandala, it does not simply refer to just visualizing deities on the body or placing deities on the body. We talk about the body mandala in terms of the three principal deities such as Yamantaka, Guhyasamaja and Heruka Chakrasamvara:
In the context of Yamantaka, there is neither the practice of body mandala nor is there an initiation into the body mandala.
As for Guhyasamaja, there is the practice of the body mandala but there isn’t an initiation into the body mandala. As for the practice of the body mandala of Guhyasamaja, it is not simply as visualizing the deities on the body or placing deities on the body but rather body mandala practice is that done through using the body as the basis of completion and from there generating the deities.
As for the Heruka Chakrasamvara, in the tradition of the Mahasiddha Kadampa, there is the practice of body mandala, and also the initiation into the body mandala. 
What I have just said is just to plant imprints.
Generally speaking, in Highest Yoga Tantra, there are four empowerments (initiations):
the vase initiation, 
the secret initiation, 
the knowledge wisdom initiation 
the word initiation.
The vase initiation of Highest Yoga Tantra is conferred on the basis of either a sand mandala or a cloth drawn mandala. 
The secret initiation is obtained in dependence upon the conventional bodhicitta mandala.
The knowledge wisdom initiation is obtained in dependence upon the bhaga mandala.
The word initiation is obtained in dependence upon the ultimate-bodhicitta mandala. 
These are the four mandalas on which the four initiations of HYT are obtained.
What are the initiations that are conferred in the three lower classes of tantra?
Only the vase initiation is bestowed.
In the three lower classes of tantra, the secret, knowledge wisdom and word initiations are not given. There is a difference in the number of initiations bestowed in the four classes of tantra. 
Action tantra has water and crown initiations and the presentation of the ritual object at the end of the ceremony.
Performance tantra has the five initiations: on top of the water and crown initiations, there is vajra, bell and name initiations.
Yoga tantra, on the top of these 5 knowledge initiations, there is the vajra-master initiation. 

HYT has 4 initiations - consisting of vase initiation plus the 3 higher initiations -the secret, knowledge wisdom and word initiations. 
Kālacakra as a specific highest yoga tantra has sixteen empowerments—seven emulating childhood, four higher empowerments, four highest empowerments, and the empowerment of the great lord vajra master.
Kalachakra as a specific highest yoga tantra has 16 initiations:
The 1-7th are the 7 initiations in the pattern of childhood,
The 8th are 4 higher initiations
The 12th are the 4 higher than higher initiations
And 16th concluded with the empowerment of the great lord vajra master. 
What I have just said is all in the text. You have to read it on your own and memorize them such as in this class of tantra, there is this and that… You have to know all these. 
We have finished with the section on how to become a suitable vessel for meditating on the tantric path. One has to train the mind in the shared paths and on this basis, one enters the mandala and receives the appropriate initiations. 

How to keep the vows and commitments purely after becoming a suitable vessel
Second, one who is capable of taking prātimokṣa vows should take any of the seven types of prātimokṣa vows— or at least the ethics of abandoning the ten nonvirtuous actions—as the basis of tantric practice.
When empowerment is conferred, only bodhisattva vows are taken, because tantric vows are not taken in action and performance tantra.
Therefore guard against root downfalls of the bodhisattva vows alone. Nevertheless there are many specific mantra commitments to be protected, which you can understand from authentic tantras quoted in Mantric Stages, while the root downfalls may be examined in the Central Path to Enlightenment
In the action and performance tantra, you have to take the bodhisattva vows when you enter the mandala.  Ideally, it is said that the candidate taking the bodhisattva vows should be the one who is capable of taking and keeping any of the 7 types of the pratimoksha vows. If not, then at the very least, the person must possess the ethical discipline of abandoning the ten non-virtues. With that as the basis, then the bodhisattva vows is taken.
After having taken the bodhisattva vows, one must guard or protect the bodhisattva vows purely. One has to abandon the 18 root downfalls and the 46 vices or infractions as explained in Je Rinpoche’s Jangchub Sumlang (?) - The Path of Basic Awakening, his commentary on the bodhisattva vows which he also talks about how to keep the vows purely and how to restore any degenerations in the bodhisattva vows.  
The third outline on how to approximate the deity while on the basis of keeping the vows and commitments.
After taking an initiation and on the basis of keeping the vows and the samayas purely, one engages in the approximation of the deity. 
How does one engage in the approximation of the deity?  That has two parts:
1. Concentration with recitation
2. Concentration that is not relying on recitation

How to approximate the deity while keeping the commitments
The third has two parts:
1. Absorption with recitation
2. Absorption not reliant on recitation
Absorption with recitation
You generate yourself as a deity by relying on the six deities, inviting the wisdom beings to the place in front of you and making offerings to them and so forth, and reciting mantras without deteriorating the four branches through combining restraint with vitality exertion. 
Vitality exertion
The term vitality exertion exists in the three lower classes of tantra, in the corpus of the Arya system 
of Guhyasamaja, and in Kalacakra, but its meaning is not the same in each.
The meaning of vitality exertion for the three lower classes of tantra is that vitality refers to the wind that circulates through the doors of the senses and so on and through the pores of the body and the head, and exertion is the mindfulness aware of distraction when the mind is diverted to 
other focal objects. Therefore the meaning of restraint through vitality exertion is the retention of those winds internally without letting them disperse externally. 
Since all of you have received an initiation, you must understand how one arises as the deity. That is important. Here, in the context of action tantra, we arise as the deity through the process of the six deities. 
As in action tantra, we arise as the deity through the process of generating the six deities. You must at least know what the six deities are. 
The six deities are: 
1. The empty deity
2. The sound deity
3. The letter deity
4. The form deity
5. The seal deity
6. The sign deity
The first of the six is the empty deity. What exactly is that? 
Empty deity here refers to meditating on the fact that oneself and the deity that you are meditating on are one taste in emptiness and are equal in emptiness. 
In the practice of tantra, whenever you generate as a deity, it is always being done on the basis of first reflecting and meditating on the meaning of emptiness. Here, in the context of action tantra, when you generate yourself as a deity via the process of the six deities, empty deity here means you meditate on the emptiness of yourself and meditating on the emptiness of the deity that you are meditating on.
You start with the meditation on emptiness. Emptiness in this context here is the emptiness of yourself -the meditator - and the emptiness of the deity whom you are meditating on. 
Essentially you need to have a mind that understands emptiness; whether it is a doubt tending towards the factual or a correct assumption with regards to emptiness, or better still, a valid cognizer ascertaining emptiness; basically is the mind that ascertains emptiness. You visualize this transforming into a moon disc.
In the context here, we meditate on emptiness. Within that meditation, you have withdrawn all appearances; and what appears is just a vacuity. With the mind ascertaining emptiness, within that state of ascertainment, nothing appears to the mind. All appearances have been withdrawn. Within that you imagine your mind transforming into taking the aspect of moon disc.
 In the space suddenly there is sound of the mantra of the deity. If it is an action tantra practice of Chenrezig, you imagine the sound of the mantra Om Mani Padme Hung resounds in the space in the aspect of sound but in entity is Chenrezig.
In the space above the moon disc, there is sound of the mantra of the deity resounding. At the time of the second deity, the sound deity, you place your attention on that sound. 
The sound of the mantra that is resonating (resounding) in the space above the moon disc slowly descends and then takes on the form of the letters of the mantra and settles on the moon disc. 
In the context of Chenrezig practice, in the middle of the moon disc, there is a syllable Hri surrounded by the syllables Om Mani Padme Hung. They appear very clearly as if you were seeing them directly with your own eyes. This is the meditation on the letter deity. After you visualize the sound of the mantra transforming into the aspect of the letters of the mantra and then these letters settle on the moon disc. 
Now you have the moon disc upon which the letters of the mantra. Light rays radiate from these letters going out in all directions. At the tip of all these light rays are Chenrezigs. From the bodies of these Chenrezig the light rays and nectar flow into all sentient beings and purifying them of their sufferings, negativities and obscurations. 
The light rays then emanated at the tips of which offering goddesses present the clouds of offerings to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. This manner of meditation is pretty similar across many practices. With regards to the visualization of the light rays going out:
purifying sentient beings of their sufferings and negativities and
making offerings to the buddhas and bodhisattvas
this is the meditation of fulfilling the two purposes. This is quite standard. Once you are aware of this, and when you see that again in other rituals, then you will understand it right away. 
All the light rays that are radiated are reabsorb back into the moon disc and back into the mantra garland. Once these are reabsorbed, the moon disc and mantra garland completely transform into the deity, and in this case is Chenrezig. Such a meditation is called the form deity because you have now generated the complete full body of the deity that is being meditated on. 
When the light rays that are emitted are reabsorbed back into the mantra garland and from that a complete transformation occurs in which one is transformed into the deity with all the features. If one has the experience in the meditation and is proficient in that, and when one becomes the deity, one will generate oneself as the deity in complete aspects in one’s experience and view. That is what will happen. There is no need to think of the color, the face, the hand and so forth. That is what you can find in the rituals which describe “Now you are Chenrezig having this number of faces, number of arms, doing this, doing that and so forth”. 
If one is able to arise as a deity instantly, then there is no need for those long descriptions of words.  Since most people cannot do that, then the ritual has those descriptions of how the deities looks like and so forth in order to help the meditator to bring to mind and what to visualize. 
If you have done the practice of Nyung Nay before, you would probably know what I am talking about. In the ritual, in the midst of accomplishment of the deity, it is very clearly stated out one by one, starting with the empty deity, then sound deity and so forth, telling the meditator what to think and what to meditate on.
After you have arisen as the deity, you place the syllables Om, Ah and Hung at the forehead, throat and heart respectively. In the context of Chenrezig, you arisen as Chenrezig. In your heart you visualize a moon disc, and in the centre of which is a syllable Hri which is surrounded by the mantra garland of the deity. 
Next is the seal deity or the mudra deity. Here you have to perform the hand gesture that is appropriate or concordant with the lineage of that action tantra deity. In action tantra and performance tantra, we talk about the three lineages - the tathagata lineage, the lotus lineage and the vajra lineage.
There is a difference in the superiority of these lineages. In action tantra and performance tantra, there are three lineages:
Tathagata lineage
Lotus lineage 
Vajra lineage
In terms of superiority, the tathagata lineage is said to be the highest, next is the lotus lineage and follows by the vajra lineage. 
The tathagata lineage is the factor of the purity of the purity of the body appearing in the form of deity. 
The lotus lineage is the factor of the purity of the purity of the speech appearing in the form of deity. 
The vajra lineage is the factor of the purity of the purity of the mind appearing in the form of deity. 
One of the ways in which we can identify the lineage to which an action tantra deity belongs to is by looking at its lord of the lineage. In the case of Chenrezig, Chenrezig belongs to the lotus lineage. If you look at the ritual of Chenrezig, after the wisdom beings are absorbed and the initiation is conferred, after the seal impression is done, whereby the overflow of the nectar transforms into Amitabha at the crown of the head. If it is crowned by Amitabha, then we can say that this is the deity that belongs to the lotus lineage. 
Then action tantra deities like Sitatapatra or White Umbrella or Namgyalma or Ushnishavijaya, as in the rituals, after the initiation is done, the overflow of nectar is transformed into Vairocana at the crown of the deity. Deities of the action tantra that belongs to the tathagata lineage are crowned with Vairochana. 
Action tantra deity like Mitrugpa Akshobhyas belongs to the vajra lineage.
The action tantra deities belonging to the vajra lineage usually are crowned with Akshobhya. 
This is rough way of identifying which lineage that particular action tantra deity belongs to. 
It is said in the teachings that the tathagata lineage is the supreme, follows by the lotus lineage, and then the vajra lineage. So the tathagata lineage is supreme of all, then the lotus lineage is superior to that of the vajra lineage. It is mentioned like this but no reasons are given. This is something we have to think about: “Why is the tathagata lineage superior or principal of the three lineages. 
Let’s see if this qualifies as a reason for this. The purpose of generating bodhichitta is to benefit sentient beings extensively. The whole point of achieving enlightenment and becoming the Buddha is to be able to work for the welfare of sentient beings. The buddhas work for the welfare of sentient beings through multitudes of form bodies. After appearing to the sentient beings, the buddhas work for the sentient beings through their enlightened speech. Let’s say we correspond this to the lotus lineage. Since the lotus lineage is the factor of the purity of the purity of speech appearing in the form of deity, the buddhas work for sentient beings through their enlightened speech that is motivated by their pure compassion. 
Since the enlightened mind of the Buddha cannot appear to the sentient beings, in that sense, compared to how the Buddha can benefit the sentient beings through their bodies and speech, then what the enlightened mind can directly benefit the sentient beings is limited in the sphere of the activity as compared to the speech or the body. In that sense, the vajra lineage is placed last. 
Anyway, this is just my opinion. You can always share if you have any other suggestion or opinion that is better than this. 
In terms of superiority:
the tathagata is the supreme,
the middling is the lotus lineage and 
the lowest is the vajra lineage. 
These three lineages are essentially the factors of purity of the body, speech and mind respectively appearing as deities.
The fourth deity, the form deity, is meditating clearly on with all the features of the deity that we have arisen to. You are supposed to perform the appropriate hand gestures of the lineage of that deity. In the case of Chenrezig, the deity of the lotus lineage, you perform the hand gesture or mudra of the lotus lineage. If you do it extensively you put your hand in the appropriate hand gesture and touch the seven points of your body, starting with:
The crown
The forehead
The eyes (counted as one)
The throat 
Two shoulders 
The heart 
The navel. 
It is mentioned that in the Chenrezig ritual, with appropriate hand gestures you touch the five places:
Heart
Forehead
Throat
Right shoulder
Left shoulder
The fifth deity, seal deity, first is putting the appropriate hand gestures and touching it to the different places of the body. 
The sixth deity, the sign deity, refers to meditation on the deity’s body in order to elicit a clear appearance and divine pride. Focusing single pointedly on that is the sign deity. In the rituals, after you have generated yourself as the deity, in the context of Chenrezig, you yourself as Chenrezig, in the heart on the moon disc. A syllabus Hri is surrounded by the mantra garland. Then light rays from the syllable Hri go out and invite the wisdom beings. All the wisdom beings come and absorb into yourself who is the commitment being. At the end, the wisdom being and the commitment being become indifferentiable. 
Commitment being is the deity that you have generated yourself as the deity.
From the heart of yourself as the commitment being, in the case of Chenrezig, from the syllable Hri at the heart, light rays go out and invite the actual Buddha Chenrezig, the wisdom being. You imagine the wisdom being dissolved into you as the commitment being. That makes a difference to the meditator’s mind because you feel that now you have absorb the real Buddha into you and this helps in your meditation to generate clear appearance and divine pride. 
After the absorption of wisdom beings, usually there is also the visualization of receiving initiation and doing the seal impression. Here in the case of Chenrezig, after you have absorbed the wisdom being into yourself as commitment being, again from the syllable Hri at your heart, light rays go out and invite all the initiation deities. Each initiation deities confer initiation upon you by pouring the nectar onto you.
The initiation deities confer initiation upon us by pouring the nectar on our body. As a deity, imaging through the nectar all the negativities and obscuration are purified. After that, we do the practice of seal impression in that the nectar overflow from the crown of our head and transform into the lord of the lineage, in this case, being Amitabha. One is sealed with Amitabha.
After you have generated all the 6 deities, and when you reach the sign deities, it is not an absolute must to do the practice of inviting the wisdom beings and after that inviting the initiation deities to confer initiation and doing the practice of seal impression. That is not absolutely necessary. If you do that it is good but if not it is not considered to be an omission.
Q&A
Student 1: The main thing about tantra is about the 4 complete purities. I was just wondering at the point where visualizing the moon disc and the mantra garland and then enacting the activities of sentient beings.  At that point, could we say that is some practice of complete purities of enjoyments and the enlightened activities, even before the supported and supporting mandala has been generated? Is it some form of doing the complete purities?
Khen Rinpoche: It is not considered to be the part that is concordant with the aspect of the complete purity of the enlightened activities; although there is the visualization of fulfilling of the two purposes here in the context of the letter deity. Since letter deity is a part of the process of generating as a deity, it is not something that is concordant with the aspect of the complete purities of the enlightened activities. That will come later on perhaps at the time when you do the recitation of the mantra and doing the visualization of enacting the activities for sentient beings.
Student 1: So it is not part of the 6th deity practice. 
Khen Rinpoche: Here we are talking about the process of generating yourself as deity. In action tantra, one can generate the self as the deity through the process of the six steps. As said in the root text, you generate yourself as deity by relying on the six deities. This is in the section of generating yourself as deity.
Student 1: As mentioned earlier in the lesson about the suitable person who takes the initiation refrains from committing the ten non-virtuous actions. Is it appropriate to drink alcohol after one has taken tantric vows especially doing the Six Session Guru Yoga?
Khen Rinpoche: You drink, and you are not drunk okay.
We have to look at the whole picture and not just focus on one small part. It all depends. In the context of person who is suited only for the Hinayana teachings, the Buddha said “You must abandon all the 10 non-virtues. There is no exception or whatsoever”. When come to Mahayana sutra, the Buddha gave permission to those who are qualified through engage in the three bodily non-virtues and the four verbal non-virtues. If the person is qualified, yes, that is the reason for them to engage in that and it doesn’t become a fault. In tantra it says one can utilize attachment, literally it says take attachment as the path. If you take the lay precepts, the pratimoksha vows for the lay person and if you become a full upasika adopting the five precepts then you are not supposed to drink the alcohol. In the vinaya, which is the ethical code of conduct mainly for the ordained, the Buddha said the ordained people should not even have a small drop of alcohol; literally on the tip of the blade of a grass. About the consumption of alcohol, the Buddha had said very clearly in the vinaya. In tantra, it doesn’t mean one can drink alcohol. For people who say they can drink alcohol, what it means is that they must have the capacity to transform it. For example, in the practice of Highest Yoga Tantra, there is blessing of the 5 meats and 5 nectars. You do the purification of blessing and then actualizing as nectar and increase it. For somebody who can actually transform the 5 meats and 5 nectars into nectar can partake of it. For the person who can do that then alcohol is not a problem for that person.  Basically it is better for people to know at what level they are in. If you know you are not at that level then don’t do thing that is not at your level. Nevertheless, sometime it is part of the practice such as tsog or situation whereby you have to taste the alcohol that is transformed into nectar.  You don’t have to taste it. It doesn’t mean that you really have to taste it or drink it. You can just do the gesture of touching and imaging that you are experiencing the nectar. As for us, we can think it as nectar but it is still alcohol. We should not use the reason to taste the alcohol. Then it is wrong.
Since it is said that tantra is accomplished through visualization, just imagine that you are touch the alcohol and taste it as nectar. Don’t drink and touch it if the basis is alcohol. If you are not at that level then don’t do it. For a practitioner who is ordained, generally we don’t use the alcohol as the basis of accomplishment for the inner offering. It is strongly advised to use tea as the basis of accomplishment. This is often very much emphasized. It is mentioned in certain ritual or practices of Highest Yoga Tantra you need to present offerings like meats and alcohol. As an object of offering then it is okay because it is part of the requirement. But it is a completely different matter whether you have to taste it or not. If you are not at the level then you don’t have to taste it but just perform the gesture of tasting and imagine tasting it and generate the wisdom of great bliss and non-dual with emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: So no problem 
In the past, when His Holiness gave the long life initiation, and part of the long life initiation, there is this long life nectar and the basis of accomplishment alcohol or chang (Tibetan beer) is usually used. Many Tibetan went in to snatch for the chang because they like beer.
Khen Rinpoche: They take one bottle after another. They change to milk after His Holiness advised not to put any more chang. If you are not careful then it becomes like this. This is blessing and after after 2 bottles it really become great bliss. 
Student 2: In page 25, it says that in Highest Yoga Tantra, there are 4 empowerments: the vase, secret, pristine wisdom and words empowerment. As for pristine wisdom, Ven Gyurme use knowledge wisdom.
Student 2: In the next verse, performance tantra has 5 knowledge empowerments, what is the meaning of knowledge empowerment here? Has it anything to do with the vase, secret, pristine wisdom empowerment?
Khen Rinpoche: I am not sure exactly why they call the 5 initiations as knowledge.
Student 2: Performance tantra being the lower tantra will only have vase empowerment. The English translation says that it has 5 knowledge empowerments, I get confused. Is this knowledge empowerment the same as the 3rd as listed above?
Ven Gyurme: No. I translated the 3rd one as knowledge wisdom initiation. There is a reason why if you understand the etymology of that. There is reason for that. The Tibetan word for which I translated for knowledge in this context is not the same as the knowledge initiation. These are two different words in Tibetan but, for the translation point of view, it is translated the same in English but they mean different things.
Student 3: As performance tantra has just 5 vase empowerments but I don’t understand why the word knowledge empowerment is in the text. 
Khen Rinpoche: In action tantra, you definitely must have the water and crown initiation. For action tantra, there is no need to confer all 5 knowledge initiation. If you talk about the 5 knowledge initiation: water, crown, vajra, bell and name initiation are parts of the vase initiation. So whether it is the crown initiation or vajra initiation or bell initiation and so forth, these are all the vase initiation. Etymology speaking why is it called vase initiation? Because at the end of all the initiations, whether it is a crown initiation or vajra initiation, it is always concluded with the water initiation by sprinkling of the vase water. As such, it is called vase initiation. 
For the action tantra, you definitely have the water and crown initiation; vajra, bell and name initiations are not necessary. However, if they are conferred, it is also okay. Anyway, they are different views on this. There are some scholars who say it is not okay but some say it is okay. The conclusion is that you need the two: water and crown. On top of that if you confer those 3 then it is okay and if you don’t confer then it is also okay. 
The path of the Action tantra is consists of two: yoga with signs and yoga without signs. There are two principal initiations of action tantra: the water initiation and the crown initiation. 
By taking the water initiation, you are empowered to meditate on the yoga without signs and leave the potential to achieve the resultant dharmakaya – the truth body in the future.  
When the crown initiation is conferred, one is empowered to meditate on yoga with signs and it leaves the special potential to achieve the resultant rupakaya – the form body in the future. 
If that is the case, you are empowered to do whatever you need to actualize the action tantra path: yoga with signs and yoga without signs. You are empowered to meditate on both as you are empowered to actualize both bodies. So there is nothing missing. Yet it is said that on top of that it is okay to confer the vajra, bell and name initiation. If it is okay, if you do confer then what is the purpose of doing? But it doesn’t say. Then we get the question.
Khen Rinpoche: Since you all have the text, please read before coming to class.