Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L14.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:26.398703
================================================================================

Khen Rinpoche: I noticed in the last few classes, the mic is not clear enough. That is why I told Benny and Xiao Chiang to take charge of the mic. Somebody have to be in charge of it. So far in few classes the mic is not good enough. I don’t who is responsible for that. That is why I told Benny and Xiao Chiang learn from those who know how to fix. This is necessity. People come all the way from far away to attend class. From the centre side, have to make good facilities. People put effort to come here, so should make the mic clear. It is not one time. It happened many times. I did mention this one time before. I don’t know who is in charge. I just want to say a few words. From my side I did put in my full effort to teach.  I do that. I have no regret for myself.  I do it myself. How well I present is a different issue.  I am not wasting your time.  I am not wasting my time.  So, there is something that everybody needs to put in effort.  I consider myself not sharp faculty.  I am considered myself as dull faculty.  So, when you say dull faculty it doesn’t mean that.  When you hear dull faculty is always like bad. It is not like that.  I learn slowly. I am not fast learner. I am a very slow learner. I learn word by word.  So you don’t have to be discouraged.  As to wasting time or not, it is individual. You know how you think.  If you even work one word, it is meaningful.  You come all the way from your home to here to learn dharma. It is virtuous.  You come here to see holy object, it is virtuous. You sit 2 hours to hear something virtuous.  After that you learn, of course much more virtuous.  So never think you are wasting time. As a teacher’s job, sometimes I repeat a little bit. But I am not going to repeat too much.  You are big enough to understand.  When I ask questions you try to answer. So I repeat a little bit like that. You are not kid. You are grown up.  Try your effort, okay? I put my full effort to teach and I have no regret. Everybody support that bring this class successful.  Bring more students here and don’t discourage. We all need this together. Energy it is important to develop the centre and develop the society. All these are needed.  I just came on of the mic. We all need to work together to make the centre successful. Not just the teacher to do everything. It is not possible.  Sorry about that.  Sometimes I have to say that. So if you are dull faculty, don’t worry about that.  If you think you are wasting time, which I don’t think you are not wasting time. Don’t worry about that.  Every teacher teaches differently.   I had six teachers, and my six teachers teach differently to me. Of course, for my side, I try my best.  I considered as my job.  Thank you for fixing the mic. Thank you.  Not one day but please continue to work on the mic.  
______
Tantra
How to approximate the deity while keeping the commitments
The third has two parts:
1. Absorption with recitation
2. Absorption not reliant on recitation
We were looking at how to approximate the deity while keeping the commitment. It has two parts:
1. Concentration with repetition 
2. Concentration without repetition or recitation
Absorption with recitation
You generate yourself as a deity by relying on the six deities, inviting the wisdom beings to the place in front of you and making offerings to them and so forth, and reciting mantras without deteriorating the four branches through combining restraint with vitality exertion. 
Vitality exertion
The term vitality exertion exists in the three lower classes of tantra, in the corpus of the Arya system 
of Guhyasamaja, and in Kalacakra, but its meaning is not the same in each.
The meaning of vitality exertion for the three lower classes of tantra is that vitality refers to the wind that circulates through the doors of the senses and so on and through the pores of the body and the head, and exertion is the mindfulness aware of distraction when the mind is diverted to 
other focal objects. Therefore the meaning of restraint through vitality exertion is the retention of those winds internally without letting them disperse externally. 
Khen Rinpoche: I think that is in the root text.  Your root text is with the commentary together or separate?   Together?  I have not read. You have to find out.  I am just reading the root text. I am not reading the root text commentary.   
[The six deities are: 
1. The empty deity
2. The sound deity
3. The letter deity
4. The form deity
5. The seal deity
6. The sign deity ]
Of the six deities, the first deity is the empty deity which is essentially meditating on how oneself and the deity that is to be meditated on are equal being empty of existing inherently.  Whatever it is, the deity yoga always starts with meditating on emptiness. 
[BP1: The first of the six deities is the ultimate deity (or the empty deity). When we generate ourselves as the deity in Action Tantra, we meditate on the emptiness of the person who is meditating and the emptiness of the deity which is the object of our cultivation, i.e., reflecting on the meditator and that which is being meditated upon as empty of inherent existence. These two are equal in the sense of not existing inherently. Within that emptiness of inherent existence, these two are inseparable in nature.
The mind (or wisdom) that ascertains the emptiness of the self and the emptiness of the deity is transformed into the aspect of a full moon disc.]
Second deity is the sound deity. One starts with meditating on the moon disc; which essentially is your expression or manifestation of your mind realizing emptiness. The main meditation that constitutes the sound deity is focusing on the sounds of the mantra of the deity that you are meditating on, and focusing on the sounds resonating in the space.
[BP1: Sound deity - We visualize, resonating in space, the sound of the mantra of the deity. Although in the aspect of sound, in reality, it is the deity we are meditating on taking the aspect of sound. We concentrate on that sound.]
The third deity is the letter deity.  The sounds of the mantra of the deity that you are meditating on are resonating in space.  The sounds descend and take on the form of the syllables of the mantra which settles on the moon disc. 
If you look at many of the action tantra ritual, you will find it is described in the sadhana that you meditate on the moon disc. On top of that, there are the syllables of the mantra of the deity.
The fourth deity is the form deity.  That starts with:
 Imagine the light rays radiate from the letters or the syllables of the mantra, which is settled on the moon disc, emanating in the 10 directions.
These light rays touch all sentient beings and purify them.
The light rays that are emitted are then withdrawn back to the syllables. 
Again the light rays are emitted from the syllables. At the end tips of these light rays are offering goddesses.
These offering goddesses makes offering to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
After that the emitted light rays are withdrawn back into the mantric syllables. The mantric syllables become more magnificent than before. 
Then complete transformation occurs. One arises as the deity and takes on the form of whatever deity one is meditating on, such as Chenrezig or Tara.
So, generating this deity of the body in its complete form is the form deity.  
[BP1: We visualize light rays emitting from the letters of the mantra. At the tip of each light ray is the deity we are meditating on. These deities work for the welfare of sentient beings, purifying their negative karma and so forth. On some of the tips of these light rays, countless offerings are made to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. Then, all the light rays that are emanated absorb back into the letters of the mantra on the moon disc. The moon disc together with the syllables then transform into the deity that we are meditating on, e.g., in the practice of Chenrezig, we transform ourselves into Chenrezig. This is the fourth deity, the form deity.]
The fifth deity is the seal deity or the mudra deity. As I have said before, the action tantra is divided into three lineages:
The tathagata lineage
The lotus lineage 
The vajra lineage.
Depending on the lineage of the deity that is meditating on belongs to, you perform the appropriate hand gesture.  Normally we touch the appropriate hand gesture of the lineage to the five places of the body.
If you are doing the practise of Chenrezig, you do the hand gesture of the lotus lineage which touch five places of the body.  You start with:
heart, 
forehead
throat
right shoulder
left shoulder
[BP1: Seal deity (or mudra deity) - Having completely transformed into the deity that we are meditating on, we perform the respective hand gesture (or mudra) in accordance with the mudra associated with that particular lineage of Action Tantra. 
In the abbreviated way, we touch the three different points of our body with the relevant mudra. 
In the extensive way, we touch the seven points of our body.
In the middling way, we touch the five different points of our body in accordance with Lama Tsongkhapa’s Great Stages of Mantra, which are: 
1. the heart 
2. the point between the eyebrows 
3. the throat 
4. the right shoulder 
5. the left shoulder 
The purpose of touching these different points of the body with the mudra is to bless ourselves.]
Khen Rinpoche: Last two classes, people asked me whether can ask Venerable Gyrume to translate slowly.  People request me.  I said don’t ask me.  You ask directly to Venerable.  I speak Tibetan slowly but you don’t understand.  If is too fast, anybody is free to ask respectfully.  No harming anybody. If I am not good enough to teach, please tell me directly. I am open for that. This is my job.  Gyurme’s job is to translate.  If too fast, please request respectfully.  Anybody can request that.  
Sometimes I repeat again. One of my teachers repeated 10 times in one of the topic.  From my past experience, that is the teacher that I appreciated the most.  I remember every single word now because of that.  Maybe some people find repeating boring, but there is a reason for me to repeat.  That is why I mentioned before, some people are of dull facultied learn slowly. Also reading part, you read already but you need to read again. There is no harm.  There is no harm that I read again.  Anything has to do with the class, please talk in the class. Not in the Facebook if you want to improve something. There is no point for the public.  Just put it here and use it meaningfully. If you have very good reason, you can put anywhere, but mostly I don’t see anything good. Anything doing with the class, please put here. I want to say 2 or 3 people couldn’t catch up. So when people ask me, I said ask direct. Anybody is welcome but please say it nicely with respect.  This is important.
If you are meditating on the lotus lineage, you have to perform the mudra of the lotus lineage by cupping your hands together.
Khen Rinpoche: Most of you doing Nyung nay -forehead, throat, here, right, left.  In the tathagata lineage, the mudra is to bless 5 points.
(Khen Rinpoche did some demonstrations)
As for vajra lineage, that is quite difficult. I don’t know exactly. I haven’t seen, and it is quite complete in the text. As for the seal deity, it is touching with appropriate hand gestures to the 5 points of the body.
The sixth deity is the sign deity which is meditating on clear appearance and cultivating divine pride.  
[BP1: Sign deity - Having completed the above visualizations, one generates clear appearance of oneself as the deity and, at the same time, cultivates divine pride and, without any distraction, one thinks, “I am the actual deity.” When we say we perform an approximation of deity, it is through this clear appearance and divine pride that we approximate (become closer to) the deity. 
One cultivates the divine pride and clear appearance of oneself as the deity through combining it with retaining the vitality exertion, i.e., by restraining the wind from leaving the body through the hair pores and so forth and cutting off all discursive thoughts. We should try to achieve such a clear appearance of ourselves as the deity that it feels like we are ‘seeing’ it directly with our mental eyes, so to speak, and that we are able to touch it.]
It is different in Highest Yoga Tantra. Here in action tantra you generate yourself as the deity which is usually done through the 6 steps which is called the 6 deities; culminating in the sign deity where you meditate on clear appearance and divine pride.
[BP1: We are doing the approximation of the deity on the basis of the self generation practice and then generating the clear appearance and cultivating the divine pride of ourselves as a deity. We focus on that as long as possible. When we become tired, in order to rest, we visualize a mantra garland in our hearts and visualize light rays emitting from the mantra garland going out to work for the welfare of sentient beings and making offerings to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. With this visualization, we recite the mantra as many times as we wish. 
In the process of generating ourselves as the deity, we have invoked and absorbed the wisdom being into ourselves. So, before we end the session, we make requests to the wisdom being who is abiding at our heart. We visualize the wisdom being leaving our heart and abiding in the space in front of us. We make offerings, offer praises and make requests such as, “Please bestow upon me and all sentient beings all the common and supreme attainments.” We then recite the hundred syllables mantra to pacify any faults and omissions we had made during the practice. Then we visualize the wisdom being returning to his natural abode. 
We hold onto the divine pride of oneself as the commitment (or samaya) being and then we can end the session. 
In most of the deity practices of Action Tantra, there isn’t any practice of close dissolution though this practice does appear in some Action Tantra texts. There is such a practice in the deity practices of Highest Yoga Tantra at the end of the sadhana. 
There is a reason for bringing up this question of whether there is the practice of close dissolution. Sometimes, people do ask, “When I have generated myself as a deity, how do I apologize for the mistakes and purify them?” Here, in the practice of Action Tantra, we visualize the wisdom being leaving from the heart of oneself as the deity and abiding in the space in front of us. It is in relation to that wisdom being that we then request for forgiveness for any mistakes made during the practice. 
What we have discussed so far is the way of doing the approximation of the deity by depending on self generation alone, i.e., the self basis. Here, in Action Tantra, it is taught that practising the self generation is sufficient for the approximation of the deity. It is not necessary to do the practice of the front generation.]
In the three lower classes of tantra you will not find the word “wisdom of bliss and emptiness” but rather you will find the term “yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity”.
In the phrase of yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity:
Profundity refers to wisdom realizing emptiness
Clarity refers to appearing clearly as the deity (clear appearance of the deity’s body)
[BP1: “Non-dual” means that these two are united in one causal collection, i.e. they are present in a single consciousness]
Something one should understand the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. This is an uncommon feature of tantra.
At the beginning of generating any deity, the meditation on emptiness is very important. That is why here in action tantra, you start with empty deity or the ultimate deity.
You need to have a mind that has some kind of understanding of emptiness.  That is the foundation or the basis from which deity is generated.
As we saw earlier, the four classes of tantra are differentiated by the manner in which attachment is utilized as the path. So by utilizing attachment as the path, great bliss arises. As the blissful consciousness arises, then many of the coarser level of consciousness are become dormant (non-manifest, or dissolved).
When the coarser level of consciousnesses dissolved (become dormant or not manifest) then the subtler level of consciousness become manifest, and one uses that to ascertain emptiness. This feature is the very heart or essence of the mantra (??)
Yes, it is called taking attachment as the path but whether you can literally take it to mean that attachment does not become an object of abandonment but rather attachment somehow changes the entity into a path. I don’t think it is really the case.
As to the meaning of taking attachment as the path, the meaning is most clearly explained in Highest Yoga Tantra whereby through using attachment causes the coarser level of consciousness to dissolve and leaving only the extremely subtle consciousness to manifest and causing that mind to transform into the path i.e. causing the mind to ascertain emptiness.  This is what I think is the meaning behind taking attachment as the path.  That causes the extreme subtle mind to ascertain emptiness. 
You imagine the extremely subtle mind ascertaining emptiness take on the aspect and become the deity.  That is what is meant by the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as deity.
In the three lower classes of tantra we talk about the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity:
Profundity refers to the wisdom that takes emptiness as the object realizes emptiness, or the mind that understand emptiness. 
Clarity refers to the clear appearance of the deity.  
These two are non-dual and these two are found in one consciousness.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you clear?  Are you getting some idea of what I am talking?  Whether you know all or not doesn’t matter. You must catch the essence of what I am talking.  
You hear these expressions yoga of non dual profundity and clarity, taking attachment as the path, the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as deity. So just need to have an idea of what they mean. 
If somebody were to say to you: Although you say you are practicing self-generation but it is not yourself becoming the deity but rather is the mind realizing emptiness become the deity. You didn’t become the deity”. What you going to say? 
The wisdom realizing emptiness is not the self, isn’t it?
How are you going to explain the self-generation?
In the practice of self-generation, how does the self becomes the deity?
Student 1: Self-generation as a deity is a mind activity. We do the self -generation using the visualization and develop divine pride of the particular deity.  
You need to think of my question. In self-generation, self means you, isn’t it? You become deity.
What do you posit to be the self that is generated as the deity?
We talk about the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. That is clear. But when you talk about self-generation, what the I that is generated as the deity? You cannot posit the ordinary I as the ordinary I cannot arise as the deity.
So you see it is not so straightforward. You have to think and discuss about it. What are you going to posit as the I or self that is generated as the deity.
Here the practice of the sign deity refers to meditation of the clear appearance of oneself as the deity and identifying oneself as the deity having divine pride. It is called the sign deity not because this meditation is accompanied with the signs of dualistic appearance; meaning the sign of true existence. But rather the sign here refers to the appearance of the deity body.
You can refer to a specific deity or ritual, such as Chenrezig’s nyung-nay sadhana. Perhaps it makes it easier to relate to these 6 deities that we have just discussed. The point here is whatever we have heard or read in the text, we should be able to connect them to practice. 
We do nyung-nay practice in the centre. Those of you who engage in that should compare what you see in the sadhana and what you have heard in class. You can make the connection between the two.
You generate yourself as the deity by relying on the 6 deities. Then invite the wisdom beings to the place in front of you and make offerings to them and so forth. The “so forth” here includes making praises to the deity.
Self generation is you generate yourself as the deity by relying on the 6 deities. 
Next we talk about the front generation. When you generate the front generation, you also begin with the ultimate or empty deity. The mandala is the basis of the completion of the front generation. First you meditate on the emptiness of that. 
When you generate the front generation it is not as if there is something autonomous right in front appearing out of nowhere. Rather the front generation is established with one part of your own mind, the meditator’s mind.
Whatever mandala which is the basis of accomplishment may be, the point is that you meditate on its emptiness. From within the state of emptiness, let’s say you are doing the practice of Chenrezig, you have already generated yourself as deity. From your heart you emanate the white syllable Bhrum. This white syllable Bhrum becomes the basis of the accomplishment of the inestimable mansion. 
The syllable Bhrum that becomes the inestimable mansion is essentially is an expression of your own wisdom realizing own emptiness. Actually it is your own mind that ascertains emptiness which then takes on the aspect of the syllable Bhrum and the celestial mansion.
[BP1: If you want to meditate on the front generation, you can look at sadhanas such as the Nyung-na sadhana. From your heart the white syllable Bhrum radiates out five-coloured light rays in front of you, where you then visualize the mandala. The mandala is not outside but comes from your heart. The mandala has four doors. Inside the mandala there is a cushion. Visualize the deity inside the mandala. Then from the sadhana, we do the practice which includes the seven-limb practice.]
The point here is whatever the celestial mansion arises from it arises from one part of the meditator’s mind. 
You generate the front generation commitment beings. 
After that you invite the wisdom beings and then absorb into them. 
Again you invite the empowering deities.  The empowering deities confer initiation on the front generation and through the overflow of the nectar. 
In the case of Chenrezig’s crown is seal impressed with the principal Amitabha and not so much with the rest of the other tatagathas. When that is done usually it is the practice of making extensive offerings and praises and so forth.
Here we are talking about the practice of generating the front generation. That involves meditating on the commitment beings and inviting the wisdom beings and so forth. But in order to make offerings to somebody in front it is not necessary to generate the commitment beings. You can just invite the wisdom beings to abide in the mandala. After you have done that you make offerings to them. Here in action tantra we make offerings with the recitation of certain offering mantras. You also have to perform the appropriate hand gestures. 
When we make offerings, the offerings have to be very clean. So you set up pure, clean and nice offerings. When we present offerings, we do so with recitation of offering mantras and performance of hand gestures. In the practice of lower tantra, the practice of cleanliness is very much emphasized. One has to rely on pure white foods, and one has to wash or bathe daily. 
Absorption with recitation
You generate yourself as a deity by relying on the six deities, inviting the wisdom beings to the place in front of you and making offerings to them and so forth, and reciting mantras without deteriorating the four branches through combining restraint with vitality exertion.
“Restraint with vitality exertion” - what does that mean in the context of action tantra?
The meaning of vitality exertion for the three lower classes of tantra is that vitality refers to the wind that circulates through the doors of the senses and so on and through the pores of the body and the head, and exertion is the mindfulness aware of distraction when the mind is diverted to other focal objects. Therefore the meaning of restraint through vitality exertion is the retention of those winds internally without letting them disperse externally.
In the term vitality exertion:
Vitality refers to the winds or energies that circulate through the doors of the senses and so on. 
Exertion, in one explanation is being aware of the distraction when the mind diverted to some other objects.
Another explanation of vitality exertion:
Vitality refers to the winds
Exertion refers to the movements through the sense doors and so forth. 
[BP1:  Vitality refers to the subtle wind that moves in and out of the body through the hair pores, sense organs and so forth. 
Exertion refers to the distracted mind that wanders to all sorts of different objects. 
“Retention of those winds internally without letting them disperse externally” means to retain that subtle wind internally. With respect to exertion, it means to keep the mind inward by focusing on some object. In essence, it means not letting the wind out of the body but retaining it internally within the body and not letting the mind be distracted with discursive thoughts but retaining it internally by focusing on some object. 
By combining vitality exertion and retention, one then recites the mantra without deterioration of the four branches in Action Tantra.]
The idea of winds or energies is very important concept in tantra. Wind is likened to a healthy person who is able to walk but unfortunately is blind. 
Wind is likened to a blind person who is able to walk. The wind is able to move but the wind itself does not have the capacity to illuminate objects i.e. it does not have capacity to be aware or to realize objects. 
The mind is likened to somebody who is crippled and cannot walk but nevertheless is able to see. So the mind is like a person who is able to see but is unable to walk. So the mind has capacity to illuminate objects i.e. to perceive or to realize objects.
The meaning of vitality exertion is most profound and clear in Highest Yoga Tantra. Generally when we talk about vitality exertion or we talk about wind and mind, the mind is dependent on the wind.  Wherever the wind moves, the mind goes with it. If one is able to control the wind, then is the energies, because where the wind is where the mind will be. So it makes a difference if one is able to restrain the movement of the energies or winds. 
The meaning of restrain or restraining vitality exertion is retaining those winds internally without letting them disperse. It will come later on. Essentially one does the restraint at the level of the navel. 
Here it says engage in the practice of mantra recitations or repetition without deteriorating the four branches through combining restraint with vitality exertion. 
The four branches are:
Self basis, 
Other basis, 
Mind basis 
Sound basis.
[BP1:  On the basis of these four branches, one recites mantras without deteriorating the four branches through combining restraint with vitality exertion.]
KR: I think you have the chart. Actually it is the old notes from the last class. But the printer is not so clear so we re-type that. I mean this is an example of the chart. But I want you to make your own chart after listening. So it works for you. You learn better. At least there is some chart there. At the chart you can see, 6 deities there. After that you have 4 branched repetitions there. 
Four branches of recitation
The four branches of recitation are recitation committed while concentrating on and maintaining
(1) oneself as the basis, 
(2) another as the basis, 
(3) sound as the basis, and 
(4) mind as the basis
1. Recitation with oneself as the basis is recitation focusing on oneself possessing the body, speech, and mind of the deity.
2. Recitation with another as the basis focuses on the deity that has been invited to the space in front of you.
3. Recitation with sound as the basis focuses on the resonance of the mantric letters and syllables.
4. Recitation with mind as the basis focuses on seeing our own nature as the same as the light or resonance at the heart of the visualized deity
The 4 branched recitation or repetition consist of:
The self basis, 
The other basis, 
The mind basis 
The sound basis.
The self basis is yourself generated as the deity. At your heart there is a moon disc. On top of that you place the mantra garland. The self basis refers to the deity you have risen into. 
Other basis is the front generation that is generated together with the inestimable mansion.
[BP1: Other basis refers to the front generation. We visualise the inestimable mansion in the space in front of us. Inside the mansion, one generates the commitment being and then invokes the wisdom beings which enter and dissolve into the commitment being. If the practice of generating the commitment being is not in the text, then one can proceed directly to the invocation of the wisdom beings to take their places inside the mansion and one then makes offerings and praises to them. One then make offerings and praises to the front generation deity with the practice of the seven limbs and so forth.]
The mind basis refers to one’s own mind in the aspect of a moon disc. You visualize the moon disc in the heart of the meditated deity. 
[BP1: Mind basis refers to visualizing a moon disc at the heart of oneself as the deity and at the heart of the front generation deity. On those moon discs, we place the mantra garland that we are going to recite. The letters of the mantra on the moon discs is the sound basis.]
The sound basis is placing the mantra garland of the mantra that is to be recited on the moon disc that is in the heart of the meditated deity.
You have the self basis which is the self generation.
Then you have the other basis which is the front generation. 
You have the mind basis which is your own mind but appearing in the form of a moon disc. You place the moon disc in the heart of the self-generation and in the heart of the front-generation. 
The sound basis is the mantra garland of the mantra you are supposed to recite. You place the mantra garland on the moon disc in your heart and in the heart of the front generation. 
These are the 4 basis. You are supposed to concentrate on these without any distraction.
As said in the text that you are supposed to engage in recitation without deterioration of the four branches of recitation. First, you have to meditate well on these four branches. On that basis you engage in the mantra repetition.
There are two ways of repetition of the mantra:
1) Repetition the mantra by observing the form of the letters of the mantra. 
1. Repetition observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front 
2. Repetition observing the form of the letters at one’s own heart 
2) Repetition the mantra by observing the sound of the mantra. 
We are now at the concentration with repetition. With regards to the kind of repetition, you repeat mantra by focusing on the letters of the syllables of the mantra. Then you repeat the mantra by focusing on the sound of the mantra.
Khen Rinpoche: I think it must be in the chart there. 
How does one engage in the mantra repetition while observing the form of the letters or the mantric syllables at the heart of the deity in front? 
As for the mantra repetition observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front, there are three objects of observation:
The deity in front
The moon disc in the heart of the deity
The mantra garland on the moon at the heart of the deity
So there are three objects of observation.
As for the manner of repetition while observing these three things, we say verbal or mental recitation. Here we say whispered or verbal recitation. When you recite mantra you are not supposed to do it loudly. When you are doing the verbal recitation: 
You shouldn’t be doing loudly, 
You shouldn’t be doing too softly
You shouldn’t be doing too quickly
You shouldn’t be doing too slowly. 
You shouldn’t be omitting syllables or adding syllables. 
One has to engage in the verbal recitation without the faults of omission or addition made, too fast or too slow, too loud or too soft. The recitation shouldn’t be interrupted by speech. You shouldn’t be reciting mantras while your mind is distracted. Rather the recitation has to be done while keeping attention on and focus on the objects of observation. In this case there are three.
While the purpose of this practice is ultimately leads the individual towards gaining a stable concentration. It is supposed to lead the meditator towards calm abiding, special insight and towards the abandonment of the two obscuration. As such, if you recite the mantra too loudly or making lots of noise or kind of sitting there just mouthing away but the mind is distracted, i is an obstacle to achieve the primary goal which is moving towards calm abiding.
Even if you are not talking in the context of acting as an obstacle to the development of concentration but when you recite mantra loudly, you might bring about a host of other problems, interferences and so forth. If you recite the mantra too loudly, even if you are not meditating but people around you who are meditating might be disturbed.  So the mantra shouldn’t be recited too loudly. Loudly here means that people can hear what you are reciting. Mantra shouldn’t be recited too softly as well to the point that you cannot even hear what you are reciting. You have to recite the mantra in such a way that others cannot figure out what you are reciting but yet you must be able to hear what you are reciting. 
Khen Rinpoche: I noticed in the Vajra-Yogini retreat in Bali, some are very loud.
While there are also instructions on how one should not count whatever the mantras you have accumulated. Let’s say, half way through the mala you suddenly yawn, sneeze, cough, and fart as well then that cannot count. 
Khen Rinpoche: That is no exception.
The point here is to develop concentration. Usually when the mind is distracted, things like these happened. Basically that takes your mind away. So the idea is to starts again when you lost the focus on your objects of observation. So the idea of starting again so that you start again with a renew sense of determination to continue, to do it better, and not to be distracted.
There is the wisdom recitation. There is the mental recitation. Here, the practice of restraining the vitality exertion comes into play.
The mental recitation is done while holding the wind is at the navel. There are winds in the upper part of the body and the winds in the lower part of the body. 
So you bring the wind in the upper part of the body down to the navel.
You bring the winds at the lower part of the body up to the navel. 
Once the winds are brought to the navel you attempt to hold it at the navel. 
Within the state of holding the winds at the navel, you engage in the mental recitation.
Without some familiarization, you will have difficult to hold the winds at the navel for a long time. By holding the winds and if the winds abide at the navel, the mind is also able to abide easily. The point is that you hold the wind at the navel for as much as you can. When you cannot continue anymore, let the wind goes. Once you release the wind then you engage in the whispered repetition.
That is the recitation observing the form or letters in the heart of the deity in front. There are two types of repetition:
Whispered repetition
Mental repetition
[BP1: RECITING THE MANTRA BY OBSERVING THE FORM OF THE LETTERS OF THE MANTRA 
Recitation observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front 
During this recitation, we focus on the front generation deity in the heart of which there is a moon disc. On that moon disc are the letters of the mantra. By observing these three together, we then recite the mantra. 
There are two ways in which the mantra can be recited: 
(1) mental repetition, i.e., silently or 
(2) whispered repetition, i.e., softly with sound. 
The main purpose for mantra repetition through the four branches is to develop single-pointed concentration. To develop concentration, we need to restrain the vitality exertion. Here we do the mental repetition by observing the form of the letters. We do so through reciting the mantra mentally and combining it with the vitality exertion and retention to stop the movement of the wind. 
With respect to the wind in the body, there is the wind in the upper and lower parts of the body. We seek to control these winds by gathering them at the navel and then making them remains there as long as possible. Whilst retaining the winds at the navel, one focuses on the front generation deity together with the moon disc at its heart together with the letters of the mantra on the moon disc. By observing these three while retaining the winds at the navel, one performs the mental repetition. 
In Tantric teachings, the wind (or subtle energy of the body) is the mount of the consciousness, meaning the consciousness is the rider and the wind is like the horse. If we are unable to control and stop the movement of this subtle energy, then it is very difficult to stop discursive thoughts and distractions from arising. That is why we have to do this practice of vitality exertion and retention. In the beginning, one is only able to retain the wind for a short time but with practice, this duration can be extended. This can be achieved slowly and through such practice, one would be able to develop single-pointed concentration. When the repetition is done through restraining the vitality exertion, there is no room for whispered repetition. One can only perform the mental repetition.
Recitation observing the form of the letters inside one’s heart. 
When we do this recitation in connection with the four branches, we go through the process described earlier. 
When we inhale, we visualise that the moon disc with the letters of the mantra in the heart of the front generation deity comes into our heart with our breath. We then stop breathing and hold our breath. While doing this, we observe the moon disc and the letters of the mantra and perform the mental recitation. The moon disc and the letters of the mantra are the two objects of observation. 
When we are unable to hold our breath any longer, we exhale and visualise that the moon disc together with the letters of the mantra at one’s own heart go back to the heart of the front generation deity. Then the process is repeated.
RECITING THE MANTRA BY OBSERVING THE SOUND OF THE MANTRA 
Here, the objects of observation are not the deity’s body, the moon disc or the letters of the mantra. Rather the object of observation in this practice is the sound of the mantra which we observe as we perform the mental repetition. 
When we perform this repetition observing the sound of the mantra, we are reciting the mantra mentally in our mind. We visualize the sound of the mantra resonating when we recite the mantra mentally whilst restraining the wind.
When we perform the recitation of mantra through the four branches: 
1. First we generate ourselves as the deity by means of the six deities. That is the self basis. 
2. After that, we visualise the deity in front of us, i.e., the front generation deity. That is the other basis. 
3. Once that is done, we visualise a moon disc at the heart of ourselves as the deity and the heart of the front generation deity. That is the mind basis. 
4. When that is done, we visualise the mantra garland on the moon disc at one’s heart and the heart of the front generation deity. That is the sound basis. 
When these four branches are completed, then we perform the repetition of mantra: 
1. First, we repeat the mantra by observing the form of the letters at the heart of the front generation deity. 
2. When that is done well, we repeat the mantra by observing the form of the letters at our own heart. 
3. Only when that is done well, then we move on to the repetition observing the sound of the mantra. 
The latter practices should only be done when the earlier ones are performed well.
Between the whispered and mental recitations, we should first perform the whispered recitation followed by the mental recitation. When reciting the mantra, we should avoid the following faults: 
1. one should not recite the mantra too quickly 
2. one should not recite the mantra too slowly 
3. one should not recite the mantra loudly 
4. one should not recite the mantra so softly that you yourself cannot hear what you are 
reciting 
5. one should not recite the mantra while talking 
6. the mantra should not be recited when the mind is distracted 
7. one should recite the mantra by pronouncing it clearly. 
We should avoid these faults while reciting the mantra which are mentioned in The Tantra Requested by Subahu. 
The Susiddhi Tantra mentions the number of recitations that are required when one is performing the approximation of the deity. 
• For mantras with 15 syllables or less, each syllable has to be recited 100,000 times. For example, if the mantra consists of ten syllables, one would have to recite 10 x 100,000 mantras, i.e., one million recitations. In the approximation of Tara whose mantra has 10 syllables, we have to recite 1 million Tara mantras. If we are performing the approximation of Chenrezig and using the six-syllable mantra, OM MANI PADME HUM, then we have to do 600,000 mantras. 
• For mantras with 16 to 32 syllables, the mantra has to be recited 300,000 times. 
• For mantras with more than 32 syllables, e.g., for the approximation of Sangye Migtukpa, 10,000 recitations can be counted as an approximation. 
Action Tantra emphasises external activities especially cleanliness. So, if during the course of the mantra recitation one falls asleep, sneezes, yawns or breaks wind, then one would have to stop the recitation and one cannot count the mantras that one has accumulated. One would have to perform the ritual of blessing and cleansing oneself. After that is done, one can then start the recitation again. At the end of the session, with the mudra of the vase, one offers the root virtues accumulated from the recitation to the deity. One leaves one’s rosary in front of the deity without bringing it elsewhere and stops the session.]
Q&A
Student 1: Could you just repeat the part that you have just explained about the mental repetition? It has specifically something to do with the mantra, how is the mantra involved in it? I heard the winds goes from up to navel and then from down to navel and then hold it there. Are you doing something with your mind looking at the mantra or what?
Khen Rinpoche: We are talking about the repetition while observing the forms of the letters at the heart of the deity in front. The objects of observation are:
the deity’s body 
the moon disc, the mind basis, at the heart of the deity. 
the mantra garland of the deity
These three are the objects of observation. While focusing on these three without distraction then you are supposed to engage in repetition - whether it is the whispered repetition or the mental repetition. You are supposed to recite the mantra either verbally or mentally.
Student 2:  Is there any difference between an initiation and empowerment
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know. In Tibetan it is oong (?) and it is translated as initiation or empowerment.
Student 2: When you are talking about the empowerment related to action tantra, there was mentioned of flower garland initiation. I don’t know whether that is like part of the initiation, because it was said that there were two main initiations in action tantra called the water initiation and the crown initiation.  I am just wondering does the flower garland initiation only happen in action tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: No. Other tantra also have.
Student 2: In the root text, there is also something called the final empowerment of the ritual objects which Khen Rinpoche did not mentioned. I just wonder what that is.
Khen Rinpoche: In some of the action tantra initiation, after the water and the crown initiation such as in the Chenrezig,  at the end you will find there is a ritual of bestowing the seven possession of a wheel turning king, the precious wheel and jewel and so forth.
Sometimes there is some kind of symbolic giving of the action tantra text to the disciple. In action tantra, there isn’t a vajra master initiation. Since the disciple has received the empowerment or initiation, what it symbolizes is like giving permission so the disciple in the future to teach the path of the action tantra.
Student 2: People who are allowed to come to this class must all have already had a Highest Yoga Tantra initiation. For example, now we are studying tantric teachings in details after we have already taken initiation. Prior to that we don’t quite know what is going on.
Khen Rinpoche: I think so.
Student 2: For action tantra, before you step into tantra, you can read some books like introduction to tantra or the bodhisattva vows. But if you are going to take the tantric vows you have no idea what those vows are beforehand. Half of the time, we don’t know what is going on and we have to be initiated before we can take teachings.
Khen Rinpoche: Actually to receive an initiation is not rocket science. To receive initiation actually is one of the easiest things. You don’t have to do any study, and in fact just stand up.
You understand what I am saying? To receive initiation you don’t need to study anything. That is what I am talking.
For example, the person who is giving you initiation holds up the crown. When he made the gesture of putting on your head and says “Now you imagine that the crown is put on your head and in the future you will achieve this and this and you will attain that and that.” Then you just think “Yes, I have received the initiation” and feels very happy. That is it and you received the initiation. As simple as that.
Are you asking whether you have received the initiation? When the guru said “Now you have received the initiation” and you generated the thought “Yes, I received it.” Then you received it.
When you have the idea “Yeah, I received this” and feel kind of achieved something and feel good about it, then you received the initiation..
Initiation works like that. That is it. You don’t have to know what the five dhyani Buddhas is. Simple as that. You don’t think is like that? All works like this so far. The point is that at that time you really think you have received and generate some happy feeling in the mind. Then you received initiation and leave an imprint. Then after that study. That is it. You want more details then you studied. Of course when you studied you know better, you meditate better. Again you take initiation you receive different type of initiation. Initiation has many different levels, not just one level..
One of the highest forms of receiving initiation is that just by receiving an initiation then the realization of the path is born in the mind. So that is the highest form of receiving initiation. For example, if you attend an action tantra initiation and when the crown is put on your head, just like that, you suddenly develop the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. Then you enter the tantric path, then that is really receiving an initiation.
Don’t worry. When you take initiation, if you think you receive initiation but different level of initiation received. If guru talk, you sleep then nothing go inside then no initiation. 
Questions to think about: 
In order to enter the tantric path do you first have to enter the sutric path? 
Does the person who enters the Highest Yoga Tantra path needs the realization of emptiness or not? 
Khen Rinpoche: You got two questions? Next class, if I ask, you must be able to say something with reason.
[BP1: Question: 
Why do we visualise the moon and not the sun disc at the heart? 
Answer: In the mind basis, we visualise the moon disc whether it is in the heart of the deity in front or oneself as the deity. The entity of the moon disc is one’s mind which we visualise in the form of a moon disc. 
In certain texts, the deity has three seats: the lotus, moon and sun discs. In that context,
 the lotus symbolises renunciation, 
the moon disc symbolises bodhichitta and 
the sun disc symbolises the wisdom realising emptiness. 
This is to make us understand that the deity who is seated on these three seats has brought to culmination these three realisations, i.e., the deity has completely realised renunciation, bodhichitta and the wisdom realizing emptiness. 
Question: When is the whispered recitation done? 
Answer: Whispered recitation is done in all the forms of repetition that we have discussed so far. We have been discussing the different forms of recitation mainly from the perspective of mental recitation. Actually, whispered recitation should be done first before the mental recitation. 
There is the whispered repetition observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front, observing the form of letters at one’s heart and observing the sound of the mantra.
Question: With regards to the number of mantras that have to be accumulated in retreat, do we divide them between whispered and mental recitations? 
Answer: The counting is done on the basis of the whispered recitations. We do not count the mental recitations. The main purpose of doing the mental recitations is to develop single-pointed concentration.]
Handout: