Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L15.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:19.967605
================================================================================

At the end of class last session, I asked you a question:
Is it necessary to have entered the Causal Perfection Vehicle path before entering the Resultant Vajra Vehicle path?
Do you have any answers to that question?
Isn’t it the case that when the entire path structure is presented, it talks about the path of the person of small capacity, then the person of medium capacity and the person of great capacity. Only then it talks about tantra, isn’t it?
If you look at the Stages of the Path literature, it talks about the 6 perfections and particular in Lama Tsongkhapa’s Lam Rim, he discussed calm abiding and special insight as a separate topic. He did talk about the 6 perfections and in particular he focused on the last 2 perfections. Only then he talked about tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: Understand the question? Now answer. Just make short. If you say no, then explain the reason. Anybody is welcomed. We are all learning. Please be brave. If you have thought about it then is good to share.
Student 1: It is not necessary for you to actually go through the whole path. I remember in one of the lesson you actually mentioned that…..
Khen Rinpoche: Not whole path. My question is not that. Listen to my question.
Question: In order to enter the path of the Resultant Vajra Vehicle, must one have necessarily entered the path of a Causal Perfection Vehicle?
Khen Rinpoche: That is my question. 
Student 1: I mean my understanding is actually not really right. Then I don’t have an answer.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, then sit down. The question haven changed from last night up till now. The question is the same.
Student 2: Khen Rinpoche, I think we got the question a bit differently so now.
Khen Rinpoche: Same.
Student 2: It sounds different. The question is: In order to enter the tantric path, do you first have to enter the sutric path? …
Khen Rinpoche: Means the same. The meaning is exactly same. What I have said in the previous night, the word is different but the meaning is the same. Before entering to the tantric path, do you have to enter into sutric path? Same question is being asked now. It is exactly the same. No different. 
Student 3: I think the answer is still no. If a person meet with a tantric teaching and trains in the common path shared with the small, medium and great without having generate a path but having met the tantric teaching and then he generate the uncontrived special bodhicitta and then he enters the tantric path without having to enter the sutric path.
Khen Rinpoche: Good answer. Correct answer. 
Student: 2:  Can I just add to that. Based on my hearing on what I heard that day, I actually wanted to ask if or rather to say because the sutric path in a way is included in the tantric path. When you enter the path, here the word is “path” so you will have to generate a renunciation together with uncontrived bodhicitta. In that sense, the answer is no.
Khen Rinpoche: She say no. I mean this is good in sharing your view. She said no. You said yes. 
Student 2: Sorry, my answer is no.
Khen Rinpoche: But just now what you are saying is yes answer, not the no answer.
Student 2: No, you don’t have to enter the sutric path because…
Khen Rinpoche: Because you said you have to have renunciation. Without renunciation, without bodhicitta, how do you enter into tantric path? You said that, isn’t it?
Student 2: But then the tantric path includes…
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t that without renunciations, without bodhicitta, how do you enters into tantra path? You said that. That means necessary. 
Student 2: In order to enter the tantric path, you generated a path. So that path must have renunciation and uncontrived bodhicitta. 
Khen Rinpoche: Before the tantric path. isn’t it?
Student 2: You can’t have it simultaneous? No, you can’t. 
Khen Rinpoche: You can’t. So have to go first. So actually you said yes. She said no. According to Student 2, she said to enter tantric path; you must have renunciation and bodhicitta. Without that, how to enter in tantric path?  So what you are going to said, Student 3.
Khen Rinpoche: This is how the debate works you know. 
Student 3: Actually I thought you already taught that when you generate bodhicitta, at the same time you generate uncontrived renunciation, isn’t it? When you generate uncontrived bodhicitta, at the same time the mind of renunciation is also….
Khen Rinpoche: How you phrase your sentence is not correct. I didn’t say that. What you have said I didn’t say that. 
Khen Rinpoche: I never said generate renunciation and bodhicitta are simultaneous. I never said that.
Student 3: Then how to phrase it correctly?
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know.
Student 2: Isn’t special bodhicitta only generated for Highest Yoga Tantra? It doesn’t apply to action tantra. It only applies to Highest Yoga Tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: No.
Student 2: In the sense of I must quickly and more quickly achieve enlightenment. 
Student 3: So for a person of definite Mahayana lineage, when you generate the mind of bodhicitta, at the same time the mind of renunciation is generated. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah. That is correct. So you must understand what you said first time and second time is totally different. But you have to answer to Student 2. 
She said that entering into tantric path must enter into sutric path because you have to have renunciation and bodhicitta. Without that you can’t enter into tantra path. 
Do you accept what she said?
Student 3: No. 
Khen Rinpoche: Explain reason. 
Student 3: Can I assume that for those who enter the tantric path first time directly without sutric path, they are of definite Mahayana lineage?
Khen Rinpoche: That one you have already explained. I said correct answer. Good answer.
Student 3: So that means when he generates the mind of bodhicitta, at the same time the mind of renunciation would have been generated, so it is not necessary for him to have generated the mind of renunciation first. 
Student 2: I didn’t say that. 
Student 3: But I thought you said that you have to generate mind of renunciation first?
Student 2:  Don’t you need to have a mind of renunciation in order to generate uncontrived bodhicitta?
Student 3: Mind of renunciation but not uncontrived renunciation.
Khen Rinpoche: Debate doesn’t become emotional. This is the dharma debate.  Sometimes have to be careful. Sometimes during debate, pointing own view is right, then becomes difficult. The whole idea is how. Also you didn’t get what she is saying. Anybody has different view?
Student 4: I thought I heard Khen Rinpoche mentioned that you have to practice the shared path, enter the mandala and then receive the inner initiation. That means they have to practice the preliminaries of the path shared with the person of small capacity and medium capacity first. After that, enter the person of great capacity and to practice and train bodhicitta. When the uncontrived bodhicitta and the renunciation are awakened simultaneously, they enter the Mahayana small Path of Accumulation. Then they train in the 6 perfections, the mind generation and also the four ways of gathering disciples. Then after that, they enter the tantric path.
Khen Rinpoche: I said that?
Student 4: No. I say I heard you mentioned that you need to do the shared path then you enter the mandala and receive the initiation. I only elaborate what you said. I may not be right. 
Khen Rinpoche: Because your elaboration is not correct. 
Student 4: That is fine. Do they need to practise the preliminaries - the reflection of cyclic existence, shared with the person of the small capacity and person with the medium capacity before they enter the path of a great…
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. That definitely need. That is needed. That is no question. But my question is : in order to enter in tantric path, whether you need to have bodhicitta first or not? That is the question. Question is same but I am asking in different way
Student 4: I would say is yes, because that is the basis for entering…
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, without entering the sutric path, you are not able to enter the tantric path.
Student 4: I thought the basis of entering the Mahayana path, you need the uncontrived bodhicitta. So whether is for the sutric vehicle or for the resultant vehicle, they still need bodhicitta first. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah. That is no question. Of course need bodhicitta is no doubt. But my question is not that.  Prior to entering to tantra, do you need bodhicitta or not? So this is the question. I am asking the same thing. 
Student 4: But your question is so simple but difficult to fathom.
Khen Rinpoche: I think you all understand my question. Which position you think correct?
Prior to entering the tantric path, one must have trained in the shared paths. One must have generated the paths that are shared with the person of small capacity and medium capacity. On that basis, then one trains to develop love and compassion and leading up to a mind wishing to achieve enlightenment quickly by depending on the tantric path. For such an individual then is able to enter the tantric path on the outset without having to enter the sutric path.
Those who enter the tantric path from the onset, those of the definite tantric lineage, the love and compassion that they develop prior to entering the tantric path is in much stronger form. In short, there are individuals who are of the definite tantric lineage who enter the tantric path from the beginning. 
There are two kinds of people:
Those who are with special bodhicitta enter the tantric path, those of the definite tantric lineage, receive initiation and enter into the mandala and ripen their minds for the practice of tantra. Then they travel the tantric path. 
There are others who enter the sutric path and travel all the way to the end of the 10th ground before entering the tantric path. 
Therefore, there are this two kinds of trainees:
 those who enter the tantric path from the onset, who are of the definite tantric lineage and
 those who generate the sutric path first and then subsequently entering the tantric path. 
Another question: So do you need to realize emptiness prior to entering the tantric path?
Come. Ready then say. Be brave. We are all learning so don’t need to shy. 
Student 5: I think the answer is yes because for tantric practice, the practice of wisdom and method has been fused in one consciousness.
Khen Rinpoche: You have to listen to what she said. You must think to what she answered. Is she answering my question or not?
Her answer is that you need the realization of emptiness prior to entering the tantric path because the very essence of the tantric path is fusing method and wisdom into one indivisible entity. These two can be found in one consciousness. How is that an answer to the question?
Student 6:  I guess she answer to your question by assuming that if we can fuse wisdom and method together. It means that we have realized emptiness related to wisdom. I think we don’t need to realize emptiness to enter the tantric path. The only condition I can see to entering the tantric path is to get a special bodhicitta. So I don’t see realizing emptiness as a condition per se to enter the tantric path.
Khen Rinpoche: Good. It is good she said yes, and he said no. Student 2 said yes, Student 3 says no. You also need to think at the same time. Before I ask second question, anybody?
Student 2: Yes, need to realize emptiness to enter. If I’m not mistaken, your question was to enter the Highest Yoga Tantra path, it wasn’t just tantric path. Anyway that is what I got. So realize emptiness to enter the Highest Yoga Tantra path because they need to take desire into the path and to meditate on deity yoga, to transform the most subtle wind and the most subtle mind. These have to be done on the basis of emptiness as the object from the sutric view and the emptiness of oneself as the subject who is the basis of accomplishment for becoming the deity. 
Khen Rinpoche: I didn’t get. Too long. My mind cannot catch up everything. I want short answer. My English cannot catch up what you are trying to say. So I need short answer. You need to realize emptiness before entering the tantric path. Why? Give me reason why.
Student 2:  Practising on the basis because you are going to practise deity yoga. For Highest Yoga Tantra in terms of deity yoga. You need to have the view of emptiness from the sutra point of view but you also have to have the emptiness of oneself as the practitioner generating into the deity. In short practise deity yoga is emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore you don’t have to specifically say Highest Yoga Tantra. All tantra is the same, isn’t it.
Student 2: Yeah. 
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, to enter to tantra, no need to say Highest Yoga Tantra. Enter to tantra, you need to realize emptiness?
Student 2: Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: Because?
Student 2: Because you have to have the two kinds of emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: Two kinds of emptiness?
Student 2: When we study tenets in sutra, we are taking emptiness as the object. I think that was also from one of your earlier classes. 
Khen Rinpoche: The explanation was done really during the explanation of the empty deity. 
In order to meditate on the empty deity, do you need the mind realizing emptiness or not?
Student 2: Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why?
Student 2: Otherwise there won’t be any possibility of generating the empty deity. 
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore you cannot do deity yoga? I’m asking you. 
Student 2:  Cannot do deity yoga without emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore yourself cannot do deity yoga? Because you don’t have realizing emptiness? What do you think? What are you going to answer?
Student 2: But then I’m not practising any solely qualified deity yoga. Mine is just pretend deity yoga.
Khen Rinpoche:  I’m not talking about whether fully qualified to enter into the path. That is not my question.  You do deity yoga or not?
Student 2: Not the properly qualified one.
Khen Rinpoche: Self generation? Or sadhana?
Student 2: Yes. Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: How you do?
Student 2: Inferential cognition of emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche:  Debate session sometimes you cannot be serious okay
So you have inferential cognizer of emptiness. So that means you realize emptiness
Student 2: Generally I would think that that was what the question was asking. Do you have to have a realization of emptiness in order to enter the actual tantric paths? I’m not on the tantric path. I mean to enter the path means having the shared paths and all those things that we’ve just talked about, I thought that was what you are asking: in order to actually enter a tantric path in the sense of generating a path. 
Khen Rinpoche: You have to realize emptiness. Why? Your reason follows like that. 
No. How good debate you must follow. You said you have to realize emptiness before entering tantra. I asked what the reason is. Because you have to meditate on the emptiness of the deity, isn’t it? What can you do with the emptiness of the deity meditation? Doesn’t have to enter tantric path. 
Student 2: But here we are talking about properly qualified tantric path.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, I’m talking about perfectly qualified tantra. I’m talking about that of course. My question is clear.
Student 2: Anyway, you need emptiness in order to practice deity.
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, you are not answering my question. I mean sometimes it is good that you say it out so you know how much you know. Otherwise, in one sentence, you think you know but you don’t know.  Sometimes one to one is very good to know how deep you have there. So what is the answer now? Student 6’s  answer is good and correct. You remember his answer? 
(Student response is inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: The essence of his answer is to enter into tantric path you don’t have to realize emptiness. Is that true?
Student 7: You don’t need to have a direct or inferential realization of emptiness as long as you have a good understanding of emptiness as a start. In tantra, it looks like initially meditating and purifying everything into emptiness. After that, you reflect on the emptiness of inherent existence. Then you generate as a deity. At least you have a good understanding of emptiness initially, then you can train. Eventually when you are good enough, you have inferential realization. Better still if you have direct realization. For a start, I say a good understanding of emptiness is sufficient. 
Khen Rinpoche: Your conclusion is…..
Student 7: My answer is you don’t need a realization. Here realization means either direct or inferential. At this stage, I don’t think you need that. A good understanding of that , you can train from there. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, same as 
Student 7: Student 6 mentioned special bodhichitta.
Khen Rinpoche: That needs what. That is what he said. What Sebastian say is correct: You need a special bodhichitta to enter into tantric path. 
Student 7: (Reply inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, you are at same position. The same thing as what he said. Exactly same. No difference.
Khen Rinpoche: First you say “Yes” or “No”, then explain.
Student 8: I want to ask her a question. If someone who has no understanding of emptiness at all, but just have special bodhichitta, can he enter the path? 
Khen Rinpoche:  You didn’t get everything of what she has said. She said you must have good understanding of emptiness. Doesn’t have to be inferentially realizing emptiness. With a good understanding of emptiness and have special bodhichitta, you can enter into tantra. Conclusion is that. 
Student 8: I feel there is something wrong with the conclusion. So I’m asking her.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, ask now. 
Student 8: My question is if someone who doesn’t have any understanding of emptiness at all, but just have special bodhichitta, can he enter the path? 
Khen Rinpoche: You still didn’t get what she said. She already said to enter into tantra you must have good understanding of emptiness. She already confirmed that. Why you ask question? 
(Student response inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: How to enter tantra? Not possible. That is why you must listen to what people say.  Then you ask. 
Student 9: If I realize the emptiness of a self-sufficient substantially existent person but I understand all phenomena to be inherently existent, and I have special bodhichitta and I take the initiation to action tantra, have I entered the action tantra path? I see and hold on to the view all phenomena are inherently existent. Have I entered the action tantra path?
Khen Rinpoche: That is a good question. I consider a very good question. Somebody answer. 
Student 2: Maybe I would like to clarify my understanding of the terms. Based on the discussion we had, when you say enter a tantric path, am I wrong because I’m thinking of a previously in the discussion of sutra, you corrected me as well. Anyway because here I thought path necessarily meant having to generate a path similar to the paths and grounds that we were taught earlier. Here it seems as if the word path has a different meaning. That is why I would like to clarify.
Khen Rinpoche: Path is same meaning. Path is not different meaning. Bodhichitta is same meaning. Emptiness is same meaning. There is no difference. Path is path. Renunciation is renunciation. Bodhichitta is bodhichitta. Path is path. All the same. No difference. Anybody answer the question? Student 7: If I’m not mistaken. (Asking Student: 9) You are saying that if a person has special bodhichitta but still hold the view of inherent existence of phenomena, then do you enter the path? 
(Student response inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche (in English): His question is what? You have special bodhichitta then what?
Student 9: You have a coarser understanding of selflessness, for example, understanding the self-sufficient substantially existent person does not exist whatsoever. But you hold on that everything, person and phenomena are inherently existent can be found from the side of the base. Then you develop special bodhichitta, you take the initiation into the mandala of action tantra. Have you entered the tantric path?
Student 8: I would say you have entered.
Student 9: Then you don’t need to have a correct understanding of emptiness. 
Student 8: But I said it is a good understanding. Just now earlier on, I did elaborate 
Student 9: Of inherent existence?
Khen Rinpoche: Listen, what you said is you must have correct good understanding of emptiness before entering the tantra. 
Student 8: Yes, good understanding.
Khen Rinpoche: (Good understanding)  Of emptiness. What do you mean by that?
Student 8: I just want to elaborate of what I mean by good understanding.  In tantra, you always meditate, purify everything into emptiness. Then after that you reflect on the emptiness of inherent existence. After that you generate. I qualify good understanding is related to my elaboration.
Student 9: But I hold on to it as inherent existence. Every phenomenon is inherently existent. I don’t need to abandon that. My view is I don’t have to abandon existence from its own side. 
Student 8: But then when you enter the path, you can …
Student 9: Have I entered the path or not with all those conditions present? Holding on to phenomena that inherently exist do not need to be abandoned. 
Student 8: But when you enter the path…
Student 9: Have I entered the path? 
Student 8: When you enter the path, you don’t need to …
Student 9:  Have I entered the path with all those conditions present holding on to all phenomena existing from the side of the base, and I don’t need to abandon that view. 
Khen Rinpoche: Having this kind of strong belief, can you still enter into tantra or not? With everything truly existent, you don’t think this have to be abandoned. Having this kind of concept in the brain, this kind of person can enter into tantra or not?
Student 8: This is not that die die you cannot change. Person can change, mind can change what. If you meet a good Mahayana teacher, then after that can teach you the Mahayana path, you can change. 
Khen Rinpoche: I’m not saying cannot change. That’s not about that. Having this concept and belief, can you still enter into tantra or not? That is the question. Of course you have to change to get enlightened. Without change not possible.
Student 8: But I thought as long as you have special bodhichitta you can consider enter the tantric path.
Student 9: So you do not need a good understanding of emptiness to enter tantra isn’t it?
Student 8: A good understanding doesn’t mean realization.
Student 9: But I hold on to inherent existence, is that a good understanding? 
Khen Rinpoche: That is a good shot. 
Student 8: I will go back and analyze one more time.
Khen Rinpoche: Anybody have different view? Yes? No? 
Student 10: I think I relate to Student 8 and Student 9 discussion back to what earlier student has just said that tantra is a path whereby you actually have to practice method and wisdom in one mind. So if you were to enter the path, although you have very strong bodhichitta but you do not have at least the correct assuming consciousness of emptiness, that doesn’t make you being really qualified even you take the initiation. Due to the lack of understanding of emptiness, you cannot actually practice tantra because the definition of tantra is practicing the method and wisdom in one mind.
Student 9: It follows that I cannot practice the six perfections because I don’t have wisdom realizing emptiness after entering the Mahayana sutra Path of Accumulation. Based on what you say, this is the consequence. Because you say without the wisdom realizing emptiness you cannot practice tantra.
Student 10: I say not wisdom realizing emptiness, at least a correct assuming consciousness of emptiness.
Student 9: Same, correctly assuming consciousness. 
Student 10: That is not really a realization. To me, I would take realization as at least inferential cognizer 
Student 9: Same thing.
Student 10: I mean if you have the understanding of wisdom realizing emptiness to the level of inferential cognition, to me is a realization. 
Student 9: Similarly, do you accept that I will not also be able to practice the six perfections upon entering the sutra Mahayana because I only have a doubt tending towards the factual on emptiness?
Student 10: But in sutric path, you do not need to have the method and wisdom to practice the path.
Student 9: Six perfections are not cultivated together?
Khen Rinpoche: You make short. I didn’t get exactly what you say.  In order to enter tantra, what is your point? You have to understand emptiness or not?
Student 10: In order to enter tantra, one’s understanding of emptiness to me is….
Khen Rinpoche): You need or not? 
Student 10: You need not realize emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: You need good understanding or not?
Student  10: Good understanding. Example are correct…..
Khen Rinpoche: Same as what Student 8 said? You are saying same thing, is it? 
Student 10: Yeah. 
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, the question already told. Those people who believe truly existence. With this kind of mind is right mind, don’t have to abandon, having this concept, you still can enter into tantra or not?
Student 10: That to me this is outside the boundary of my definition of correct understanding of emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: I know it is outside. Therefore, this person can enter into tantra or not? 
Student 10: No. This person who holds on to phenomena being inherent existent cannot enter into tantric path.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah. Your point is this person is outside your boundary, so this person cannot come inside. Correct?
Student 10: Correct.
Khen Rinpoche: What you going to say? People outside boundary, inside you say is not my boundary cannot come in. Finish. So now what?
Student 9: Just ask the consequence: Why do you need to realize emptiness in order to enter the path? Khen Rinpoche: Listen. She is not saying realize. 
Student 9: Correct understanding. 
Khen Rinpoche: Correct understanding.
Student 9: Why do you need a correct understanding of emptiness in order to enter the tantric path? 
Khen Rinpoche: That one easy to answer.
Student 10: Because the definition of tantric path is like once you enter the tantric path, you do have to practice method and wisdom throughout the path. 
Khen Rinpoche: It is funny what you say. You don’t what you are saying also, right? 
Student 10: No, no. I know what I’m trying to say. 
Khen Rinpoche: You say have to realize emptiness to enter the path, are you saying that or not? One way sounds like that, one way don’t need. You have two ideas. To enter the tantra, you need to realize emptiness or not?
Student 10: You need to have correct understanding of emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: But don’t have to realize emptiness. 
Student 10: Not realization, but correct understanding.
Khen Rinpoch: But just now you say because entering the tantra, wisdom and method have to be together. Then what? That means realization?
Student 10: That is realization. Oh. Okay.
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, now your question. 
Student 9: Already answer.
Khen Rinpoche: Not answer. What do you mean? She says this person outside the boundary cannot come in, what you say? You didn’t say.
Student 9: I ask: Why do you need the correct understanding in order to enter the path. Because your assertion is that you need a minimum of correct understanding of emptiness together with other conditions to enter the tantric path. But why do you need this correct understanding of emptiness? What is the purpose of that?
Student 10: Because the definition of tantric path…..
Student 9: Yeah, that one Khen Rinpoche has addressed already, and you can’t use that, right?
Khen Rinpoche: That one very simple, you can answer on that. Not so difficult. Already talked about six deity yoga. Very simple. From there you have idea what to answer for that question. 
Student 10: You have to purify the deity into emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: That’s it. Why you have to have good understanding of emptiness? Because in order to generate yourself into deity, we have the six deities and the first deity is deity emptiness, that means without understanding emptiness how you are going to meditate. Finish.
Student 9: I can purify all these with my understanding of selflessness according to the Mind Only School. Why not? I believe that through that path I can achieve enlightenment. All these six deities are purified through that realization of selflessness. 
Student 10: MOS has no problem. One can practice tantra using MOS. 
Student 9: You are contradicting yourself already.
Khen Rinpoche: You keep your position. What you are saying don’t change. Because of that emptiness of the deity you need good understanding. Then what? 
Student 9: So I say that if I hold on to the MOS view, I can also purify the six deities due to my understanding of selflessness. 
Student 10: No problem. 
Khen Rinpoche: You cannot say no problem. 
Student 9: It’s a lot of problem.
Khen Rinpoche: If you say no problem, that means you already finished.
Student 9: Your purifying the six deities is based on correct or goof understanding the emptiness of inherent existence, isn’t it? 
Student 10: Okay.
Student 9: But I’m not using any of that. I’m just using selflessness according to the MOS which I feel that everything is inherently existing from the side of the base. So it is absolutely totally wrong understanding of the final view of reality, isn’t it? Yet I can practice purifying the six deities or not? 
Student 11: Then it follows that Student 9, there is a tantric path that is union of ignorance and clarity of the deity.
Student 9: No pervasion. We are not discussing after that. We are talking about upon entry. After that whatever you develop that is a separate question. 
Student 11: I’m following her boundary, entering means that you must be able to practice correctly
Student 9: So that means I cannot purify all these and think that I have purified it based on the view of MOS after generating special bodhichitta and receive……
Student 10:  I learnt that even using MOS tenets one can actually practice tantra. There is no need to use CMWS. When you purify a deity, you need not purify a deity in the sense….
Khen Rinpoche: Come on. What is your position? Hold on and say that. You have to say that how to meditate on empty deity without understanding emptiness. I’m supporting you.
Student 10: That is outside my boundary of correct understanding of emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Boundary talk is completed now. Don’t talk. How to meditate emptiness of deity without understanding of emptiness? That is it. You understand what I say?
Student 10: Yeah.
Khen Rinpoche: Repeat.
Student 10: How to meditate on empty deity without correct understanding of emptiness? 
Khen Rinpoche: What is believe in MOS empty is not real empty, and it doesn’t work. You say like that. Must have good understanding of Prasangika view then only you can meditate deity.
Student 10: Only when one has a correct assuming consciousness of CMWS tenets, then one can be able to purify the deity into emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: For the sake of debate, I am saying that. Whatever I say doesn’t mean correct or wrong. Don’t believe me. You said that. Well said well said. She said that in order to have tantra, you have to have self-generation. In order to have self-generation, you have to have good understanding of emptiness. Good understanding of emptiness means Prasangika view, and MOS view doesn’t help. Therefore, cannot enter into tantra. 
Student 9: It doesn’t help you to achieve the result of that path. With what you just said, what is stopping someone to start or enter the path? What you just said or Khen Rinpoche help you to say doesn’t help you to achieve the result. That is no problem. Because all of us are Prasangika view. So you won’t achieve the result. But what is stopping somebody to start or enter the action tantra path? 
Khen Rinpoche: What is stop is because not understand correct of emptiness.
Student 10: Lack of understanding of emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why that is needed? You have to generate yourself as deity of emptiness. Empty deity first, at least you need to meditate that. Without how to have self-generation. If don’t have self-generation, how to enter tantra?
Student 9: That comes to Khen Rinpoche’s question. What is the self that is generated in dependence of the deity in self-generation?
Khen Rinpoche: No, no. Different question. 
Question: Prior to entering the tantric path, do you need to generate the mind that renounces cyclic existence? 
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? Now the question is: In order to enter the tantric path, prior to that, whether you need to have renunciation or not? 
Student (background) : Uncontrived?
Khen Rinpoche: When I say renunciation it is always understand uncontrived.
Student 10: No.
Khen Rinpoche: Explain.
Student 10: If one were to develop uncontrived renunciation before the path, then the person will generate a Hinayana path. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why? If we have renunciation, you mean we enter into Hinayana path?  Is that necessary? 
Student 10: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: My answer is given last class. That means if you enter into Mahayana path you have to enter Hinayana path?
Student 10: No.
Khen Rinpoche: Sit down. Your mind is not working. 
There is something to think about. What if I say: In order to enter the tantric path, you must have realized emptiness because the trainee of tantra has to possess faculty that is much sharper than the trainee of sutra. Isn’t it the case that in sutra when we talk about dull and sharp faculties, the sharp facultied trainees are the ones who realized emptiness prior to entering the path? That was clear long ago. Therefore, those who enter the tantric path must have realized emptiness prior to entering it.
You understand? If somebody say that, what you going to say?
We have already talked about the reasons why in sutra the sharp facultied trainees realized emptiness prior to generating the path. Because of this reason, the trainees who enter the secret mantra on the onset must have realized emptiness prior to entering the tantric path. Why? Because the trainees of the tantric path definitely have faculties that are much sharper than the trainees of sutra, isn’t it? 
Isn’t it? No? Tantra student is much sharper than sutra student. It is true. Because they are very sharp. Compared to sutra they are much sharper. That is why they get faster enlightenment. They are so clever and so sharp don’t need three countless eons. In one life time they go there. No sharp how to go? So now what? 
(Student response inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: What do you mean not sharper? Not sharper? 
Student 11: I am just toying around the idea. That are always exception. How about people who are of dull facultied has a lot of compassion. Through their extraordinary compassion and guru devotion they develop the kind of merits to be able to enter the tantric path. Given that such a bodhisattvas that have entered tantric path but have not realize emptiness. Based on the text page 23, it says: In general a suitable candidate may receive empowerment in either sand mandala, painted cloth mandala or an absorption mandala. If everyone who enters the tantric path would have realize emptiness why do we need the first two mandalas? I mean the third one will be enough because people who realize emptiness all will have no problem generating the absorption mandala.
Khen Rinpoche: You make question short for me. What you are asking short question. Conclusion and ask short.
Student 11:  If we said that everybody that enters the tantric path, prior to that have realize emptiness then it follows that when one receive empowerment, one only requires an absorption mandala, there is no necessity to have the sand mandala and painted-cloth mandala. The absorption mandala only requires concentration, so calm-abiding. If everybody who enters the tantric path has realized emptiness, every candidate should be able to generate an absorption mandala because calm-abiding would be achieved much earlier than that.
Khen Rinpoche: You don’t understand. Obtaining an empowerment and entering the tantric path are not mutually inclusive. There are not the same.
It doesn’t mean you receive empowerment, you receive initiation, you enter into the tantric path. It doesn’t mean that. It is not necessarily. Entering into the tantric path, at the minimum you must have this special bodhicitta. Otherwise, you cannot enter the tantric path. In order to receive tantric initiation, , you can enter any mandala. You have good concentration then you can use this mandala. 
Since the trainees of secret mantra definitely have sharper faculty than the trainees of sutra therefore trainees of tantra who enter the tantric path must necessarily have realized emptiness. What are you going to say to this? Our conversation is somewhere there.
Student 12: Yes, I have no problem with that. To enter the path of tantra you need to have realized emptiness. There is a difference between entering the path and doing the practice.
Khen Rinpoche: Of course there is a big difference. I have made clear that. Entering to the tantric path, you must have special bodhicitta. That is the boundary. In order to practice, you don’t necessarily enter the tantric path. It is very clear. So who is confused now? You confused whether entering the path or not?
Student 12: No. From my side, in order to generate a tantric path and it is assumed that it is a path, there is already the uncontrived renunciation in the mind. Because it is a tantra path, it is the special bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: Just before this sentence, what did you say?
Student12: I felt that uncontrived renunciation is subsumed in the fact that it is a path.
Khen Rinpoche: It is path. No?
Student 12:  Just to generate a path must have uncontrived renunciation, to me because it is a tantric path, sutra path, uncontrived renunciation already there. Because it is Mahayana, bodhicitta is there. Because it is tantra, it is a very special bodhicitta. To say that you have to realize emptiness to do tantra, to me is “Of course”.
Khen Rinpoche: Prior to generating bodhicitta, has the uncontrived renunciation already been generated? Yes or no?
Student 12: You are talking about the special bodhicitta for tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: Whatever, special or not it doesn’t matter. You think so?
Student 12: I think so.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Compulsory? Necessarily? Pervasive?
Student 12: To have renunciation before you generate bodhicitta?
Khen Rinpoche: Ya
Khen Rinpoche: Somebody asked question, I have already made clear before.
Student 12: I still have problem with that. People have tried to explain to me but I still not getting it.
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t the measure of entering the path, the generation of uncontrived renunciation?
Student 12: That is what I am saying
Khen Rinpoche: I am asking question.
Student 12: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: At the time, when the person of the definite Mahayana lineage generates bodhicitta. Upon generating bodhicitta, he enters the path or not? So, it follows that the definite Mahayana lineage must have entered the Hinayana Path prior to entering Mahayana path.
Student 12: I understand this whole discussion.
Khen Rinpoche: So, with what you have said? The final answer is what?
Student 12: The final answer is that the uncontrived renunciation and bodhicitta is in the mind of person of the definite Mahayana lineage when he enters the sutra path.
Khen Rinpoche: Correct.
Khen Rinpoche: My turn to ask question today. When I asked people to ask question, they don’t ask.
One must realize emptiness prior to entering the tantric path isn’t it?
Student 12: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: Realize emptiness? 
Student 12: Yes, I think so. I just want to check whether entering a path is an active decision in the mind of a practitioner like “Now I am going to cross over this line and I have entered the path.” It is an active and  I know I am going to do this. Or it is something that just arises spontaneously in the mind when one achieves that required conditions, for example, uncontrived bodhicitta according to Three Principles of the Path when suffering of others is so unbearable and day and night that is what you can think about. When that thought arises in the mind and you have uncontrived bodhicitta, and you enter the path automatically or does it have to be an active decision on the path “Now I am entering the path”.
Khen Rinpoche:  What do you mean by active? Why do you even have this question, is it have to do with two divisions of mind generation: aspirational and engaged or what?
There is two bodhicitta minds: aspirational and engaging bodhicitta. They are both enter into the path when you have this mind. When you said active I don’t know, you say entering the door or what, you said something? I don’t understand.
Student 12: I wasn’t thinking of aspirational or engaged bodhicitta when I had this question in my mind. I think I might have to phrase my question more clearly.
Khen Rinpoche: A path arises when uncontrived renunciation is developed. In order to enter the Mahayana path, what is the measure? As soon as the uncontrived bodhicitta arises, simultaneous with that, you enter the Mahayana path, isn’t it? Enter path doesn’t mean that you have to take one step and going. 
Student 12: I understand. It is spontaneous. Once you reach that measure then you enter the path.
Khen Rinpoche: In the practice of self-generation, what is it that is generated into the deity? It the self that is generated as the deity arises as the deity. What is this self that is generated as the deity? What is this I? Is it correct or wrong to generate our appropriated contaminated aggregates as the deity? 
Right or wrong? Give me a reason. Don’t say wrong, say wrong must give reason. You can’t say wrong and leave it like that. Of course, you must have reason behind that.
Student 13: The deity is going to be the causes for us to achieve the body of Buddha. Therefore based on the substantial cause point of view, we cannot generate something which are contaminated to be the deity body.
Khen Rinpoche: What? Why can’t you generate your body as deity? 
Student 13: Because it is contaminated.
Khen Rinpoche: What is wrong with that? It is contaminated why cannot generate as the deity?
Student 13: Therefore it cannot be the substantial cause for something which would be the substantial cause for us to achieve form body of the Buddha.
Khen Rinpoche: The meditated deity is the cause of enlightenment, isn’t it?
Student 13: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: It is not your contaminated body, isn’t it? 
Student 13: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: So what is wrong? What problem will that be if you meditate on our appropriated contaminated aggregates as the deity? 
Student 13: Something that is contaminated cannot be the substantial cause …
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, I agreed with that. Then?
The deity that you meditated on is that which becomes the deity. It is not your contaminated appropriated aggregates that becomes the deity, isn’t it?
Student 13: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: Now, make it simple. Your body is here. You visualize your body becomes the deity. You visualize your body transforms “I am deity like Mother Tara or whatever”. This kind of concept, this kind of visualization, imagine Tara and that becomes cause of the form body. 
Student 13: No
Khen Rinpoche: Why not? That was my question. 
Student 13: Your body….
Khen Rinpoche: That is not your body. Your body is just a basis. No?
Student 13: You are talking about the deity’s body or the contaminated body?
Khen Rinpoche: Your contaminated body is here. Now you visualize this contaminated body becomes empty. Now it becomes deity like that. Is that okay or not?
Student 13: No
Khen Rinpoche: Why?
Student 13: Shouldn’t be that way.
Khen Rinpoche: Why?
Student 13: Like what I said, the substantial cause of something should be something of the same nature. The substantial of a gold pot has to be gold. Therefore contaminated aggregates cannot be the substantial cause of the deity’s body.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the substantial cause according to Action Tantra?
Student 13: I don’t know.
Khen Rinpoche: Then gold’s cause has to be gold? Ok, the last one, then we are going to stop as the time is finished.
Student 14: The ascertaining factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity for the three lower classes of tantra is a coarse mind.
Khen Rinpoche: According to cause or according to what?
Student 14: According to the three lower classes of tantra
Khen Rinpoche : According to cause or according to what?
Student 14: Coarse, rough mind.
Khen Rinpoche: Compare to ?
Student 14: Compare to let’s say Highest Yoga Tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: Compare to sutra it is very subtle. No?
Student 14: Yes. The self that is generated upon the deity in Action Tantra, the self that is generated upon the deity and depending on the deity what sort of the self is that?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student1 4: The deity arises in dependence upon the ascertaining factor, the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. So there is a mind and the body in one entity. So for the three lower classes of tantra….
Khen Rinpoche: In all four classes of tantra we say that the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity,  this is generic tantric thing.
Student 14: But I am referring to the three lower classes of tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: It is all the same.
Student 14: But according to the three lower classes of tantra, that particular wisdom appearing as the deity is coarse …
Khen Rinpoche: It doesn’t matter, ok. Then?
Student 14: It is a coarse wisdom. For the self that arises in dependence of the deity that I has to be that which move from life to life up to the enlightenment in reality, therefore the I, the self that arises in dependence upon such a wisdom appearing as the deity, which is a coarse mind, is not that which moves on from life to life to enlightenment. Therefore there is no….
Khen Rinpoche: We talk from the perspective of Action Tantra. From the perspective of Action Tantra, by depending on Action Tantra, you can achieve enlightenment, right?
Student 14: In reality, no.
Khen Rinpoche: According to Action Tantra.
Student 14: Yes..
Ven Gyurme: What is it that achieved enlightenment? What is it that goes enlightenment? The apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as deity?
Student 4: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: What is it that becomes the form body? It is basically the mind itself. The consciousness, the wisdom realizing emptiness, becomes the form body.
Student 14: This does not work. It cannot work for them because of this. The consciousness cannot become the form body.
Khen Rinpoche: Aren’t both method and wisdom present together in that consciousness? In that consciousness, both method and wisdom exists.
Student 14: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: So, that wisdom that realizing emptiness is both the substantial cause for the dharmakaya and rupakaya,  isn’t it?
Student 14: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore the wisdom realizing emptiness acts as a substantial cause for form body, isn’t it?
Student 14: No pervasion.
Khen Rinpoche: Pervasion or no pervasion there no question to that.
Student 14: Wisdom acting as a substantial cause for the form body.
Khen Rinpoche: No? 
Student 14: No
Khen Rinpoche: What no?
Student 14: Consciousness cannot be form.
Khen Rinpoche: Whether you talk about substantial cause of rupakaya or the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity, it is that mind realizing emptiness, whether it appears as deity or not? The point is what is it that appears as deity? That wisdom, isn’t it? At the end of the day, you have to pinpoint something it is this wisdom realizing emptiness that acts as the substantial cause of both bodies. You can have this also in sutra.
Student 14: It is applied also like that?
Khen Rinpoche: It cannot apply in sutra? No? Yes?  
Isn’t it a unique feature of tantra that the present of both method and wisdom fused together in one indivisible entity? Isn’t that an essential uncommon characteristic of secret mantra? As such the etymology speaking, it has the word Vajrayana, isn’t it? 
Student 14: Inseparability yes.
Khen Rinpoche: So that doesn’t exist in Sutra.
Student 14: Yyes.
Khen Rinpoche: You think yes?
Student 14: No
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t have isn’t it?
Student 14: Inseparable one mind, no, not in sutra.
Khen Rinpoche: The method and wisdom found together in one consciousness is only found in secret mantra.
Khen Rinpoche: So, you think don’t have in Sutra?
Student 14: In one consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche: Ya
Student 14: No
Khen Rinpoche: You are sure?
Student 14: Accompanying it, together
Khen Rinpoche: I am not asking accompanying.
Student 14: It is not in one consciousness. No.
Khen Rinpoche: It follows that it exists in sutra because that is a mind that realizes the emptiness of the deity’s body. In sutra, is it possible to have a mind realizing emptiness of the deity’s body by taking the deity’s body as the focal object?
Student 14: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: So, it follows that in sutra, there is both method and wisdom present.
Student 14: Yes, method and wisdom is present.
Khen Rinpoche: In one mind. It can exist in sutra if you take the deity’s body as the focal object?
Student 14: But the deity’s body does not appear in equipoise directly realizing emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Equipoise not equipoise doesn’t matter.
Student 14: It doesn’t appear.
Khen Rinpoche: It is possible for a person in sutra to see a deity and then realize that the deity is empty of existing inherently. Within that realization, he realizes that, right? The deity is still appearing as that person is looking at the deity.
Student 14: But not directly. 
Khen Rinpoche: In Tantra you don’t need directly, isn’t it? You mean in Tantra, you don’t need directly understanding, isn’t it?
Student 14: Not initially. Subsequently you need to realize that.
Khen Rinpoche: Everything is subsequently
That is why you see in sutra, we can have the mind that has both method and wisdom. Yes?
Student 14: Okay.
Khen Rinpoche: I thought this is an uncommon feature of Vajrayana. Didn’t we say conclusively in one of the earlier lessons that in sutra, method and wisdom assist one another. They are conjoined with one another but there are not fused together. It is only in secret mantra that the two are fused together.I thought we conclusively decided that this was the case. Therefore the Vajrayana, the uncommon feature is both method and wisdom fused together inseparable entity in one mind. Because of this uncommon feature that, that is why tantra is more powerful as the path.
Handout 2
The stages of leaving the repetition performed in dependence on the Four branches:
1. Observation of the sound of the mantra
2. Form of the letters of the mantra on the moon in the heart of the deity in front
3. The moon in the heart of the deity in front
4. The body of the deity in front
5. One’s own divine body
6. The form of the letters standing on the moon disc at one’s heart
7. The sound of the mantra
8. Wisdom body
9. Form body
- The path of Action tantra is subsumed by three forms of meditation:
	1. Meditation on the deity’s body – Mahamudra
	Meditation on the six deities
	2. Meditation on the deity’s speech – Mantra
	Concentration with repetition:
		– Repetition observing the form of the letters
		– Repetition observing on the sound of the mantra
	Concentration without repetition:
		– Concentration abiding in fire
		– Concentration of abiding in sound
	3. Meditating on the deity’s mind – Suchness
		Concentration without repetition:
		– Concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound
[BP1] Summary of the explanation of four-branched repetition
In the four branches of repetition, there are: 
1) the self basis 
2) the other basis 
3) the mind basis 
4) the sound basis 
1) The self basis refers to how to one generates oneself as the deity. 
a. At the beginning of generating oneself as a deity, we have to reflect on the meaning of emptiness as clearly as we can. We meditate on how oneself as the meditator and the object that is being meditated upon, the deity, are both equal in the sense of not existing inherently. 
b. The mind that ascertains the meaning of emptiness is transformed into a moon disc. The entity of this moon disc is one’s mind in the aspect of a moon disc. 
c. We then visualise in the space above the moon disc, say, if we are doing the Chenrezig practice, the sound of the mantra, Om Mani Padme Hum reverberating in the space. The entity of this sound is the deity Chenrezig in the aspect of the sound of the mantra resonating in space. 
d. That sound then settles on the moon disc in the form of the letters of the mantra in the relevant colour, e.g. gold. 
e. We now visualise light rays emitting from the letters of the mantra touching and purifying sentient beings of their negativities and obscurations. 
f. We also visualise some of these light rays making offerings to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
g. All the light rays that were emitted now gather back into the letters of the mantra. 
h.The letters of the mantras together with the moon disc then completely transform into oneself as the deity Chenrezig with one face and four arms. 
i. After one is transformed into the deity, one blesses oneself with the respective mudra of the lineage, touching the five points – the heart, the space between the eyebrows, the throat, the right shoulder and left shoulder. One then thinks, “Now I have become the actual deity, Chenrezig.” 
j. Then one focuses on the appearance of oneself as the deity as clearly as possible. 
Now go through the whole process in your mind – what is the first thing to be done, what follows after that and so forth. This is how one performs the self generation. 
2) The other basis refers to how we generate the deity in front. We will not go into the details here as they are very clearly indicated in the practice text. 
• In the beginning, we generate the mandala in front. 
• in the centre of the mandala, we generate the deity using the same process as that explained for self-generation. 
• When the deity is generated in the centre of the mandala, one then thinks that the actual deity is residing there. 
3) The mind basis refers to visualising a moon disc at the heart of ourselves as a deity. 
4) The sound basis refers to visualising the letters of the mantra on the moon disc. We also visualise at the heart of the deity in front, there is a moon disc and on that moon disc, there are the letters of the mantra. 
Next we do the repetition of the mantra. 
● First, we focus on the front generation deity. At the heart of that deity is a moon disc and on that moon disc are the letters of the mantra to be recited. These are the three objects of observation. We focus on these three objects together – the front generation of the deity, the moon disc at its heart and the letters of the mantra on the moon disc. 
• If we are doing the whispered repetition, we recite the mantra softly while focusing on these three objects and the recitation single-pointedly and without distraction. 
• When that recitation is stable and done well, we switch to the mental recitation which is done in silence. While focusing on those three objects, we perform the mental recitation while restraining the life-force exertion by holding the wind at the navel. We perform the mental recitation for as long as we are able to hold the wind. 
• The next practice becomes subtler and is done to help us to develop single-pointed concentration: We focus on the moon disc and the letters of the mantra at the heart of the front generation deity. When we inhale, we visualise the moon disc and the letters of the mantra at the heart of the front generation deity entering us together with the breath. Both the moon disc and the letters of the mantra settle at our heart. 
• Then one focuses the mind single-pointedly on that while holding the wind and performs the mental recitation. 
• This next practice is even subtler: The object of observation here is only the sound of the mantra at one’s heart. We don’t even think of the moon disc and the letters of the mantra. 
• While focusing on the sound of the mantra at one’s heart, we should do whispered repetition. 
• When that is done well, then we switch to mental recitation while holding the wind. 
This method of recitation of mantra together with the four branches is primarily aimed at developing single-pointed concentration, especially calm abiding. It is clearly mentioned in all the texts that the development of calm abiding is extremely important. We need the realisation of calm abiding in order to realise emptiness. We free ourselves from samsara through the union of calm abiding and special insight realising emptiness. 
At the end of the session, how do we stop the repetition? During the practice, we had generated the deity in front, the moon disc at its heart together with letters of the mantra and the sound of the mantra reverberating from those letters. What follows is the dissolution process using the example of the Chenrezig practice: 
• In the centre of the mandala is Chenrezig 
• At the heart of Chenrezig is the moon disc together with the letters of the mantra Om Mani Padme Hum. 
• The sound of the mantra is reverberating. 
• The sound of the mantra dissolves into the letters of the mantra 
• The letters of the mantra dissolves into the moon disc 
• The moon disc dissolves into the body of the front generation deity. 
• We now focus on the body of the front generation deity. 
• We then absorb the front generation Chenrezig into ourselves. There is no longer any front generation deity. 
• What is left now is oneself as the deity. One’s body dissolves into the letters of the mantra at one’s heart 
• The letters of the mantras at one’s heart dissolves and becomes the entity of the sound of the mantra reverberating at the level of one’s heart. 
• One focuses on the emptiness of that sound and think that it does not exist inherently. What appears is emptiness. 
• Within the state of emptiness focusing on the emptiness of the sound of the mantras, one arises as the deity. It is also said that, within the state of emptiness, one can arise as one’s normal self. The deity or oneself is like an illusion.
Question: Does the mental repetition while observing the sound of the mantra immediately precede the attainment of calm abiding? 
Answer: No. There is still the concentration (absorption) of abiding on fire and the concentration of abiding on sound which come under the concentration without recitation. When the concentration of abiding on sound is brought to culmination, then that is when calm abiding is achieved.