Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L16.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:05.023167
================================================================================

In the Foundation of All Good Qualities, the prayer discussed on renunciation first, then the development of bodhicitta and follows by the needs to practise the bodhisattva vows.  After that it says:
Once I have pacified distractions to wrong objects
And correctly analyzed the meaning of reality,
Please bless me to generate quickly within my mind-stream
The unified path of calm abiding and special insight.
After the bodhicitta is discussed, then there is a separate treatment on calm abiding and special insight. It is only after that there is a discussion of tantra:
Having become a pure vessel by training in the general path,
Please bless me to enter
The holy gateway of the fortunate ones:
The supreme vajra vehicle.
From this you can see that one enters into tantra only after having trained the mind in the common or shared path. This is what is being written in the Lamrim literature. 
Question: Does one have to complete the training in renunciation, bodhicitta, and then calm abiding and special insight before one enters into tantra?
The Foundation of All Good Qualities says:
Having become a pure vessel by training in the general path,
Please bless me to enter
The holy gateway of the fortunate ones:
The supreme vajra vehicle.
Ven Gyurme: General path = shared path; vajra vehicle is Vajrayana
This verse is saying that only after you have trained and generated renunciation, bodhicitta and calm abiding and special insight, only then you enter the tantra. Isn’t the verse saying that?
This question is another way of asking of what I have asked in the previous session:
Do you need to enter the sutric path before entering the tantric path? 
Another way of asking: Do you need to realize emptiness before entering the tantric path.
If you say “No, it is not necessary”, then you have to answer why it is not necessary. What are you going to say in the verse in the Foundation of All Good Qualities of “Having become a pure vessel by training in the general path?”
Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting my question? Or no?  If you get the question, you know what I am asking, and think about what is that?  What is the best way to answer that? The whole point is that. I mean having same question by asking in the different ways.
Anyway, you follow what is mentioned in the root text:
After having trained the mind in the shared path, in order to enter into tantra, you have to take an initiation. 
After taking the initiation you have to guard the vows and samaya purely that you have taken during initiation.  
On that basis, how does one approximate the deity while abiding in the vows and samaya. That is where we are basically on this outline.
We are now at the third outline of the action tantra section:
How to approximate the deity while abiding in the samaya and vows? To approximate the deity means to get nearer or closer to the deity.
As for the way to approximate deity while abiding purely in the vows and samaya:
The concentration of repetition 
The concentration without repetition
One start with the concentration with repetition and one has to begin the practise with generating oneself as a deity.
I am going to summarize of what I have already said in the previous session. You just focus as much as you can.  If you have the interest to find out and really want to learn, the words that I made will stick in your head.  Otherwise, if you just sit there with an attitude of whatever come, come is ok, then it is difficult for the material to stick in your head.
Khen Rinpoche: That time people asked me how to improve memory and also how to listen to the teaching. Of course, everyone learns differently. My own experience, I never learn by listening to the audio or with the chart or visual aid. For me is just listening. When teacher teaches, you really listen.  Of course, you must have an interest first and you listen well.  Sometime you must listen how to catch the point. You don’t have to catch every single word I say but you must hold the point of what I am trying to say.  Then hold it “This is right.” You must get that.  After that, that will keep in the heart for long time. For me is like that. Some of you will listen single-pointedly. These people really get inside. I noticed many people are listening but at the same time they read, same time they write. I am just wondering much they go inside.  You know what I am saying?  I am not sure how much go inside. But everybody learn differently. If you are learning that way that is fantastic. You are all tired from your job, physically tired, mentally tired. I don’t know and I can’t say much also. For us, in monastery we are full time. We have good rest. We are full time and that works better us. For your case, I understand you are physically tired, mentally tired from the job. You don’t have much all these. We just try. Nothing much I can do. Nothing much you can do.  What I am saying is you really have to put little bit effort to catch the point.  
I have mentioned earlier that approximation means getting closer to the deity. Here we are supposed to get closer to the deity through the concentration with repetition. We have to figure out how this repetition of mantra makes us closer to the deity.
In this context here, repetition is done within the context of deity yoga. Prior to repetition, we have to generate ourselves as the deity. In the context of action tantra, that is done through the 6 deities:
1. The empty deity
2. The sound deity
3. The letter deity
4. The form deity
5. The seal deity
6. The sign deity 
I am not going to go through that again.  
At the end of the process when you reach the stage of the sign deity, one has already arisen into the complete aspect of the deity that is mediated upon. After that, the main practise is to develop stability of mind focusing on the deity body. You try to elicit clear appearance and identify yourself as deity. So that is divine pride. Within abiding oneself as the deity, we are supposed to engage in repetition. As said in the root text, we are supposed to recite the mantra without deteriorating the four branches through combining restraint with vitality exertion.
Absorption with recitation
You generate yourself as a deity by relying on the six deities, inviting the wisdom beings to the place in front of you and making offerings to them and so forth, and reciting mantras without deteriorating the four branches through combining restraint with vitality exertion.
We are supposed to engage in repetition without deteriorating the four branches. What are the four branches? 
The four branches are:
Self basis, 
Other basis, 
Mind basis 
Sound basis.
We have gone through that already. 
We have to know what those four mean individually.   
Self basis refers to the self generation, oneself arisen as a deity
Other basis is the front generation, visualize the deity in front
Mind basis is imagining your mind that realize emptiness taking on the aspect of a moon disc either the moon disc is placed at your heart or at the heart of the front generation deity
Sound basis is placing the mantra garland on that moon disc
When you go through these different bases you have to do it within the undistracted state of mind. The whole idea is the process of stabilizing the mind by putting the mind undistracted on the focal object.
Here we are talking about action tantra. Generally, in action tantra ritual:
After the self generation practice, there is the front generation. 
After you have established the front generation, usually there is a practise of arranging offerings.
These offerings have to be made to the front generation
Then follow by recitation of praises to the deity and so forth.
In the practice of tantra, whenever we made offerings, usually the offerings have to be blessed. That is done starting with the dispelling of interference that may abide in the basis of the offering. So by reciting the appropriate mantra and with concentration, one imagines the interferers are dispelled.
The general procedure in tantra is that when we are blessing the offerings it usually involves the process of dispelling the interferences, purification and then generating the offerings.  So with concentration and recitation of the appropriate mantra you dispel whatever interferers that may be abiding in the basis of the offering. Then you purify the offerings into emptiness. From within the state of emptiness, you generate the offerings. 
In the practice of the tantra, whether you are talking about the generation of the deity or blessing and transforming the offerings and so forth, it is always done from within the state of emptiness. This is extremely important.
This is one essential reason why the practice of tantra has to be preceded by having trained the mind in the shared path; at least having the meditative experience of love and compassion, in particular the correct view of reality, emptiness. If one has that then when one engages in the practise of tantra, even when you come to the practice of generating the offerings and making the offerings, it makes a huge difference in the practitioner’s mind.
After dispelling the interference that may abide in the basis of the offerings, then you purify them in emptiness and generate the offerings from within the state of emptiness. At the end, you bless or consecrate the offerings. Generally the offerings are consecrated or blessed through mantra, mudra and concentration.
The offerings are to be blessed through mantra, mudra and concentration. As to what concentration mean in this context here, I am not exactly sure but I think perhaps is the offerings that are generated from within the state of emptiness. After the offerings are generated within the state of emptiness, I guess one has some kind of concentration, and the concentration in this context may mean to visualize clearly those offerings that have been generated.
In the mantra for blessing the offering, for example, with regards to the first offering, the offerings of libation or drink, the mantra with the word Argham intersperse with Om Ah and Hum.  So you start with Om, then Argham and sometimes have Ah and Hum, for example, Om Argham Ah Hum.
Khen Rinpoche: You all know these, Om Argham Ah Hum.  
When Argham intersperse with three syllabuses Om Ah Hum, it means it is blessed by Om Ah Hum. That is what the 3 syllabuses do, they bless.  
Khen Rinpoche: You see Om Ah Hum is there or not?  Om Argham Ah Hum? You take out Argham, them Om Ah Hum? Argham put between there.  Om Argham Ah hum.   Om Ah Hum is there.
It is the same with the rest of the near enjoyment. That is how you bless it. You bless the water, the near enjoyment by reciting the mantra Om Argham Ah Hum.  
In action tantra, the external activities such as performing appropriate hand mudra or hand gesture is essential. Since the offering has to be blessed through the combination of mantra, mudra and concentration, while you recite the mantra for blessing the offering, you have to do the appropriate hand gestures.  
In action tantra, you have to perform the appropriate hand gesture while you recite the appropriate mantra when you are blessing the offering. All these are done within the state of concentration.  
After the offerings are blessed, then you present your offerings. Usually before the offerings are made, you prostrate to the deity.  With regards to the offering mantra, let's say the first offering of libation, you don’t say Om Argham Ah Hum. The mantra is slightly different. For example, Om Argham Pratichha Svaha.  
It is good to know the general procedure in the ritual. When you look at the ritual on top you will see, Om Argham Ah hum and at the bottom, if you don’t notice it, you think it is saying the same thing again, but it is saying Om Argham Pratichha Svaha, and you might be wondering why they are repeating the mantra. 
You have to know the offering have to be blessed. After the offerings are blessed then you offer them. When the offerings are consecrated, you have to perform the hand gesture. Likewise, when you are offering, you will also have to perform the hand gesture.  
In short, before engaging in the repetition, one has to meditate on the four branches. You have to do it nicely and clearly without any distraction before you jump into the mantra repetition. 
Just before the mantra repetition, one has to consecrate or bless the mantra rosary. In the text they do prescribe mantra rosaries of different substances according to the lineage:-
If you are doing an approximation of the tathagata lineage it is recommended that the mantra rosary be made of bodhi seed.
If you are doing an approximation of the lotus lineage then it is recommended the mala substance is lotus seed. 
If one is doing repetition or approximation of the vajra lineage then the recommended mala is that of the ruksha seeds. 
There properly is a difference if one follows what is recommended due to the dependent arising related to the substance itself. But this is not the main focus. Some people lose sleep about this and go all over the places just to find this mala and that mala and then worrying about the substance that is made of. This is not the main thing. It is good if you can find the mala. If you cannot find it then it is alright. You can just to use anything you can lay your hands on. If you can’t find a mala, that is also alright. 
These things do make a difference. If you have it, then it is good. The main thing is the practice. If the practice is done on the basis of having all these external conditions coming together, of course it will be better. 
When you engage in the repetition in dependence upon the four branches, essentially there are two kinds of repetition: 
Repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra, 
Repetition observing the sound of the mantra
With regards to the first repetition of repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra, it can be divided into two:
Repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra at the heart of the deity in front
Repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra at one’s own heart of oneself as the deity. 
[BP1: There are two ways of performing the recitation (or repetition) of the mantra: 
1) Reciting the mantra by observing the form of the letters of the mantra. 
1. Recitation observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front and 
2. Recitation observing the form of the letters at one’s own heart 
2) Reciting the mantra by observing the sound of the mantra.] 
Recitation observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front 
First, one engages in the repetition focusing the letters of the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front. 
By this time you already have visualized the deity in front. 
Then you visualize at the heart of the deity in front, there is a moon disc. 
On the moon disc you visualize the mantra garland of the mantra you are going to recite. 
When we engage in this repetition, you are supposed to focus on the three things: 
the body of the deity in front,
the moon disc at the heart of the deity 
on that moon disc there is the mantra garland of the mantra you are going to recite
Without any distraction while focusing on those three, you engage in the repetition. 
There are two forms of repetition: 
the verbal (or whispered repetition)
the repetition through restraining the vitality exertion.
The repetition is to be done within a state of non-distraction. You don’t lose the visualization of the deity’s body in front, the moon disc and the mantra garland on the moon disc. You are supposed not to lose mindfulness of that. 
Within some clarity of those three then you engage in the repetition. When you recite mantra there are faults to be avoided such as reciting too quickly that doesn’t become clear or you miss out certain syllables or recite the mantra too slowly. 
In the course of the mantra repetition, if you lose mindfulness then you are supposed to start all over again. You are supposed to try to get a clear visualization of those three things again - the deity’s body, the moon disc and the mantra garland on it before you engage in repetition.
You are supposed to recite the mantra:
without being too fast or too slow, 
without any additions or omissions, 
without being excessively loud
basically just sitting there reciting without making any noise.
That is whispered repetition. By doing it well, it helps to move the mind towards stability with some kind of concentration. 
Then one moves on to recitation through restraining the vitality exertion. 
You are supposed to bring the upper winds down and the lower winds up so they meet at the level of the navel. Through restraining the winds there, one engages in the mental repetition. 
When you restrain the vitality exertion in such a way, you will not be doing any verbal recitation. The recitation to be done is mental. When you do the mental recitation, again focusing on those three things:
the deity’s body in front, 
the moon disc at the heart of the deity 
the mantra garland on the moon disc
The whole idea of restraining the vitality exertion is that you hold the winds at the navel. As the winds are abiding in the body and not moving about, this will help the mind kind of stays focused. This kind of repetition through restraining the vitality exertion is more profound than the whispered repetition.
Khen Rinpoche: You get any idea or no. If you don’t understand, ask. You don’t get clear idea, ask.
Student 1: When one is bringing the upper winds and lower winds to the navel, one is actually focusing on these winds, the mental recitation is accompanied by focusing on the deity in front, the three aspects of the body, the moon disc and the mantra garland. Would there be some difficulty because one is focusing on the winds at one’s body and at the same time focusing on the front generation. How would one be able to do such?
Khen Rinpoche: The winds are brought together at the navel. The winds are there but that is not where we place our mental attention on. We place our mental attention on the three focal objects that I have mentioned earlier on. 
Student 2: With regards to the mantra garland, do we have to visualize them in the Tibetan syllables or can we visualize them in English alphabets?
Khen Rinpoche: The best is to visualize in the Sanskrit syllables because that was the original language in which the Buddha pronounces or prescribes the mantras. If we recite the mantras and visualize the mantras in the Sanskrit original way, it does make a difference in regards to receiving the blessings of the mantras. That is ideal. If not, then visualize Tibetan syllables or English syllables or whatever syllables you like. The idea is to focus your attention on it. 
Having said that, the idea is that whatever language you visualize the mantra in, it should be able to convey whatever the original Sanskrit mantras were trying to convey; the symbolism, the sound and so forth. So with regards to this, the Tibetan language is able to do this. I doubt the English language is able to do that. For example, in the syllable Hum, if you know Tibetan, there are so many elements to it. You can explain the Tibetan syllable Hum in term of its symbolism, its meanings and its implications that can be correlated with the original Sanskrit. But you can’t do that with English. English is just H.U.M. That is the problem. 
As for the Tibetan syllable Om, if you deconstruct it, it is made up of 3 syllables There are 3 parts that come together to form Om. Because of this, there is an explanation how those three parts correlate to the body, speech and mind. The Tibetan language has that characteristic in it. I don’t think you will find it in any other languages. 
Student 3:  Following up on Student 1’s question on how do you place your concentration on the body of the deity, the mantra and the moon disc. When the wind is focused at the place below the navel what is the technique that we need to use in order for us to be able to focus the mind on the external three aspects? Do we put a slight tension at the point four fingers below the navel? 
Khen Rinpoche: Myself have not really done this and I can’t say much. I don’t know what to say. But I guess the point is when you say you hold the winds at the navel, you have to draw the upper winds in and somehow it finds its way down there. In order to bring the lower winds up, you have to apply pulling force or tension that are able to draw the winds to the navel and hold it there. We are not trained at all and have no experience or have any idea what it is. It is really difficult. Usually we talk about just holding the breath and is usually held at the chest level. To talk of holding the breath in other parts of the body, especially you talk about holding the breath at the lower parts of the body does sound strange. 
When you are doing the breathing yoga, they teach to keep your breath at the chest, stomach, navel, lower part. How to hold the yoga also teach. 
Student 3: I am asking Rinpoche because in some of the tai chi and qigong methods where you don’t actually hold your breath. You actually put the tension there and you continue to breathe normally. If you hold the breath like you said, there is only a limited amount of mental recitation you can do because you will run out of breath. We don’t actually hold the breath when we do that technique. We actually put the tension there and it actually eliminates a lot of the discursive thinking and allow the mind to actually focus on the mental recitation of the mantra. 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think so because I think the qigong master Hup Cheng say ‘hold’. That time when he taught the qigong he said breathe and hold and release like that.
Student 3: But there is a technique that you can actually breathe, hold and you continue to breathe, and actually hold the tension there. I am just wondering because I do part of it like that. So I am wondering whether it is the right thing when you are talking about holding the breath there. Thank you. 
Khen Rinpoche: It is clear in the texts, in the teachings, in the instructions that you have to hold the wind. In the case here you hold the wind at the navel. So you have to bring the upper winds down, the lower winds up, and hold it at the navel. That it is clear. 
What is the term that is used here? You are supposed to engage in repetition, especially mental recitation, through restraining the vitality exertion. 
Vitality here means the wind, and exertion here means the movement of the winds in and out of the sense doors. So that is vitality exertion. Then you have to restrain that. Restraining the vitality exertion means stopping the winds from moving in and out of the sense doors. So you have to hold the winds internally and in this case at the navel. 
The instructions say that you hold the winds at the navel. The instructions states that if you are able to hold the winds in such a way, then the mind will stabilize and your mind will not be running all over the place. You will be also able to hold the mind. 
This is the practice of restraining the vitality exertion in lower tantra. The meaning of restraining the vitality exertion becomes very different in the Highest Yoga Tantra. In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, restraining the vitality exertion means to stop the winds from coursing in the left and right channels. Most of the time, our energies never ever enter and abide in the central channel. So they move about in the other channels such in the left and right. So in the context of Highest Yoga Tantra restraining the vitality exertion means to stop the coursing or the movements in the winds in the left and right channels and cause those winds to enter into the central channel and then cause the winds to abide in the central channel. If one is able to do that it is said to bring about unbelievable stability of the mind. 
So in the context of action tantra here, what we have been discussing is clear in the instructions that you hold the winds at the navel, and then through restraining the vitality exertion in this way, you engage in mental recitation. When you are no longer able to hold the breath, that is when you exhale, then you switch to whispered repetition. And then so forth.  
Student 4:  I just wonder why the 6 deities? What is the reason for generating the self generation via the 6 deities. Highest Yoga Tantra  is kind of transforming ordinary death, immediate state and birth, but ut in Kriya Tantra, why these 6? I just don’t quite understand why these 6?
Khen Rinpoche: Why 6? Why not 7? 
Student 4: Empty I can understand because a lot of things we have to generate from empty. But why after that is sound, letters, form, seal, sign? Another question. Before a written language was created, how does anyone visualize the letter deities? 
Khen Rinpoche: Whether the letter has beginning or not? 
Student 4: Ya I wonder? 
Khen Rinpoche: I wonder. So, no question.
Student 4: If it is in another world system, will the Sanskrit letter be Sanskrit.
Another  question is that Kriya Tantra is very much physical practices and all that. So does it mean that a person who is handicapped will have a problem completing it? I mean if the hands is handicapped, do to do the mudra.
Khen Rinpoche: That is why they talk about the 8 freedoms and 10 endowments, isn’t it? 
The 8 freedoms and 10 endowments characterize a perfect situation. That is a perfect situation. But never did they say that you need all these to engage in dharma practice or you have to have all of them to engage tantric practice. They are saying that it is an ideal and perfect situation. If you have all these, then you can do many things. If the individual is physically challenged and if he has missing a body part, what to do? If you don’t have hands, nobody is going to blame you if you don’t do the hand gestures.  So what is left to be done? Just sit there and meditate, and do the practices with the mind.
Khen Rinpoche: I remembered Rinpoche said to the monks in Kopan, when you recite 35 buddhas names, put your hands and  palms together. Normally in monastery, normally nobody do. In the puja, they don’t. I don’t know because in monastery sometimes you are not allowed to take your hand outside from your clothes. You supposed to keep inside you know. When recite the buddhas names, normally the monks in the monastery, they don’t put hand together.. So Rinpoche said “It is wasted. When you recite the Buddha names, you don’t put your two hands together if you have hands. When you recite the Buddhas names, you don’t put your two hands together, you are wasting your two hands. Your two hands are useless.”. A very good advice. If you don’t have hands, you got nothing to do. If you have hands, whenever you hear the Buddha name so just put palms together thinking of Buddha. That create so much merit.. So those are important. If physically you don’t have hands you don’t have to do the hand mudras. But still that person can meditate. If the person can’t think at all, then what to do? It is like that. 
In the context of action tantra, we generate ourselves as the deities usually through the six deities. It is just a way of generating the deities slowly and nicely. It is a technique. In the Highest Yoga Tantra, when you arise as the deity. You don’t just arise as the deity out of nowhere. Generally, there is also a process. In some of the Highest Yoga Tantra, they talked about five manifest enlightenments:
Manifest enlightenment from the moon, 
Manifest enlightenment from the syllable, 
Manifest enlightenment from the hand implements and so forth.
There is a process that is laid out for the practitioner to be able to do it well slowly and steadily, so you can have a good practice. I don’t think it is necessary all the time and it depend on the level of the practitioner. In the case of action tantra, if that individual already reached high level of the practice of yoga with signs and without signs, I don’t think that individual need to go through step by step. These people have the realization and literally they are able to generate themselves as the deities instantaneously. In an instant they arise as the deity, clear appearance is there, and divine pride is there. So for such individual, there is no need for them to go through step by step. 
The path of action tantra can be explained in term of the meditation on the deity’s body, speech and mind. The path of action tantra can be condensed or explained through the meditation on the deities body, speech and mind. Maybe I will do this in the future.
Now we have finished with the repetition observing the form of the letter at heart of the deity in front. In short, the three focal objects: 
The deity in front,
The moon disc at the heart of the deity, 
The mantra garland that is placed on the moon disc
Through focusing on these three focal objects without any distraction one engages in whispered repetition and mental repetition through restraining the vitality exertion.
Recitation observing the form of the letters inside one’s heart.
After engaged in the repetition observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front, then you move on to repetition observing the form of letters at one’s own heart. 
How do you engage in the repetition observing the form of letters or mantra at one’s own heart? According to one instruction, after you have already finished with the repetition observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front, now you are now going to engage in repetition focusing the form of letters at one’s own heart. According to one instruction, this is how you do it:
- As you inhale, you visualize the moon disc at the heart of the deity in front together with the mantra garland on it, comes in with your inhalation and settle at your heart.
- While that moon disc with the mantra garland on it abiding at your heart then you engage in the repetition.
I think perhaps while the moon disc with the mantra is at your heart, you can do the repetition both the whispered and mental.
The text said that when you exhale, the moon disc at your heart together with the mantra garland on it, leaves your body with the breath and goes back to the heart of the deity in front. 
You alternate the process. As you exhale, the moon disc at your heart together with the mantra garland goes back to the heart of the front generation deity. Then you observe that. Then you engage in the repetition and again you alternate. As you inhale you bring that moon disc and the mantra garland back to your heart. Then you engage in meditation alternating between the front and the self.
To keep it simple, if we just look at the repetition observing the form of letters at your own heart, on its own, you just think of the moon disc at your heart, and there is a mantra garland on it. That is the focal object. Then you engage in repetition both the whispered and the mental.
While there is an instruction in one text that you do the practice of alternating between the heart of the front generation deity and the heart of oneself as the deity, one might ask “What is the purpose?” For that, I am not sure.
Student 5:  Can I confirm that while whispered and mental repetition is done at this occasion while inhaling and exhaling, it is not done simultaneously? Or the whispered is done by inhaling and when one restrain the life force exertion one does the mental repetition, and when one is exhaling one does the whispered repetition. That means the whispered and the mental repetition is not done simultaneously because I find it difficult.
Khen Rinpoche: Of course these cannot be done simultaneously. 
Student 5:  There is alternation of inhaling and then holding it and focusing on the mantra garland moon disc at one’s  heart. After that exhaling focusing on the mantra garland and moon disc at the front generation. So at the time of inhaling and exhaling can we say that one is doing the whispered repetition? Whereas when one is focusing on the mantra garland and moon disc at one’s heart, as well as the other occasion, alternating at the front generation, one is doing mental repetition?
Khen Rinpoche: When you move the moon disc at the heart of the front deity together with the mantra on it to your own heart together with your inhalation, the inhalation is just start moving it. After the moon disc has settled at your heart, it doesn’t mean you have to hold the breath. It is just as you breathe normally, and it is just happen when you are breathing in, and it comes in with your breath. Once the moon disc has settled at your heart, then you have the choice of doing either whispered or mental repetition. If you are doing whispered repetition then you better breathe. If you decide to do the mental repetition then you have to restrain the vitality exertion.
Student 5:  Got it. Then the second question is that when we do our Nyung Na sadhana ritual, after generating the six deities, one does the recitation of oneself one emanates to fulfill the two purposes. This does not sound to me to be this second occasion of recitation not deteriorating the four branches of observing the moon disc and mantra garland at oneself as the deity. That means this second occasion when one is doing the alternating moving the moon disc back and forth, it doesn’t seem to be the recitation of what we do in the Nyung Na sadhana after generating the six deities. In the Nyung Na sadhana there are only two occasions when one does the mantra recitation. After generating the self generation, one is doing that. The second occasion is after generating the front generation, one does the recitation. That means I don’t see any occasion when does the recitation in the second occasion mentioned here in this outline. That means meditating on the four branches without deterioration observing the moon disc and mantra garland at the heart of oneself as the deity.
Khen Rinpoche: In the Nyung Na sadhana, the one that you are using, yes, after you have arisen as the deity through the six deities, you do engage in mantra recitation. Definitely the four branches are not complete because the front generation is yet to be visualized. Only after the first mantra recitation then you establish the front generation. 
After the front generation is established, then there is the mantra recitation. Since both the front and self generation have been fully established then you can engage in the four branches repetition at that time.
I guess that is the point that you engage in the four branches repetition after you have established the front generation. This four branches repetition thing is a means to develop concentration.
In the repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra at the heart of the deities in front, you have three focal objects. You were told that when reciting the mantra you have to focus on:
the deity body in front, 
the moon disc at the heart 
together with the mantra garland on the moon disc
Without any distraction you engage in repetition. When you engage in the repetition focusing on the form of letters of the mantra at your own heart, you are told that you have only two focal objects:
The moon disc at your heart 
Together with the mantra garland on it
In terms of the focus, it becomes more subtle. Instead of focusing on three things, now you put your attention on just two things - the moon at your heart and the mantra garland on it. The practice has becomes little bit more subtle. At the beginning of the practice you visualize everything without leaving anything behind. As you progress in the meditation, you kind of zooming in on things. So the practice has becoming a little bit more progressively subtle. 
So that is the repetition observing the form of the letters. Next you have the repetition observing the sound of the mantra. 
Khen Rinpoche: You have in the chart. It is not in the root text. 
When the repetition observing the sound of the mantra is done, you don’t focus on the deity’s body, or the moon disc, and you don’t even focus on the form of the letters. The focal object is the sound of the mantra. With that as the focal object then one engages in either whispered or mental repetition.
When one engages in the whispered repetition, for example, while observing the sound of the mantra, you are observing the sound of the mantra in that the mantra that is resonating. So you are focusing on that sound.
The focal object while practicing the repetition focusing on the sound of the mantra is more subtle and more profound than before. Here you don’t focus on the deity body, you don’t focus on the moon disc, and you don’t even focus on the mantra garland the form of the letters. But rather, you are just focus on the resounding of the mantra. Focusing on that, you engage in the repetition either in the whispered or mental repetition. This is in progression of training the mind. This whole sequence is a method to move the practitioner towards achieving calm abiding.
Student 6:  The whispered repetition of the mantra that is done first with the repetition observing the form of the letters, follow by the repetition observing the sound of the mantra. After we have master those two methods then we go back and do mental repetition with the repetition observing the form of the letters and mental repetition observing the sound of the mantra. Is this correct? 
 Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think so.
The sequence of the practice is outlined as:
First you do the repetition focusing on the form of the letter at the heart of the deity in front.
Based on that, you engage in whispered repetition follow by mental repetition. 
Then you move on the repetition focusing on the form of the letters at one’s own heart, and engage in whispered repetition and mental repetition. 
After that, you move to the repetition focusing on the sound of the mantra and within that, first you engage in whispered repetition follow by mental repetition.
Why is there this sequence? With regards to the object of observation, in the first practice, the objects of observation are considered coarse relative to what is going to come. In the repetition focusing on the forms of letter in one’s own heart, the object of observation becomes a bit more subtle. When you come to the repetition focusing only on the sound of the mantra then the focal object becomes subtle. All these are relative.  
Student 6:  I wanted to ask then is that in one practice session, is the whispered repetition and the mental repetition done sequentially in one session? Or is it like we go through many sessions practicing our whispered repetition and then when that is stable and well done then we have more session where we practice on the mental repetition. Or are the two happening in one session? 
Khen Rinpoche: I talk about that another time.
BP1:
RECITING THE MANTRA BY OBSERVING THE FORM OF THE LETTERS OF THE MANTRA 
Recitation observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front 
During this recitation, we focus on the front generation deity in the heart of which there is a moon disc. On that moon disc are the letters of the mantra. By observing these three together, we then recite the mantra. 
There are two ways in which the mantra can be recited: 
(1) mental repetition, i.e., silently or 
(2) whispered repetition, i.e., softly with sound. 
The main purpose for mantra repetition through the four branches is to develop single-pointed concentration. To develop concentration, we form of the letters. We do so through reciting the mantra mentally and combining it with the vitality exertion and retention to stop the movement of the wind. 
With respect to the wind in the body, there is the wind in the upper and lower parts of the body. We seek to control these winds by gathering them at the navel and then making them remains there as long as possible. Whilst retaining the winds at the navel, one focuses on the front generation deity together with the moon disc at its heart together with the letters of the mantra on the moon disc. By observing these three while retaining the winds at the navel, one performs the mental repetition. 
In Tantric teachings, the wind (or subtle energy of the body) is the mount of the consciousness, meaning the consciousness is the rider and the wind is like the horse. If we are unable to control and stop the movement of this subtle energy, then it is very difficult to stop discursive thoughts and distractions from arising. That is why we have to do this practice of vitality exertion and retention. In the beginning, one is only able to retain the wind for a short time but with practice, this duration can be extended. This can be achieved slowly and through such practice, one would be able to develop single-pointed concentration. When the repetition is done through restraining the vitality exertion, there is no room for whispered repetition. One can only perform the mental repetition. 
RECITING THE MANTRA BY OBSERVING THE FORM OF THE LETTERS OF THE MANTRA 
Recitation observing the form of the letters inside one’s heart. 
When we do this recitation in connection with the four branches, we go through the process described earlier. 
When we inhale, we visualise that the moon disc with the letters of the mantra in the heart of the front generation deity comes into our heart with our breath. We then stop breathing and hold our breath. While doing this, we observe the moon disc and the letters of the mantra and perform the mental recitation. The moon disc and the letters of the mantra are the two objects of observation. 
When we are unable to hold our breath any longer, we exhale and visualise that the moon disc together with the letters of the mantra at one’s own heart go back to the heart of the front generation deity. Then the process is repeated. 
RECITING THE MANTRA BY OBSERVING THE SOUND OF THE MANTRA 
Here, the objects of observation are not the deity’s body, the moon disc or the letters of the mantra. Rather the object of observation in this practice is the sound of the mantra which we observe as we perform the mental repetition. 
When we perform this repetition observing the sound of the mantra, we are reciting the mantra mentally in our mind. We visualize the sound of the mantra resonating when we recite the mantra mentally whilst restraining the wind.