Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L17.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:03.779571
================================================================================

We have been looking at the practice of repetition in the context of action tantra. In short, in the practice of action tantra, the repetition is done on the basis of the four branches. We have finished with that. 
As for the concentration repetition, there are two types: 
Repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra
Repetition observing the sound of the mantra.
As for the repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra, there are two types:
Repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra at the heart of the front generation deity
Repetition observing the form of the letters at one’s own heart as the deity
We have also finished with that. 
As for the repetition observing the form of the letters at one’s own heart as the deity:
when you inhale, imagine the moon disc at the heart of the front generation deity together with the mantra garland on it comes in with your breath and settles at your own heart
then you engage in repetition
if you are engaging in mental repetition, then you do it while holding the winds.  
when you release the winds i.e. when you exhale, imaging the moon disc at your heart together with the mantra garland on it leaves with you exhalation and goes back and settles at the heart of the front generation deity
So that is clear. What is not clear is that once the moon disc together with the mantra has settled at the heart of the front generation deity, do you engage in repetition focusing on that or not? That is not clear in the text. However, if you look at the two divisions of the repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra, now we are talking about the repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra at one’s own heart. That is the primary practice. So in this context, it is clear that this is the main practice.
It is clear in the text that you alternate the positions of the moon disc and the mantra garland on it with the exhalation and inhalation of the breath. That is clear. What is not clear in the text is whether you should perform repetition when the moon disc and the mantra are back at the heart of the front generation deity. 
Personally I think probably not. Probably the object of observation is the moon disc and the mantra garland on the moon disc at your own heart since it is a repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra at your own heart. 
The question is that: When you exhale, the moon disc and the mantra garland leaves from your heart and settles back at the heart of the front generation deity. When the moon disc is back at the heart of the front generation deity, do you engage in repetition whether it is whispered or mental? That is the qualm.
Khen Rinpoche: You understand or not?
If you look at how it is being phrased in the text, it says repetition observing the form of the letters and repetition observing the sound of the mantra. It doesn’t say repetition observing the letters. 
As for the repetition observing the form of the letters, whether it is at the front generation or at your own heart, what is the letter here?
Khen Rinpoche: Whole question is “What is letter?” That is all. You know what is letter? What is A? What is B? A is apple? What is A? Can explain? When somebody asks you what is A, how are you going to explain?
(Student response inaudible) 
Khen Rinpoche: Can you go a little bit deeper?
(Student response inaudible) 
Khen Rinpoche: Form of the syllable, form of the A is A? Are you talking about that?
(Student response inaudible) 
Khen Rinpoche: Shape of the A is A or not? 
(Student response inaudible) 
Khen Rinpoche: Quick, it is easy. I mean A, what is A?   The student already said the shape of A is A.
(Student response inaudible) 
Khen Rinpoche: You don’t know what is A. End of the day you don’t know what is A. 
Student 1: The letter A is part of what is used to form a word and the word into a sentence. A is not the stroke. In the previous module, if I remember correctly, A is an A because it is labeled A by us. If you really break it down, it is like this and like that but in Sanskrit it is not like this. It is some other strokes.  So it is a formation of different parts that comes together to form that A. 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know. Anybody have something? Don’t be shy. Doesn’t matter wrong or right, doesn’t matter. Come. 
The form of the letter is not the letter. The form of the letter is the basis of designation of the letter. So the basis of designation is not the designated object. So A is nothing more, nothing less than other the sound or tone that you associate with A. So A is the sound that is the basis of designation refers to.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay? That’s all.
After you have finished with the repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra, you move on to repetition focusing on the sound of the mantra. 
At the time of engaging in the repetition observing the sound of the mantra, the practice is done on the basis of having meditated well on the four branches. 
At the time of engaging in the repetition observing the sound of the mantra, the object of observation is just the sound of the mantra. 
In short, repetition observing the sound of the mantra as if listening to your own recitation, then you engage in either both the whispered repetition or the mental repetition. 
It is not clear in the text but I wonder whether one can engages in the repetition observing the sound of the mantra with the self basis and the other basis, that means just focusing on the sound that is emanating at your heart of yourself as the deity or can you also do that by observing the sound of the mantra that is resonating at the heart of the front generation deity.
It is clear in the text that it said you observe the sound of the mantra while you engage in repetition. The sound of the mantra that is at the heart of the deity’s body but it doesn’t specifically say that you meditate on that sound emanating at the heart of the self basis or the other basis. It just says the deity’s body. 
Of the two concentrations, 
The concentration with repetition and
The concentration without repetition
now we have finished with the concentration with repetition. Next is the concentration without repetition.
What I have said is summarized in the chart of the handout 2.  It will be more effective if you were to go through that process intellectually in your head on your own for 10 or 15 minutes. Imagine that you are going to do the practice, and it is just to develop some familiarity with the concept. We are not talking about gaining any experience or realization. That is difficult. Just have the feel of what it is like to meditate or to engage in repetition as it is taught starting from the beginning - visualizing the four branches so on and so forth, and then going through the three types of repetition. If you are able to do that on your own, then it will help the concept to stick in your head.
Sometimes just trying to understand things well just by reading the material alone may not be sufficient. However, if you do try it out or you rehearse the process, and try to meditate or think on your own without referring to the notes, perhaps the concept will becomes a bit clearer. It is such the nature of thing that when the concept becomes clearer, it tends to stick in our heads for a longer period of time.
In the ideal situation, anybody who is teaching stuff like that must have the realization or experience or must have done the whole practice with a lot of experience and then impart the instructions to the disciples. It is a very big difference.  But this is difficult. Even if that is possible, you may not also find any suitable receptacle anyway.
Student 2: When one does the repetition observing the form of the letters at one’s heart, does one visualize that the front generation dissolves? 
When one does the repetition observing the sound of mantra at one’s heart, does one visualize the front generation and the body of self generation together with the mantra garland and moon disc dissolve, and only focusing on the sound of the mantra?
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think so because the repetition has to be done with the four branches present, as it says to engage in repetition with the four branches present. At the time of performing the repetition focusing on the form of the letters of the mantra in one’s own heart, the front generation is already present as all four branches must be present. When you breathe in, imagine that the moon disc together with the mantra garland at the heart of the front generation enters together with your inhalation and settle at your heart. So the front generation is there. 
I don’t think you will dissolve the front generation because it is said in the text that you are supposed to alternate moving the moon disc and the mantra from the front generation to the self generation and back and so forth. Upon moving the moon disc to your heart, if you dissolve the front generation, then before you can send the moon disc back, you have to again visualize the front generation. 
When performing the repetition observing the form of the letters at one’s heart, I don’t think you dissolve the front generation. While the front generation is there, you don’t dissolve it. You don’t focus on it because the focal object is just the two things: the moon disc and the mantra garland at your heart.
Student 2: Yeah, so that was my following up question. I have a problem of having so many objects of observation yet I am only focusing on the moon disc and the mantra garland. For the tantric practitioners, their calm abiding is very powerful having all those objects. How to make it easier for us lay people or ordinary people to understand the concept of so many objects yet we are focusing on just the moon disc and the mantra garland. The same thing for the sound of the mantra, the front generation, self generation, moon disc, mantra garland all are there, we will have to have the visualization of these yet at the same time, we are focusing on the sound of the mantra during the occasion when you recite that. 
Khen Rinpoche: You have problem.
Student 2: How to focus on that and yet all these appear? It is as if like my eyes focusing on either Khen Rinpoche or the Chenrezig statue and the rest are like an AAA (Awareness to which an object appear but is not ascertained) sort of thing.
Khen Rinpoche: In the case of a sense consciousness, that is how it works. Let’s say, in the view of a particular eye consciousness observing a specific object, there are a lot of stuffs appearing in the periphery but you don’t pay attention to it, that is not ascertained but nonetheless have appear. But you don’t focus on the stuffs and that is the sense consciousness.
In the case of a mental consciousness, here we are talking about mental experience and not the sensory experience. If you are talking about mental consciousness, and you are meditating to achieve calm abiding, you will be focusing on a chosen focal object. When your mind attention is placed on the focal object, I wonder if other things do appear to that consciousness or not.  
So when calm abiding is realized, that is when the person is in calm abiding completely absorb in the focal object, it is said that even if you were to beat a drum or make a huge noise in front of the individual, it doesn’t affect the person as the person is not cognizant to that sound.
When the mind becomes more and more concentrated, the mind is becoming increasingly subtle and when the mind is increasing more subtle, it becomes clearer as well. What is clearer? The focus on the object of observation is clearer. You probably are not thinking of anything else. This perhaps could be the case.
Student 2: Next question is “What is the measure of having achieved these various stages with proficiency such that the meditator knows that he has achieved the proficiency and moved on to the next subtler levels”. 
Khen Rinpoche: It is not clear in the text. I have not seen any positing of the boundaries or measure of the three forms of repetition, whether it is observing the form of the letters or observing the sound. It is clear with regards to the concentration abiding in sound. There is a concentration abiding in sound which is coming. The concentration abiding in sound involves the stages up to and including the actualization of calm abiding. That is a measure and it is a clear boundary. 
When do you achieve the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound? It is when the meditator achieves the union of calm abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness. With regards to those two concentrations, the boundaries are clear. 
What I have just said, the concentration abiding in sound, is not what we have just looked at. It is not the repetition observing sound or the mantra, and we are not talking about that. We are talking about something else that will come later on. 
The path of action tantra is essentially divided into two:
Yoga with signs 
Yoga without signs
If you look at what the yoga of signs, it includes all these different stages of practice. I think essentially they are all stages leading up to the achievement of calm abiding - yoga with signs. The yoga without signs has to do with special insight. 
With regards to the things that are subsumed under the yoga with signs, since these are practices leading up to the achievement of calm abiding, probably there should be a way to correlate the explanation of the nine mental stages in the achievement of calm abiding that we studied during the Lamrim. For example, the abandonment of laxity and excitement as to which is abandoned, when and so forth, probably there should be a way of correlating those explanations with the different stages of practice that comes under the yoga with signs. 
I have not seen any explanation like this in the text. I think one can think about it and then try to correlate them. Perhaps one might be able to come up with something. 
Whatever repetition you are engaged in, whether it is observing the form of the letters, or repetition observing the sound of the mantra, at the end of the session, how do you leave the session? How do you stop the session? What are the stages of leaving off the repetition?
In the action tantra ritual, the rituals do not seem to be very clear on how you leave the session. It is not exactly very explicit as to how you do the necessary dissolutions that usually come at the end of the ritual. If we follow the usual structure of an action tantra ritual, the main practice is like the four branches repetition:
You visualize the four branches and engage in repetition of mantra. 
At the end, you dedicate the merit towards full enlightenment. 
Usually there are thanks giving offerings. You present the thanks giving offerings. 
Then you recite verses of praise. 
Then you ask for forgiveness for any omissions or additions you made in the practice. 
If one has meditated on the front generation, then one visualizes:
the wisdom beings of the front generation depart to their natural abode and 
the commitment beings of the front generation dissolve into oneself. 
In one commentary it describes the stages of leaving off the repetitions. It says that you leave the session moving from observing the sound of the mantra at the heart of the front generation deity. You leave off from the sound and focus on the form of the letters of the mantra. At the heart of the front generation there is a moon disc and there is a mantra garland. 
With regards to the stages of leaving the repetition, in one commentary it says you leave off focusing on the sound of the mantra at the heart of the front generation, which kind of suggesting that there is a repetition observing the sound of the mantra with regards to the front generation deity.  
If the stages of leaving off the repetitions include starting off with this, what is the problem if you just say that there is a repetition observing the sound of the mantra at the heart of the front generation? The only thing here is that what would be the problem with such a repetition? If you can find a problem with such a repetition then you can say it doesn’t exist. Otherwise, what is wrong with saying that it exists? 
At this point of the practice, imagining that you have done the practices of the repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra and repetition observing the sound. We are already at this point in time of this practice and you are about to finish off the session, how do you leave the session? It says you leave off the session by moving your observation from the sound of the mantra at the heart of the front generation deity to the form of the letters of the mantra at the heart of the front generation deity. 
By the end of the session, your object of observation is pretty subtle as you are just observing the sound. As you leave off the session, your object of observation becomes coarser, that is your attention move to a coarser object. In this case, it is moving from the sound to the form of the letters or the mantra on the moon disc at the heart of the front generation deity. 
As you are leaving off the session focusing on the sound of the mantra at the heart of the front generation deity, I guess you can imagine the sound gradually disappears and takes on the form of the letters of the mantra. So your attention is placed on the letters of the mantra. 
Then you move from observing the letters of the mantra into observing the moon disc that the mantra syllables are seated on. You move from the mantra syllables to the moon disc. 
Then you move from observing the moon at the heart of the front generation deity to observing the body of the front generation deity. Again, your attention is gradually placed on a coarser object.
Then you move from observing the body of the front generation deity to the body of the self-generation deity. Whether or not the front generation deity dissolves into you or not, that is another question. But the attention, you move from focusing on the front generation deity’s body to the self-generation deity’s body. 
In the case of Chenrezig, you are visualized as Chenrezig. You move from focusing on the body of yourself as Chenrezig to the six syllables at your heart. If you follow the normal order of progression, you should move from observing the body of the self-generation deity to the moon disc at your own heart. But that is not written in the text. That is why it is not in your text. 
Will there be a problem if you add in the moon before the mantric syllables as you move from observing the body of the self-generation deity to the six syllables at the heart? Again the mind is becoming more subtle. 
You move from observing the form of the letters or the syllables of the mantra to observing just the sound of the mantra, it is kind of like coming back again to what we have visualized earlier on during the repetition observing the sound of the mantra. As the focal objects become more subtle, the mind becomes more subtle as well. 
Then you move from observing the sound of the mantra into observing suchness where you bring to mind ascertaining the lack of inherent existence of the sound, the lack of inherent existence of the Ï, the self and the person, and culminating in the wisdom body (the truth body). 
As you move from observing the sound of the mantra into the last stage is called the wisdom body (truth body). What does it mean? I guess is the object of focus becomes more and more subtle, the mind becomes more subtle as well. Then you imagine as if you are able to ascertain the emptiness or the lack of inherent existence of the sound or the lack of inherent existence of the person, the meditator, the I. That mind that ascertains the emptiness of inherent existence, while the term is not used, we could call it perhaps the wisdom truth body of the basis or the basic truth body; which is a terminology that is found in Highest Yoga Tantra and is not found here. The concept will be explained in the future. Just to get an idea, basically the wisdom truth body here is referring to the mind that ascertains emptiness at the time of the basis. 
If we turn our mind to the nature of reality after observing the sound of the mantra, perhaps it does makes a difference, because the basis, the sound of the mantra, moving from that into emptiness. Thinking about emptiness of the sound, perhaps will make it easier.
If you move from observing the sound of the mantra into observing the suchness or emptiness, you are moving into a state where the sound becomes non-objectified in that it disappears into emptiness, into vacuity. We are not talking about disappearing into nothingness. We are not talking about just emptiness, ordinary kind of becoming nothing. The point here is you are moving towards ascertaining the emptiness of inherent existence. At the end of the day, that should be the result.
You need to generate the mind realizing emptiness; the mind that ascertains emptiness. This mind that realizes emptiness and the vacuity becomes the basis of designation, let’s say that become the basis of designation of the I. 
When you end the session, from within emptiness, you arise as the deity. It is often like that at the end of the session. When you arise as the deity, there is an appearance, things appear but the meditator is cognizant of the illusory nature. Things appear, there is appearance of true existence, but there is no belief in that illusory like appearance.
In the earlier sessions, we talk about the apprehension factor of the mind realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. It is that wisdom that arises as the deity. As you leave off the session, the mind that ascertains emptiness is that which arises as the deity’s body. 
You do cultivate and arrive at the mind realizing emptiness. On the path of Highest Yoga Tantra, there is an additional element of cultivating divine pride of that being your resultant dharmakaya. You imagine that mind realizing emptiness is the resultant dharmakaya. That is what you do in Highest Yoga Tantra. 
At the time of practice, you identify the mind realizing emptiness as the resultant dharmakaya. With divine pride, you think it is my resultant dharmakaya. It is the very same mind which you think is resultant dharmakaya, which then arises in the aspect of the deity’s body. After that, you identify this is my resultant rupakaya, my resultant form body. 
This is roughly the concept or the answer to one of the earlier question that I have asked. What is it that arises as the deity? Simply speaking, that dharmakaya, the truth body of the basic of the basis, let’s take it to be the mind that ascertains emptiness.
In Highest Yoga Tantra, you imagine that you generate divine pride “This is my resultant dharmakaya” which essentially is identifying and putting that label on that wisdom body of the basis, that mind which ascertains emptiness. It is this valid mind that then arises as the deity. Then this valid mind arises in the aspect of the deity’s body. Then you identify this is the deity’s body, this is my resultant rupakaya (form body). That is the thing that you develop clear appearance with respect to, and that is the thing that you develop divine pride as well and you identify. 
This is an extremely important point. You really have to get your head around this.  We talk about the apprehension factor or the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. We use this phrase. Then we talk about the unique features of tantra which is that in one mind both factor of method and wisdom are indivisibly fused in one entity. These two are found in one mind. These are the heart features of secret mantra. Why is this crucial? Because when we are talking about the resultant state of full enlightenment, when we talk about the truth body and the form body, the truth body and the form body are one entity, indivisibly one. They are different but one entity. If the resultant’s stage has such a feature, then at the time of the path, the path which is the cause of that result must possess similar feature. So at the time of the path, you must have both method and wisdom fused indivisibly in the consciousness at the time of the path; without which you cannot have such the result. 
Because of the resultant stage is like that, the form and truth bodies are indivisible one entity. So you must able to posit how at the time of the path, there is a correct cause that will lead such a result. You must know how to posit at the time of the path. In term of tantra how these two factors of the method and wisdom indivisible fused in one consciousness. 
Hence, there is a need to understand the meaning behind the phrase - the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. 
This apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity is essentially talking about the wisdom realizing emptiness. This is the basis of accomplishment of the deity. This is the very thing that transform into the deity. This apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity, basically is the wisdom realizing emptiness that is the basis of accomplishment. This very thing becomes the deity. It is a mind realizing emptiness appearing in the form or aspect of the deity. So that appearance in the aspect of the deity constitutes the factor of method which is a cause for the form body. That is the appearance factor of the mind. The ascertainment factor of the mind, that mind is essentially a mind realizing emptiness, constitutes the wisdom factor which is a cause for the dharmakaya. We are just talking about the same thing - one mind, whether you are talking about its appearance or what it is realizing. These two are one together. This apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. When they appear as the deity, this becomes the basis of designation to identify oneself as the deity. You develop the divine pride on the basis of that. Of course then there is clear appearance.
Khen Rinpoche: You got what I am talking? You must get that first. There are so many things. Later you ask another question you confuse. First you must get that what I am talking. Make sure it goes inside deep down, Not only in the space but make sure goes down. Later I ask another question you confuse again. Are you getting something? Okay, now ask questions. If not clear, ask questions.
Student 3: The practices of all the 4 classes of tantra, the apprehension factor of this wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as deity, at that level, the wisdom realizing emptiness becomes the basis of designation for the “I”. At that level will be only being in dependence on the mind, the consciousness aspect because at that level the body is still a coarse body. So there is no basis of designation for the body, from the side of the body, to call I of the deity.
Khen Rinpoche: What is posited as the basis of designation of the person?
Student 3: Either the body or mind?
Ven Gyurme: Any of the five aggregates. Basically four to five. 
Student 3: So, in this case it is only the consciousness aspect,, the four without the form. So, we do not use the form as the basis of designation for this purpose because the meditator at this juncture. …..
Khen Rinpoche: There is a threefold division of the body and mind into coarse, subtle and extremely subtle. This will be apparent in the Highest Yoga Tantra section. As such, there must be a different level of subtleties of the I or the person, the designated object. As such, you will not be able to find any better explanation than what is found in the Highest Yoga Tantra explanation of what the I is. At the end of the day, the final basis of designation of the person is the extremely subtle wind mind. That is the basis of designation. Then there is the person that is designated in relation to that. That I is the thing that moves from life to life and that thing that moves to enlightenment.
Student 3: So, therefore whatever stages of dissolution here, we will not be able to actually achieve the deity’s body. What is being explain here is the wisdom body (#8) and then after that the form body (#9) on the chart. So, that form body will not be the actual form body. In another words, the 3 lower classes of tantra will not be able to achieve enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche: I am just giving idea. You do have to leave the session. You leave the session from within the state of emptiness and arise as the deity. The practice is like that. You arise as the deity because definitely you have to get out of the meditative equipoise. You have to arise into the post meditative equipoise. You have to arise into subsequent attainment. In the subsequent attainment, although the meditation effect is not exactly the same as during the session, nevertheless it is said that one has to rely on mindfulness to keep divine pride and clear appearance as much as possible even in post session. Therefore, you see instruction like seeing your body as the deity’s body, seeing your speech as the deity’s mantra and you have this idea recognizing whatever thought you have seems as dharmakaya. Without leaving off the three recognitions and go about doing whatever you need to do including making mandala offering, prostrations, offerings and so and so forth to accumulate merits and purifying the obscurations.
Student 2: Upon achieving the concentration abiding in sound, it said down here, one achieves calm-abiding 
Khen Rinpoche: That one talk later. I haven’t covered the topic.
Student 3:  But I am just trying to see whether that is the stage one develops bodhicitta because within calm-abiding, uncontrived bodhicitta arises. This is the same problem with the earlier module Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds whether one generates at the beginning or at the chapter of concentration when the exchanging self and others is attained. I have the same problem with that.
Concentration abiding in sound is the measure of achieving calm-abiding in action tantra. So, in this the point where the tantric practitioner of action tantra generates uncontrived bodhicitta?
Khen Rinpoche: Think about. You got the question?
Student 4:   The text does not say repetition observing the letters. It says the repetition observing the form of the letters. That one understood. It also explained to us the meaning of the form and the meaning of the letters.
Khen Rinpoche: Explanation is meaning of the letters. What mean letters? What mean ‘A’? ‘A’ is letter. My question is ‘A’ is letter. Okay?
Student 4: When we are doing this meditation, are we just trying to meditate on just the syllables on the mantra garland? 
Khen Rinpoche: In the beginning yes. When you engage in the repetition observing the form of the letters, you are thinking about the syllables.
Student 4: The physical form of the syllables?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. You just said it. You didn’t say syllables. You said the physical form of the syllables which mean the syllable is not the physical form. What is syllable mean? ‘A’ is syllable. Yes or no? Is“A’ a syllable?
Student 45 ‘A’ is an alphabet.
Khen Rinpoche: First is to recognize ‘A’.
Student 4: ‘A’ is an alphabet in the English language.
Khen Rinpoche: Alphabet? Then syllable is what? ‘A’ and ‘B’ put together syllables? ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ syllables or not?
Student 4: No, it is alphabet.
Khen Rinpoche: ABC, Amitabha Buddhist Center.
Student 4: That is the initial of Amitabha Buddhist Center.
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, what I meant you understand?
Student 4: Ven Gyurme mentioned that there is a difference between basis of designation and designated object.  I guess meditating on them means the experience is also difference.
Khen Rinpoche: Different, object is difference.
Student 4: To make it simple. We are just meditating on the physical form of the syllables. Correct? Can I confirm that?
Khen Rinpoche: The letter, OM MANI PADME HUM, the written letter. Shape of the letter.
Student 4: My second question is this: I was thinking of that verse in the Foundation of All Good Qualities where it says that: May I quickly arise the union of calm-abiding and special insights and having trained in the pure path, may I enter the vajra vehicle”. Here in the practice of repetition of the mantra, the purpose of it is to actually develop calm-abiding. I just get a little confused in the sense that does it not means that calm-abiding has already been attained before doing a tantric practice. I am trying to reconcile this with those two verses of Foundation of All Good Qualities.
Khen Rinpoche: So that was the question: before entering the tantric path, does one necessarily have to realize all those things that come before that including up to calm-abiding and special insights. Do you need that or not in order to enter the tantric path? When did you enter the tantric path? Is it following the order of the foundation or not? Renunciation then bodhicitta, calm-abiding, special insight then after you have all those then somehow something happens that you enter the tantra or is it necessarily so? That was my question. Don’t ask me back. I have my answer.
Student 4: If I am practising tantra, should I practice Action Tantra first before going to Highest Yoga Tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: First action is needed.
Student 4: Does that means we should actually before we practice Highest Yoga Tantra, we should actually go through the door of Action Tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: We talked about the 3 vehicles. We have talked about the difference between the Hinayana and the Mahayana. We have already said that you don’t need to enter the Hinayana Path before you enter the Mahayana Path. You are clear about that? Don’t forget. 
Mahayana is divided into two: Mahayana Sutra and Mahayana Tantra. Do you need to enter the Mahayana Sutric Path before entering the Mahayana Tantric Path? End of the day, the answer is no need. Likewise, in order to enter the Highest Yoga Tantric path, do you need to enter first the Action Tantric Path?  Or in order to enter the Highest Yoga Tantra, do you need to enter action tantra first or not? The answer is not necessarily. That is the final answer and the conclusion is that. 
While it is easy to say the answer is no, you don’t need. But you have to know why. You say no is easy. I say no is easy. For example, start with Hinayana and Mahayana, before you enter the Mahayana Path, must you enter the Hinayana Path or not first? The answer is clear, it is no. Why? If you say no, it is not easy. So before you enter the Mahayana Path, do you need to enter the Hinayana Path or not? Yes or no? Somebody comes and answers? You say no? Answer. Come and I will ask the question. How? How stable you are.
Student 5: No. I said no. 
Khen Rinpoche: No? Don’t you need to generate renunciation prior to entering the Mahayana Path?
Student 5: Can be generated together with mind generation.
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t it say in the Lamrim that prior to training in the path of the person of great capacity, one must have trained in the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity. 
Student 5: But also different sentient beings have different capabilities so that is why there are 3 vehicles.
Khen Rinpoche: First answer that one. Isn’t it said in the Lamrim that prior to training in the path of person of great capacity and prior to actualizing it, one must have trained in the path that is shared with the person of middling capacity? Isn’t that the case stated in the Lamrim clearly isn’t it?
Student 5: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity – renunciation?
Student 5: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore it follows that prior to entering the Mahayana Path, you must generate the Hinayana Path, isn’t it?
Student 5: No
Khen Rinpoche: Whenever you say no, you already said yes. Only you said no but indirectly you said yes. Contradicting. No? You get the point? No, no debate you must get the point no?
Student 5: No, I follow what you are saying. To turn away the arguing you have to have very strong reason to counter. 
When Khen Rinpoche was explaining the different types of initiation received, we have the water initiation and crown initiation earlier on. The water initiation through that one attains perfect abandonment of the two stains. My question is relating to the two stains. I was wondering what the two stains were. Has it got something to do with abandoning the stains of the intermediate state and the state of rebirth?  In HYT, in some of the prayers that you recite, it talks about may I abandon the stain of the intermediate state and then may I abandon the stain of rebirth. 
 Anyway, I am not sure where to match these all to, where does these two plug in so if that can be explained at some stage?
Khen Rinpoche: Maybe we can elaborate on that in the future.
Student 5: Also whether do those two stains apply across all the four classes of tantra. That is what I would like to know.
Khen Rinpoche: If we talk about the water initiation, there are two initiations in action tantra: the water and the crown:
- Water initiation purifies primarily the defilement of the mind. 
- Crown initiation purifies primarily the defilement of the body. 
I guess of the speech, it must be included in that as well.
In action tantra, the water initiation purifies the defilement of the mind and it establishes the potential to actualize the resultant dharmakaya
the crown initiation purifies the defilement of the body and places an imprints or potential to actualize the resultant form body.
But when you talk about the water initiation in the Highest Yoga Tantra , the water initiation in the Highest Yoga Tantra is part of the vase initiation. In the Highest Yoga Tantra, they talk primarily of the four major initiations: the vase, secret, knowledge wisdom and words initiation. 
In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, it is the vase initiation as a whole that purifies the defilement of the body. If you remember in action tantra, we talk about the 3 lineages: the tathagata, lotus and vajra lineage. The tathagata being the highest and the tathagata lineage is essentially the factor of purity of the pure body arising as deity primarily in the aspect of Vairochana. That is considered to be the supreme. In Highest Yoga Tantra, it is the reverse in that the factor of the purity of the mind arising as the deity, Akshobya is taking as the principal. So, there is a difference. Why is that this difference? It is something to think about that.