Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L18.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:21.179501
================================================================================

As seen in the earlier classes, in the context of the action tantra:
You generate ourselves as the deity through the 6 deities
On that basis that you visualize well all the 4 branches
Then you engage in the repetition. (Two forms of repetition - whispered and mental)
There are 2 types of repetition:
the repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra
the repetition observing the sound of the mantra
As for the repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra, when you observe the form of the letters at the heart of the front generation deity, there are three objects of observation:
Deity’s body in front
Moon disc at the heart of the deity
Mantra garland on the moon disc
As you move to the practice of the repetition observing the form of the letters at one’s own heart then the object of observation becomes two:
Moon disc
Mantra garland on the moon disc
When as you move on to the repetition of observing the sound of the mantra, there is only one focal object:
Sound of the mantra
You can see progressively the object of observation become more subtle. This the way of making the mind that is meditating more subtle as well. You have to know these essential points. 
As I have said before, when you engage in the repetition observing the sound of the mantra, there is only one focal object or one main object of observation which is the sound of the mantra. You focus on the sound of the mantra and engage either in whispered or mental repetition.
What is this sound of the mantra you are focusing on?  
It is as if you are listening to your own repetition. It is your own mind making that sound. Then you focus on that and engage in either whispered or mental repetition.
This is the manner in which the four branches repetition is performed. At the end of this practice you arrive at this repetition observing the sound of the mantra.
This is just a repeat of what was already covered earlier. As I have mentioned before, when you engage in approximation of the deity, approximation here means to get closer to the deity.  Whether we call it retreat or engaging on the approximation, that is what you are trying to get closer to the deity.  After you have finished with this practice, and when you are going to end the session there is a way of leaving off the repetition. 
Here we are talking about leaving off the session after completing the repetition observing the sound of the mantra.  After you have completed the practice of the repetition observing the sound of the mantra, how do you leaving the session? 
You move from observing the sound of the mantra to observing the letters of the mantra.  In the case of Chenrezig, there is six letters Om Mani Padme Hum. 
You switch your mind attention to the letters of the mantra which is at the heart of the front generation deity. 
Then you move from observing the letters of the mantra to observing the moon disc. 
Then you move from observing the moon disc to observing the body of the front generation deity.
Then you move from observing that to yourself appearing as the deity.  
Then the mind that is visualizing the deity becomes again more subtle, because you leave off focusing on yourself as the deity body to the letters of the mantra at your heart. 
Then you leave off observing the form of the letters at your heart and move on observing the sound of the mantra.
Then the sound of the mantra that you focused on gradually disappears into emptiness.
Then you arise at the stage which is called the wisdom body or wisdom truth body which I think essential is arriving at the mind that ascertains emptiness. 
The emptiness and the mind observing it become one taste i.e. become inseparable.
While this is what I am going to say now is not mentioned in action tantra. Essentially, I guess is arriving at the point where you imagine it is the mind of clear light that ascertains emptiness. In short you arrive at the mind ascertaining emptiness.
You leave off that meditative equipoise by arising as the deity into the subsequent attainment. In post meditative equipoise, you view everything as illusory. You arise as the deity, one face two arms. With that you go about doing things such as accumulating merits and purifying negativities and obscurations.
The main practice during the session is on the basis of the six deities you engage in the four branches repetition. As you leave off the session, you arise from emptiness into the deity. In the post meditation session, you arise into the deity. During the post-meditation session, it is not a time you can just do anything as it is not as if the practice is done. Rather it is in another phase of practice which is called post-meditation session, where one is supposed to be always mindful with the idea that one is the deity.
One has the recognition or the attitude that:
one’s body is the deity’s body, 
one’s speech as mantra, and 
ones’ mind as the dharmakaya
While maintaining these three recognitions in the post-meditation session, one goes about doing activities such as reading the text, making offering, making images of buddha tsa tsa and so forth.
The time that is spent in-between sessions, what we call the post-meditative session, is extremely important. It is not the time we literally just relax completely and just do whatever you like. That is not the case.  If your meditation has culminated in producing whatever is supposed to produce then that is a different matter. If that is not the case, since you need to enter into the session again from the post-meditative session, the post-meditative session has to benefit the meditation session. If you are not careful about what to do during the post-meditative session, it is not going to be helpful when you engage in the meditation session again. In fact you might find it difficult to move back again into the practice if you are not careful during the post-meditative session. In general, the post-meditative session is definitely little bit more relax then the actual meditation session, nevertheless, in the post-meditative session, whatever you have to do, you have to do it without being separated from the three recognitions. The post-meditative session suppose to help the meditation session. 
In the context of Mahayana Sutra, we talk about wisdom of meditative equipoise and wisdom of subsequent attainment. During subsequent attainment, the bodhisattvas engage in the accumulation of merits by working hard. What is the point? The point is that when they go back into meditative equipoise their accumulation of merit will aid in their meditation on emptiness. Likewise here, in order for the post-meditative session to benefit the actual meditation session, therefore during the post post-meditative session, one must engage in whatever activities without being separated from the three recognitions. If you do that, then it will be much easier when you enter into the meditation session again focusing on the six deities and doing the four branches of meditation.  This is how thing has to be done.  For people who are really dying to have the experience of the path of realization, this is how it has to be done.  This is a serious business. However, for people like ourselves, in the session we meditate but once we get off the seat from the session, it is like completely in a different world. We see no connection between the sessions. We didn’t know there is a connection between that and what we have to do during the time out of session. That is why we are not getting anywhere.
Question: Is there a difference between the sessions and the time in-between session? Should there be a difference?  Is there a difference?  
Khen Rinpoche: For us, any difference or the same?  
(Student’s response inaudible) 
Khen Rinpoche: Opposite?  Must be opposite. 
At least we can use whatever information we have gathered here and put it into practice. If you happen to be doing retreat or are going to do retreat, then you should as much as possible to implement whatever you know and get used to the theory and the practice. That is how habit can be built up. Even if it is not retreat, try to apply as much as possible of whatever you have learned to the daily recitation. Try to utilize the information as much as possible and to think along those lines as much as possible.
[BP1: At the end of the session, how do we stop the repetition? During the practice, we had generated the deity in front, the moon disc at its heart together with letters of the mantra and the sound of the mantra reverberating from those letters. What follows is the dissolution process using the example of the Chenrezig practice: 
• In the centre of the mandala is Chenrezig 
• At the heart of Chenrezig is the moon disc together with the letters of the mantra Om Mani Padme Hum. 
• The sound of the mantra is reverberating. 
• The sound of the mantra dissolves into the letters of the mantra 
• The letters of the mantra dissolves into the moon disc 
• The moon disc dissolves into the body of the front generation deity. 
• We now focus on the body of the front generation deity. 
• We then absorb the front generation Chenrezig into ourselves. There is no longer any front generation deity. 
• What is left now is oneself as the deity. One’s body dissolves into the letters of the mantra at one’s heart 
• The letters of the mantras at one’s heart dissolves and becomes the entity of the sound of the mantra reverberating at the level of one’s heart. 
• One focuses on the emptiness of that sound and think that it does not exist inherently. What appears is emptiness. 
• ● Within the state of emptiness focusing on the emptiness of the sound of the mantras, one arises as the deity. It is also said that, within the state of emptiness, one can arise as one’s normal self. The deity or oneself is like an illusion.]
The path of action tantra can be condensed into these 3 meditations:
Meditation on deity body - Mahamudra
Meditation on deity’s speech  - mantra
Meditating on the deity’s mind - suchness.
Meditation on the deity’s body – Mahamudra is essentially the meditation on the deity’s body; which is meditation on the six deities.
There is meditation on deity’s speech as mantra of which there are the two concentrations.
We have finished with the first: concentration with repetition
The main thing is concentration without repetition of which there is:
Concentration abiding in fire
Concentration abiding in sound. 
These two will come soon.
There is meditation on the deity’s mind – suchness. Here is primarily the concentration without repetition of which is the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound.  
For the concentration without repetition, in the root text it says the absorption not reliant on recitation, which is translated as concentration without repetition which is:
The concentration abiding in fire
The concentration abiding in sound 
The concentration that bestows liberation at the end of sound.
You really have to know these terms well. You really have to be able to say it out. This is really the bare minimum, and without which is really difficult. So starting from the six deities, you should be able to say right away:
what are the 6 deities
what are the 4 branches
As for the concentration with repetition, you should be able to say:
concentration on repetition observing the form of letters of the mantra, 
concentration on repetition observing the sound of the mantra
As for concentration without repetition, there are three:
Concentration abiding in fire 
Concentration abiding in sound
Concentration bestows liberation at the end of sound.
After you have meditated on concentration with repetition then you engage in concentration without repetition.
What do you visualize when practising the concentration abiding in fire? 
In the heart of yourself as the deity, you visualize a tongue of flame.
Khen Rinpoche: You know what is a tongue of flame? This is easy. When you light the candle, there is a flame. Like that.  
You visualize a tongue of flame at the heart of yourself as the deity.  You visualize this tongue of flame as very stable as if it is not disturbed by wind. Visualize the tongue of flame clearly which means is bright.
Visualize the tongue of flame is your wisdom realizing emptiness appearing in the aspect of the sound of the mantra resonating within the tongue of flame.
At the heart of you as the deity with a tongue of flame and in there is the sound of the mantra of the deity resonating. This sound of the mantra is the nature of your very own mind:
- The entity is your mind
- The mind realizing suchness but appearing in the aspect of sound of the mantra resonating inside within the tongue of flame. 
- You put your attention on the sound of the mantra. 
Here in the concentration abiding in fire, there are two focal objects:
The tongue of flame
The sound of the mantra that is resonating inside it.
There is this tongue of the flame at the heart of yourself as a deity.
Inside the tongue of flame is the sound of the mantra that is resonating. 
The entity of which is your mind realizing suchness. 
But here when you are focusing on the sound, it is not like what we did before.  Earlier on, in the repetition observing the sound of the mantra, we regarded the sound as if it was made by ourselves. It is as if we were listening to our own repetition. But here it is not like that. Here, in the concentration abiding in fire, you are listening to the sound as if it is coming from within that tongue of flame. It is not as if you are listening to your own repetition.  It is not like that.
Since this is a concentration abiding in fire, which is a concentration without repetition, there is nothing to repeat here. There is nothing to recite. So there is no whispered repetition or mental repetition. The practice is just keeping focus and attention on the tongue of the flame and the sound of the mantra that is resonating inside. 
After performing this meditation for a while, and if it is done correctly, then there will be certain signs of proficiency such as:
becoming lesser and lesser hungry, 
becoming free from hunger, 
free from thirst 
endowed with blissful feeling of heat in the body.
It is said in the teachings that such signs of proficiency will arise if one has engaged in concentration abiding in fire and have done it well and correctly. 
Next is the concentration abiding in sound. What do you visualize? 
At the heart of yourself as the deity, you visualize there is an orb of light. We say a moon mandala but is an orb of light. You don’t visualize the moon in the usual way as lying down but visualize it upright; an orb of light. 
Inside that orb of light (the upright moon mandala), visualize a very small deity that looks exactly like yourself. Visualize this external deity as very very small deity. 
Inside the heart of this small deity at your own heart is a tongue of flame. Inside the tongue of flame is the sound of the mantra that is resonating. 
Khen Rinpoche: Ok. Clear? If you get the idea, then it is ok. You must first get the idea. 
The concentration abiding in sound involves you as the deity and in the heart of yourself as the deity is an orb of light, which is a moon mandala not lying flat but upright. Essentially it is an orb of light. 
In that moon mandala there is a small deity that looks exactly like the external deity, which is yourself.  In the heart of the very small deity, is a tongue of flame. Inside that tongue of flame is the sound of mantra reverberating (resonating).
Student 1: The moon mandala or what Ven Gyurme say “orb”, is it like a bubble? 
Khen Rinpoche: You can visualize 
Student 1: Then the abiding in fire inside the flame, the sound of mantra is just sound. There is no letters? 
Khen Rinpoche: No letter.
Here in the concentration of abiding in sound:
- In the heart of yourself as the deity there is an orb of light.
- Inside there is a very small deity. 
- In the heart of that deity is a tongue of flame. 
- Inside that tongue of flame imagine there is the sound of the mantra reverberating or resonating. 
You just place your attention on that and the sound is like somebody else reciting. You just focus on the sound of the mantra reverberating. You just do that. You don’t focus so much on the tongue of flame but just the sound.
At the culmination of the concentration abiding in sound, calm abiding is accomplished. This is so in the case of action tantra, performance tantra and maybe even yoga tantra. So when the concentration abiding in sound is culminated, then calm abiding is achieved. 
If you have read the text on your own, you should remember reading this sentence which says:
Calm abiding 
You establish calm abiding in the stages up to and including meditative absorption on sound
(meditative absorption on sound is translated as the concentration abiding in sound)
What it is saying is that after meditating well on the concentration abiding in sound and after it has culminated, that is you have reached the end of the practice of concentration abiding in sound, you achieve calm abiding. 
Absorption bestowing freedom at the limit of sound 
From the limit of sound, you meditate on insight. 
(Translated as From deliberation at the end of sound, you meditate on special insight) 
Khen Rinpoche: I am reading from your root text.
Union of calm abiding and insight
If you apply analytical wisdom excessively, you will disrupt the previously developed stability. Therefore you need to alternate analysis and placement until you have successfully united calm abiding with the insight realizing emptiness. 
When you obtain insight realizing emptiness, you progress to the path of preparation, and when you perceptually comprehend emptiness, you progress to the path of seeing, just as you do in the Perfection Vehicle.
The concentration with repetition and within the concentration without repetition including up to the concentration abiding in sound is the yoga with signs. 
Concentration bestows liberation at the end of sound, here the sound refers to the earlier concentration of abiding in sound. 
At the end of that, what are you bestowed?  What are you given by this concentration? 
You are bestowed the final truth body. The liberation here means the final truth body. This is the concentration that bestows the final truth body (dharmakaya) at the end of sound. 
What is it that will bestow this final truth body which is liberation at the end of sound?
It is the wisdom realizing emptiness. In this context it refers to the special insight focusing on emptiness.
What happens after the concentration abiding in sound is culminated? You already have calm abiding. What comes after that?
In terms of the path you have the special insight focusing emptiness. With that you enter the Path of Preparation. Subsequently after that you enter the Path of Seeing and so on and so forth moving towards liberation. 
In that sense when does the real progress towards liberation starts? It starts when you have special insight focusing on emptiness. That is the thing that will give you that liberation. 
There are two concentrations: with repetition and without repetition. 
Within the concentration without repetition there are three:
Concentration of abiding in fire,
Concentration of abiding in sound
Concentration of bestowing liberation at the end of sound
The first two – concentration of abiding in fire and concentration of abiding in sound - fall under the yoga with signs. 
The concentration of bestowing liberation at the end of sound is yoga without signs.
Student 2: Since today topic is about attainment of calm abiding, previously  we were taught calm abiding through the 9 stages, it is actually fixated to one focal object. Right now we are learning all these absorptions, repetition and without repetition, and our focal objects are like changing from one to another to another. At the end of the day, how is this calm abiding is attained because the object is kind of changing. When we are learning calm abiding we are just sitting there without moving our mouth or our hands, but when we are doing the whispered repetition we are moving our mouth, and also our hands, malas and so forth. How do we achieve attain calm abiding with changing objects of concentration and moving our mouth and hands?  I don’t know how to fit this the nine stages to calm abiding in that sense. Even when we say when we attain calm abiding at the end is actually focusing on one object. 
In the last lesson, it was mentioned about this phenomenon “apprehension aspects of wisdom”. What exactly apprehension aspects of wisdom arising as a deity? Does it mean that there is an apprehender aspect of wisdom? Or is there a difference between these two?
Khen Rinpoche: Ok. Let’s deal with the 2nd question first. In the expression “the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as deity”, what is this apprehension aspect? 
If apprehension aspect is translated literally from Tibetan to English, you probably have to say apprehended aspect or aspect of the apprehended. Here it is translated as apprehension aspect. There are a couple of ways to understand this sung nam or apprehension aspect or apprehended aspect. What it means here is the consciousness. We should not take that here to mean the object, it means the consciousness.
If we talk about the wisdom realizing emptiness, what is appearing to this wisdom? It is emptiness. 
So emptiness is the apprehended. 
What is being apprehended?
Emptiness is the apprehended  
What is apprehending it? The mind - the apprehender. 
The mind that takes emptiness as the object, and that is the apprehender. 
So you have the apprehended and the apprehender. 
This apprehender has the aspect of the apprehended. 
In Lorig, we talk about the main mind and the mental factors having the concomitant of aspect. One of the 5 concomitant is the aspect. So having the concomitant of aspect is the same thing here. 
[BP1 Lorig
A main mind is concomitant by way of the five similarities with the mental factors in its retinue. What are these five similarities? 
1. Similar support (or basis) 
2. Similar object of observation: both the main mind and the mental factors in its retinue observe the same object. 
3. Similar [subjective] aspect: they both have the same aspect. 
4. Similar time: they are both produced, abide, and disintegrate at the same time. 
5. Similar substance: just as there is only main mind  e.g., an eye primary consciousness apprehending blue, there can only be one mental factor of feeling in the retinue of that main mind. In that sense, they have similar substances.
For example, an eye consciousness apprehending blue and the mental factor of feeling in its retinue are concomitant by way of the five similarities.]
Khen Rinpoche: You shouldn’t forget all the topics. 
Here the phrase “the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity”, the apprehension aspect here means wisdom realizing emptiness. 
Why is it called the apprehension aspect or having the aspect of apprehended? 
Because this is the mind having the aspect of emptiness; possessing the aspect of emptiness. .
Student 2: So basically it is just saying wisdom realizing emptiness arising as a deity. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, you can say that.
Student 2: When the person is in meditative equipoise what is the object this wisdom realizing emptiness that is appearing? Emptiness, right?
Khen Rinpoche: We didn’t say it has to be the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. We say wisdom realizing emptiness. We talk about the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness arising as the deity. At the beginning of the practice, even one does not have the actual valid cognition or realization of emptiness, but has some understanding of emptiness. So it is that mind that has some understanding of emptiness which you imagine arising as deity. However, if you have realized emptiness, then it is the wisdom realizing emptiness that arises as deity.  Then in the context of lower tantra we talk about yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. 
If you are talking about wisdom directly realizing emptiness, does the deity’s body appear to the consciousness or not? 
I don’t know whether to say appear or not. Probably not even in the context of tantra to say the deity’s body appear to the wisdom of meditative equipoise directly emptiness. 
Does the deity’s body appear to the consciousness or not?  
I don’t know whether to say appear or not. I think probably not even in the context of tantra to say the deity’s body appears to the wisdom directly realizing emptiness.
If you are talking about just wisdom realizing emptiness, not directly in the context of the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as deity,  then we are just talking about wisdom realizing emptiness which is a conceptual realization. Then in tantra, there is a position we say that deity’s body appear especially in the context of yoga with signs, it appears.
Here we need to know is, in the context of generating the deity, for example, we are generating ourselves as the deity. When we engage in self-generation, we always start with meditation on emptiness. We are not just meditating on just mere nothingness or mere vacuity, but at least to have some understanding of emptiness, the emptiness of inherent existence. I guess we imagine that while we don’t have the realization at all. Whatever understanding we have of emptiness, we imagine that our mind ascertain emptiness and that mind that has ascertained emptiness is one taste with emptiness; it become indivisibly conjoined with emptiness. In that there is no dualistic appearance whatever.  We imagine that mind arise as deity. 
The idea of first purifying into emptiness is to overcome ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness in tantra. So in order to overcome ordinary appearance you have to withdraw all appearances into emptiness. You purify them into emptiness. You absorb them into emptiness. Essentially the point is generating the mind ascertaining emptiness. Even if it is make believe by imagining the mind ascertains emptiness and that mind that has ascertained emptiness has become one with emptiness - indivisible. Imagine that there is no dualistic appearance. When we talk about the dharmakaya, that is what we are getting at. With this meditation, particular this mind that we imagine has realized emptiness and is oneness with emptiness, we felt that this is the dharmakaya. If you talk about it from the sutric point of view, it is kind of introduction to the phrase “the mind is in the nature of clear light, or the mind is clear light”. 
Can you remember the question about who exactly is the person who arises as deity? There is debate about that. There are different views about what exactly is this “I”.  If we enter into that debate without holding to one position at least, then it is going to be very confusing. If we have something to think about and just start from that one position and based on that then if you go onto the debate, it is better and less confusing. 
So back to “the apprehension of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as deity”, let’s talk about the apprehension aspect, which basically is the mind that has ascertained emptiness, the wisdom realizing emptiness. This mind is indivisibly one with the object of emptiness; no dualistic appearance. Then we identify and think “This is the dharmakaya” and arise as the deity. The apprehension aspect of wisdom realizing emptiness that being the basis of accomplishment is that which arises as the deity.
It is the wisdom realizing emptiness which arises as the deity. This means it appears as the deity.
Whatever deity you want to be appearing such as Chenrezig, it is that wisdom realizing emptiness which arises as the deity.
After it has appeared as the deity, then you cultivate clear appearance. Meditate clearly on what is appearing. 
You cultivate clear appearance as the deity and you are supposed to engage in divine pride as well. What is it that we are identifying ourselves as? 
What is the basis of this divine pride?
You are supposed to identify ourselves as deity. The basis of designation is that appearance as that deity. So we try to elicit as clear appearance of ourselves as deity. The clear appearance of that deity becomes the basis of designation for us to think or to identify “This is me.”
You need to really understand this very well.  In short, one meditates on emptiness and then the mind realizes emptiness. That wisdom becomes the basis of accomplishment of the deity, the form body. That wisdom realizes emptiness is generated into the deity, and appears in the aspect of the deity. This aspect of the deity becomes the basis of designation. In relation to this basis of designation, then there is a designated object - the mere imputed object which is the “I”, “I” am this, “I” am the actual Buddha, “I” am Chenrezig, “I” am whatever deity.
Within this deity, the wisdom realizes emptiness, is the basis of accomplishment or appearing in the form of the deity’s body. This wisdom appears as the deity body. 
So within one consciousness there is both method and wisdom. If you talk about tantra in general, then the meaning of Vajrayana comes into play here. You can see the meaning of Vajrayana here on how these wisdom and method are found in one consciousness together. In the context of the three lower classes of tantra, we called it the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. 
Whatever it is, the point here is within one mind, both method and wisdom are present. 
In there it is the mind realizing emptiness. That is the factor of wisdom. 
It appearing in the aspect of deity is the factor of method. 
So both method and wisdom are found in one mind, one entity. So that is the meaning of Vajrayana.
In the lower classes of tantra, yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity are the causes of the two bodies of the result; 
the form body and the truth body being one entity at the time of result
 the factor of method and wisdom are fused into one consciousness, at the time of the cause.
So that is the meaning of Vajra.
In this fundamental characteristic of Vajrayana, this is what Vajrayana is. This is what in the context of the lower tantra, the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity is. It is with this understanding that our understanding of enlightenment becomes more profound. 
When we talk about enlightenment, we talk about the Buddha’s body and mind being oneness. Wherever the Buddha’s mind pervades, the Buddha body is there.
Wherever the Buddha’s body is, the speech is there. 
Basically wherever the Buddha mind is, the body and speech is there. They are indivisibility one. 
How do you appreciate this? We are able to better appreciate this and come to understand how this is possible if you understand Vajrayana. Because at the time of the cause, at the time of the path, even in one consciousness, both factor of method and factor of wisdom are present. That makes it possible to have a result where both bodies - the truth body and the form body (rupakaya) - are indivisibly one in entity.
In Vajrayana, the substantial cause of the form body is the meditation of the deity body. 
The substantial cause, as such is called method in Vajrayana.
So the meditation on the deity body is the substantial cause of the form body. It is called method. 
The wisdom realizing emptiness is the substantial cause of the truth body. 
Actually whether we are talking about the substantial cause of the form body or the substantial cause of the truth body, if you look at it, it is the same thing. We are talking about the mind - the wisdom realizing emptiness.
To gain an understanding of this is very important. It is with this understanding that you can see what the difference between sutra and tantra is. Then you can see why tantra is more profound and more powerful. It all comes down to understanding this point. In tantra, the point is to overcome ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. Therefore, first you will have to purify in emptiness and then within the state of emptiness, that wisdom realizes emptiness is visualize to appears in the aspect of the deity. After you have appeared as the deity then you meditate on clear appearance and divine pride to overcome ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness.
Q&A
Student 2: For the wisdom that really realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise, only emptiness arises. For that mind, is there wisdom and method in the same entity?
Khen Rinpoche: If you are talking about the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the context of tantra, does method appear or not? Is the deity body appears or not? You have to say no. 
In the context of tantra, is this wisdom directly realizing emptiness the deity yoga or not? Then what are you going to say? You have to say yes. You cannot say no.
Why is this still deity yoga? The answer will come in the text soon.
Student 2: In relation to divine pride, what if the person is somebody who holds a MOS or even AMWS?
As a wisdom realizing emptiness of self sufficient substantially self, and this person could have also sees this wisdom and think that this wisdom arise as the deity. Is that a divine pride?
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s ask one by one. In the Shangri-la dialogue recently, how they ask question? They ask four questions. One type, five question, they only answer one type. Maybe you copy from there I don’t know. One by one is better for me. I don’t have this brain ….
It is mentioned clearly in the text that there are people who entered the tantric path with the MOS view, which means people with this view meditate on deity yoga and generate clear appearance and divine pride. It is clear in the text that there are people who are of MOS view have entered the tantric path. What about the AMWS? Nobody said anything.
It is clear that those with the MOS view where the emptiness of subject and object as different entities. Nothing is said about the AMWS. 
What about people who entered the tantric path based on realizing the emptiness of self-sufficient substantially existent person? I really wonder. Probably you are not going to have people who enter the tantric just by having the realization of the emptiness of self-sufficient substantially existent person.
As to why the MOS view is singled out, and with that it is possible to enter the tantric path. I guess is has to do with the MOS view about how the emptiness of the subject and object existing as separate entities. According to the view, everything is in the nature of the mind. Everything is established from the ripening of the certain predisposition and produces both subject and object. That is how everything is in the nature of mind. When one has that view, I guess that makes one at least closer to the Prasangika view of how things exist in mere name. So with the view of how everything is in the nature of mind, probably one is able to move on and really appreciate the Prasangika view on how everything exist in mere name. Anyway it is clear in the text that you can enter the tantric path with a MOS view, but not sure about AMWS. If I see anything I will let you know.
Student 2: As for the MOS, that wisdom that realizes emptiness of the object and subject being different entities, with that you arise as the deity and hold that as divine pride. Then for ordinary being who make believe thinking that they understand what emptiness is, and think that the understanding which arises as the deity and hold that as the deity, is that really considered as divine pride?  It is possible for a person who really thinks that they are Buddha and really believed they are Buddha; also known as hallucination. Then there are also people who claimed they are Buddha and knowing that they are not Buddha. In that sense is that called divine pride? When do you draw the line between the divine pride and the other seven types of pride that we know of?
Khen Rinpoche: It was very much emphasized that prior to engaging in tantra, entering tantra, or practicing tantra, one must have trained the mind well in the shared path, in particular, one must have studied well and gained a good understanding of emptiness as explained by Nagarjuna and his spiritual sons. So this is very much emphasized. Otherwise, without the correct understanding of emptiness, then just meditating on nothingness or vacuity and thinking that as emptiness and thinking that arises as deity, for sure. that is really hallucination. Meditating on this is just nonsensical. It is pointless and it is a waste of time because it doesn’t lead to anything beneficial at all. Nothing positive comes out of it.
Here in the practice of tantra, when there is deity yoga involved, it always asks you to meditate on emptiness. That mind which realizes emptiness taken as the basis of accomplishment for arising as the deity, and that wisdom realizes emptiness arising as deity. After appearing as the deity, with that appearance of the deity as the basis of designation, then you identify yourselves as the deity. With that you meditate on clear appearance and divine pride. So you see this whole exercise culminating in the practice of divine pride and clear appearance. 
There is another two questions: 
What is the point of doing this? What does it do to us? What is the point? What is the purpose?. 
Is this practice the wrong consciousness in the first places or not? Is this wrong in the first place or not? Is divine pride wrong consciousness or not? There is a debate about this, you see.
This is mentioned in Pramanapatrika?? Even though the mind may be mistaken but sometimes there could be some benefit. Sometime is being mistaken and non-beneficial and there are certain situation when the mind which is mistaken but nevertheless beneficial. There is a difference between them. To give an analogy of mistaken is the glow of a wish fulfilling jewel to be the wish fulfilling jewel. That is a mistaken mind. However if you follow after the light thinking it is a wish fulfilling jewel, eventually you will see the wish fulfilling jewel, and you can put your hands on it. Yes, it is mistaken but it helps you to fulfill the purpose.
You all should think about the question raised by the student just now. 
As you move through the concentration with repetition and without repetition culminating in calm abiding, you moved through a different number of focal objects. How does one ends up with calm abiding if it seem to be moving from one focal object to another. This is something to think about.
Khen Rinpoche: You need to think. I will talk about it on Thursday but you will have to explain your own idea. 
You have to think of another question which was raised by a student in the last lesson.
As said in the text, in action tantra, the calm-abiding is achieved when the concentration is abiding in sound is culminated. Does that mean that when one enters the action tantra path, one doesn’t have calm-abiding? 
Khen Rinpoche: I think if I am not wrong, he is asking that question. Is it the same?
Are you going to say that when one initially enters the tantric path, you don’t have calm-abiding? Is it possible not to have calm abiding?
You have to relate this to what was covered in the previous module. You cannot forget. When we are talking about the complete aspect of application, which is the bodhisattva yoga, when is the complete aspect of application obtained when you have calm-abiding and special insight? You have entered the Mahayana Path of Accumulation when you generate bodhicitta. From the onset of generating bodhicitta you have the complete application which involves calm abiding and special insight, which means, first there is calm-abiding? How do you gel all these together? It seems to be a contradiction, right?
Khen Rinpoche: You got the idea? There are many things to think, not just one thing alone such as sutric path, tantra path, but all the topics. Many things on how not contradictory then make one like that so. You have to think about that. I am just telling you to think now so I will talk my view in the next class. You must think and compare with my view and your view. Nothing is clear in the text. I have to say something. You think about. You tell me your view, I tell my view. Maybe we all hallucinate, I don’t know. We all go wrong path. I have no idea. The blind leads the blind. 
[BP1 1. Absorption that abides on fire 
One generates oneself in the aspect of the deity. Then one visualises at one’s heart a small tongue of flame and inside that flame is the sound of the mantra reverberating. In entity, that aspect of sound is one’s mind that understands emptiness. In this absorption abiding on fire, one does not perform any kind of repetition, neither whispered nor mental. One focuses solely on the tongue of flame together with the sound of the mantra reverberating whilst holding the wind. 
2. Absorption that abides on sound 
One visualises oneself as the deity and a small moon disc at one’s heart. Inside that moon disc is a smaller version of the deity. The moon disc does not need to always be visualised as lying down flat. Here, the deity is inside the moon disc so we can visualise the moon disc upright like an orb of light. Inside the heart of that smaller deity is a tongue of flame. Inside that tongue of flame is the sound of the mantra reverberating. We then focus single-pointedly on the sound of the mantra inside the tongue of flame at the heart of the smaller deity. 
In the above concentrations abiding on fire and on sound, the manner of focussing on the sound of the mantra is not the same as the earlier practice of the repetition observing the sound of the mantra. The earlier practice falls under “concentrate with repetition,” be it whispered or mental. In the latter practices, we focus on the sound as if we are listening to the sound. We are not whispering or reciting it mentally with our own voices. 
When the concentration abiding on sound is fully completed, that is when we develop calm abiding. What is the measure of having achieved calm abiding? The measure of having achieved calm abiding is when we are able to focus our minds single-pointedly on a chosen object for one-sixth of a day, i.e., four hours. Then that would mean we have attained calm abiding. 
Answer to question: It all depends on the level and the realisations of the individual. If one hasn’t achieved the earlier realisations, it is impossible to meditate on the later steps. For example, depending on one’s state of mind, if one is able to meditate on bodhicitta then one can start immediately with that meditation without having to go through the paths of the small and medium capacities. It depends on where one is. If you know how to read, you don’t have to start again from the alphabet. 
Answer to question: Won’t one face the same problem if one chooses the deity’s body as the object of observation for the development of calm abiding, with its head, hair, eyes, hands and so forth? When you have accomplished calm abiding with the deity’s body as the object, how does that deity’s body appear to you? Do the different body parts appear to you sequentially or does every part of the deity’s body appears to you at one go? 
It is the same with using the sound of the mantra as the object of observation for developing calm abiding. It is mentioned in the texts that all the letters of the mantra appear at one time. When we develop calm abiding with respect to the mandala with the 32 deities of Guhyasamaja, all the deities appear simultaneously, not separately. I think that is how the sound of the mantra will appear to the mind that has achieved calm abiding when focusing on the mantra. I remember seeing this in one text.
One establishes calm-abiding prior to the absorption that abides on sound, and from the limit of sound one meditates on insight. If there is too much analysis by analytical wisdom, the prior factor of abidance is destroyed. Due to that, one attains the union of calm-abiding and insight comprehending emptiness by combining analysis and placement. 
“One establishes calm-abiding prior to the absorption that abides on sound”: The English translation may give you the idea that calm abiding is established before the concentration abiding on sound. That is incorrect. Calm abiding is established when one has actualised the concentration by abiding on sound. 
“And from the limit (or end) of sound one meditates on insight,” means we engage in the last concentration to develop special insight. We achieve calm abiding by actualising the absorptions that abide on fire and sound. But those realisations alone cannot liberate us from samsara. That is why we need the third concentration, the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound.
“Emancipation” here refers to liberating ourselves from the two obstructions to achieving the truth body (dharmakaya). In order to do this, we need the realisation of special insight, to realise emptiness. That is why we need the third concentration: “concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound.” 
“If there is too much analysis by analytical wisdom, the prior factor of abidance is destroyed. Due to that, one attains the union of calm-abiding and (special) insight comprehending emptiness by combining analysis and placement”: The teachings on emptiness, such as the scriptures on the Middle Way, indicate we first need to identify correctly the objects of negation, the self of persons and the self of phenomena. We then have to understand how all phenomena do not exist inherently and are not ultimately established. How do we do that? We arrive at that conclusion - that phenomena are not inherently existent – through analysis and we meditate on that conclusion. However when there is too much analysis, the mind will move away from the object of observation. Faults such as distraction and excitement will then arise.
It is through analysis that one arrives at the ascertainment of the meaning of emptiness. When that ascertainment is achieved, we place our minds single- pointedly on the meaning of emptiness that we have ascertained. However, if the factor of calm abiding of that placement meditation becomes too strong, that is a fault because the wisdom of individual analysis that analyses the meaning of emptiness weakens. At such a time, there is the danger of laxity and dullness arising in the mind. 
It is mentioned in the short edition of The Stages of Meditation that when the special insight focussing on emptiness becomes too strong, the factor of calm abiding will weaken. When this happens, it is likened to putting a butter lamp in the wind. The mind becomes disturbed and will move from the object and when this happens, one no longer sees emptiness clearly. So, when special insight becomes too strong, one needs to cultivate calm abiding. On the other hand, when calm abiding becomes too strong, one is likened to a person who is sleeping. Again, one will not be able to see emptiness clearly. At that time, one needs to meditate on special insight. 
Faults will arise when either calm abiding or special insight is stronger than the other. Therefore, these two factors should be meditated upon equally, like ploughing the land with that, one attains the union of calm-abiding and insight comprehending emptiness by combining analysis and placement.” 
When one obtains insight comprehending emptiness, one transfers to the Path of Preparation and when one perceptually comprehends emptiness, one transfers to the Path of Seeing and so on, similar to the Perfection Vehicle. 
However if one seeks to accomplish the limitless feats of special siddhis as stated in the Action and Performance Tantras, one needs as pre-requisites the four branches of recitation and the absorptions of just those three. The Great Stages of Mantra states that to establish many minor siddhis it is not definite that those are required.  
“The four branches of recitation” should be understood as one noun phrase by itself. “The absorptions of just those three” refers to the three concentrations (i.e., the concentrations of abiding in fire and sound and the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound). Collectively, these three concentrations are known as the concentrations of the three principles.
With regards to the concentrations with repetition, mental recitation is considered to be subtler than whispered recitation, which is considered coarse. But the concentrations without repetition is considered to be even subtler than those two. 
The meditation on the deity’s body is also known as deity yoga. The meditation on the deity’s speech is known as mantra yoga which refers to all the different forms of repetition up to the concentration of abiding in sound. These two yogas are classified as yoga with signs. The practice of deity yoga and mantra yoga are done in conjunction with the mind realising emptiness and are the principal practices of yoga with signs. 
The concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound comes under yoga without signs. At the time of this concentration, there is the factor of appearance (which is the meditation on the deity’s body) and the factor of meditation on emptiness. In this context, the meditation on emptiness is considered to be more important so this concentration is referred to as the yoga without signs. 
Many masters hold different views with regards to the meaning of yoga with signs and yoga without signs. Where are the boundaries between the two? Some classify the yoga with signs as the yoga that is not conjoined with the meditation on emptiness and the yoga without signs as the yoga that is conjoined with the meditation on emptiness. This is one of the examples of the different views.