Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L19.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:20.645506
================================================================================

In the path of action tantra, if one were to do an approximation of the deity properly, as we have seen, that begins with a good meditation on the six deities. After you have arisen as the deity, you then engage in the repetition through the four branches. We have covered that already. You should read those sections, think about it and develop familiarity with the material such that in the future when you do a retreat on, for example approximation on Chenrezig or something, then that would be relevant and that is the time you can put into practice and meditate. 
Then there are the two concentrations: concentration with repetition and concentration without repetition. 
So in practising the concentration with repetition, when one is engaging in the repetition, one has to do it without any distraction. You have to know the stages of engaging in the repetition. In the concentration with repetition, there are essentially two forms of repetition, and culminating in the repetition observing the sound of the mantra. As you leave the session after the practice, the stages of leaving the session is progressing backwards from the stages that you start to meditate on. Basically it is a reverse of the process as you leave the session. We have already talked about this, and you should acquaint yourself with that.
Khen Rinpoche: It is clear yeah? Huh? Should be clear by now. 
It is said that the time in-between the sessions is very important. The teachings tells us that it is very important to conduct ourselves in-between sessions without being separated from the three recognitions. 
[One has the recognition of:
one’s body is the deity’s body, 
one’s speech as mantra, and 
ones’ mind as the dharmakaya ]
After one has finished with the concentration with repetition, one doesn’t stop there as there are still more to be meditated upon. One moves on to the concentration without repetition. 
As for the concentration without repetition, there are three: 
1) Concentration abiding in fire
2) Concentration abiding in sound
3) Concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound
Going by our root text, it says that calm abiding is achieved when the concentration abiding in sound is culminated. After calm abiding is achieved, one alternates between placement or stabilizing meditation and analysis. Then come the time when the union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness is attained, one enters the Path of Preparation. When you have the union of calm abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness that is when you achieved the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound. That is when the yoga without signs comes into being.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay this is the repetition. This is already said. Every detail already said. This supposed to be one I said in simple word. I already explained them these few days.
Khen Rinpoche: Did you think about the question that I asked? Or no?
As for the questions that were raised, you will not find any clear or definite answer in the text. I am going to offer my view on this. I am just offering my opinion. I am not saying whatever I’m going to say is definitely the case. I am just going to offer you my opinion that I have formed after giving it some thought. With regards to a definite answer, you will not be able to find it in any particular text. Neither do I have any person that I can verify with. I can only offer you my opinion. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay? Now listen. Listen with your full attention. Can be a lot of mistakes. Must listen with your concentration otherwise you don’t find the mistake. You must listen like that. 
At the beginning of this module, I have already shared with you the differences between Hinayana and Mahayana. From our discussions, by now you should be clear that in order to enter the Mahayana path, one does not have to enter the Hinayana path prior to that. 
There is nothing difficult about this. This is very straight forward. You will always find clear statements in the text about this. In the teachings, we talk about those of the definite Mahayana lineage. Those of the definite Mahayana lineage are those who enter into Mahayana path from the onset without having entered any other paths prior to that.
Khen Rinpoche:Okay? You must clear with that. 
The Mahayana is divided into two. 
The Causal Perfection Vehicle 
The Resultant Vajra Vehicle 
That I have also shared with you. I have also shared with you that these two are not differentiated by view but rather by the factor of method. What constitute method?  In the context of tantra, essentially the special method is the special techniques or the causes for achieving the form body. As such, you have the mantra vehicle.
In order to enter the tantric path, must one have entered the path of the Causal Perfection Vehicle or not? The answer is also clear: No, it is not necessary. 
Within the secret mantra, there are four classes of tantra which are differentiated by the manner in which attachment is taken as the path. I have already talked about this. 
Since there are four classes of Buddhist tantra, if you are asked “Is it necessary to have entered the paths of the three lower classes of tantra before entering the path of Highest Yoga Tantra? If you think about it, the answer is pretty clear: No, you don’t need to have entered the paths of the three lower classes of tantra in order to enter the path of Highest Yoga Tantra. There are people of that lineage who enter the path of Highest Yoga Tantra from the onset. 
What is clear is that there are people who enter the Highest Yoga Tantra path on the onset but there are also others who enter the paths of the lower classes of tantra from the beginning. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. That’s it. Finish
What I have said so far are things that are clear in the text. It is pretty obvious in that there is no dispute about it. These are the things that you need to be certain of. You need to hold this as the basis on which you can then engage in discussion. If you don’t even have this as the basis, and when you attempt to analyze or discuss, what are you discussing? You may just ending up with ‘Yes’ and ‘No” and are getting at nothing because you don’t have anything to hold on to. You don’t have foundation or something from which you can work from. So you need to have solid basis.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay? Your foundation is stable now or not? There is nothing much to discuss to what I have said. Yes! Yes! Yes! There is nothing much to discuss. You must remember that. This one I think must discuss. All the scholars say the same thing. So you just have to understand and you just have to say that. Then after that, discussion comes. 
It is clear in the teachings that one can enter the tantric path without first having to enter the sutric path. That is clear.
In the Lamrim literature, you will find that the discussion as to the door to the Mahayana. If one were to enter the Mahayana, what is the entrance? What is the door of the Mahayana? 
It is mentioned in the Lamrim that there are only two Mahayanas: the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the Resultant Vajra Vehicle. Other than these, there are no other Mahayanas. Mahayana is necessarily either of these.
If it is a Mahayana path, then it is either the path of the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the path of Resultant Vajra Vehicle (secret mantra). Whatever it is, whether you enter the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the Resultant Vajra Vehicle, the door is only the bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: This one already completed before.
If one has the Mahayana mind generation, then one becomes a Mahayanist and one enters the Mahayana path. There is this explanation in the following sections. No matter what other qualities you have, even if you have the wisdom realizing emptiness, that does not constitute the door into the Mahayana. 
In the Lamrim Chenmo, if you look at how the outlines are arranged with regards to generating bodhicitta through the sevenfold cause and effect instructions, it singles out compassion to be the root. In the sevenfold cause and effect instructions, the steps that are prior to compassion starting from:
recognizing all sentient beings as your mother
remembering their kindness, 
wishing to repay their kindness and attractive love
All of these are posited to be the causes of compassion. 
The steps that come after compassion, starting with whole hearted resolve and mind generation (bodhicitta). These two are posited to be the effects of compassion. 
So you see how the outline is arranged with the focus on compassion itself.

In the usual presentation of the sevenfold cause and effect instruction, traditionally it start from number one and then ending with number seven which are arranged in that order. If you look at how Lama Tsongkhapa arranged the outlines to that section, he places compassion as the central theme with the steps prior to it posited as the cause and the steps after that posited as the effects of compassion. 
Anyway I’m not going to go through all the details since you have already covered this when we looked at the Lama Tsongkhapa’s Middle Length Lamrim. Here just to give you an idea so that you can then go back and check the relevant sections of the text for those who are really interested. 
[Sevenfold Cause and Effect
Perceiving all beings as mother
Remembering kindness
Repaying kindness
Great love
Great compassion
Wholehearted resolve
Bodhicitta ]
There is an emphasis on the importance of compassion and making compassion the central theme. There is an explanation of how compassion is important at the beginning, important in the middle, and important at the end.
What is the door into the Mahayana? It is when the bodhicitta that is induced by love and compassion arises in the mind. That is when one enters the Mahayana. Without bodhicitta, one is not a suitable vessel for the practice of the Causal Perfection Vehicle. If that is the case, how it is possible that one is a suitable vessel for secret mantra if one does not have bodhicitta. Before one can even try to start on the techniques for generating bodhicitta, one must have trained the mind already in the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity. Why this is the case? If we cannot even feel that we ourselves are tormented by the different kinds of sufferings of samsara, and having the disenchantment of our own situation in samsara, how is it possible to generate compassion for others when we think of other sentient beings in samsara? It is impossible!
In order to generate the great compassion, which is the root of bodhicitta, we first must have renunciation of our own samsara. We must be repulsed by our own sufferings in samsara and have the attitude of wanting to be free from that. Without this, there is no way whatsoever we can develop the wish for others to be free from that. Impossible! Therefore, prior to even training the mind in bodhicitta, one must have already trained the mind in the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity. 
In the practices of a person of medium capacity, one is directed to think of sufferings of cyclic existence to the point of generating revulsion for any samsaric happiness. One has no interest whatsoever in any samsaric business. Anything to do with samsara, so-called pleasures and happiness and good things of samsara, one has to train the mind and see that all of these are rubbish, worthless and pointless. One has no attachment whatsoever to it. This is necessary. Otherwise, how is it possible to develop a wish for liberation? Without this sense of revulsion and have no interest whatsoever in anything to do with samsara, then it doesn’t matter what you meditate on, it doesn’t matter what you are practicing or what you do, none of it will become a cause for even liberation from samsara. If this doesn’t even become a cause for liberation from samsara, how can it be a cause for enlightenment? 
There is a saying in the teachings: 
May my mind become the dharma, the dharma to become the path and the path to be free of obstacles
When we say “the dharma to become the path”, what it means is that whatever we do become the cause for liberation. 
Before one can meditate and have realizations of the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity, even before that, one must have trained the mind well in the path that is shared with the person of small capacity. 
What is the essence of the attitude that is the result of training in the path that is shared with the person of small capacity? By thinking “If I don’t practice the Dharma, I will definitely going to be reborn in the lower realms. Once I am in the lower realms, how impossible it is to bear with the sufferings”. To feel this and the heart is moved with the end result the mind is moved: “Oh my goodness, I’m in trouble!” This is the attitude that must have arisen, without which there is no way to practice of the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity. There is no hope about it and there is no need to talk about the Mahayana path. 
When we talk about the refuge that is a person of small capacity, what kind of refuge does a person of small capacity has? 
Refuge is a mind and it is an attitude, isn’t it? When a person reflects on the suffering of the lower realms and understands that he is going to the lower realms, he has this great fear and his heart is terrified. That fear moves him to seek refuge and place his trust in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha with the belief that the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha can protect him from that fear. When you have that kind of mind, then you have a refuge of a person of small capacity. This is the kind of refuge that we should at least possess. It is real fear combine with a wholehearted conviction in the ability of the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha to protect us from that fear. Whether you call it the lowest level of refuge, the minimum level of refuge, or the entry level of refuge, this is at least we should have. But if you think about it, even for us, it is doubtful whether we have it. This is the basic minimum. This is the end result of after training in the mind in the path that is shared with the person of small capacity. This is the very minimum entry level kind of practice and so-called experience or realization that we must produce in our mind. For somebody who doesn’t have this attitude or this experience, and at the same time you tell him “You are supposed to give up and don’t be attached to the happiness of humans and gods. It is useless and is waste of time”. For such a person, it is like talking something impossible to him. Therefore, before one can even train the mind in the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity, we first must train our mind in the path that is shared with the person of small capacity and actualized it. You have to know this is the case. You have to know why this has to be the case. What is the reason? It is not that you don’t know this. I think you should know this by now. Sometimes there is benefit if we revisit the topics again. 
Before you can even train the mind in the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity, you have to train your mind in the path that is shared with the person of small capacity. In the process of training and actualizing the path, we have to give up our attachment to this life. Otherwise, now our whole energy is just put to the happiness of this life. This life is more important than anything else. It is the priority. We put all our efforts and energies into it. When our attitudes are still like this, the happiness of this life is the main driving force behind everything that we do in this life. If that is what we are looking for, it doesn’t matter what practice we do, studies, or whatever we say we are doing, it doesn’t matter. Forget about those practices. They will never become a cause for enlightenment. Forget about enlightenment, they cannot even become a cause for liberation. Forget about liberation. While having attachment to this life, even those so-called practices that we do, whether they will actually become a cause for our good rebirth or not, there is a huge question mark. When it is phrase like this, what it means is there is no way. We have to know that there is a reason and purpose why they tell us in the teachings. If we are attached to this life, doesn’t matter what we do, how it looks like, what we call it, all of it will not become a cause for even a good rebirth. We have to see why this is being said. Why it is necessary to say this. We have to understand why.
Back to the phrase: “For the mind to become the dharma, the dharma to become the path and the path to be free of obstacles”. For the dharma to become the path, that is related to the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity. 
Start with the first one: For the mind to become dharma means for the mind to be free of attachment to this life. Instead of being attached to this life, one’s main goal in daily life, everything you do, you are primarily interested only in your next life; not this life. When your world view has transformed and what drives you everyday is that you are really concerned about your next life, then your mind has become the dharma. 
The very word for dharma in Tibetan is cho that has the connotation of changing for the better, transformed or changing. If the mind has transformed from that of primarily focusing on happiness of this life to looking mainly for next life’s happiness, and if you are interested in that, then your mind has become the dharma. This is because your mind has transformed for the better. If the mind has not transformed in this way, it doesn’t matter what you do - daily prayers, recite mantra, circumambulation, and prostration - the mind doesn’t change, then it is difficult for those practices to change the mind. The mind has not changed from one of attachment to this life to one seeking happiness in next life. If the mind has transformed for the better, then one is practicing the dharma, the mind has become the dharma. It may be the path of the person of small capacity, medium capacity to great capacity, they are all dharma. In that sense, there are transformations. If the mind is transforming in any of those ways, then the mind has become dharma. That is the point. I’m not saying you should not circumambulate, you should not prostrate, or you should not be doing prayers. There is a purpose behind those practices but you have to know what it means to practice dharma. 
Khen Rinpoche: Enlightened already? Or no enlightened.
All of us have to think for ourselves. We have to look at it and ask ourselves the question: If my mind hasn’t changed, I have to ask myself why. We may be studying a lot, and if we don’t see any change in the mind or change in the way that it is mentioned in the Lamrim, maybe it is not the fault of studying, is it the fault of practice because of not doing recitation, or not doing this practice or that practice. If we also do many recitations and do many prayers, and despite studying, despite doing prayers, and if the mind hasn’t changed in the way that the Lamrim has said, obviously something must be missing. There must be something missing. That is why change is not happening. We have to sit down and analyze why. The answer is already given to us in the Lamrim. They said the whole thing comes back to because of our attachment to this life. We are not able to give up our attachment to this life. That is why the mind hasn’t changed at all.  All the problems come from that. That is the answer that has been given to us. We have to see whether that is true or not. We have to check for ourselves. If we do bother to think about it, sit down and analyze, then it becomes clearer and clearer that this is really the case. Then we see where the problem is. Then we start acting on it. Then slowly, slowly the practice shows effect. Then slowly, slowly we start on the path that is shared with the person of small capacity. 
We take on all those huge commitments - bodhisattva vows, tantric vows. But we are not even able to keep all of them properly or purely. Why? If you think about it and analyze, again it comes back to attachment to this life, because we don’t have the path that is shared with the person of small capacity. Therefore, the saying “for the mind to become the dharma, the dharma to become the path, and then culminating in the path to be free of obstacles”, refers to generating uncontrived bodhicitta. Having trained the mind in the practices of a person of great capacity, when one actualizes uncontrived bodhicitta, then the person, whatever the person does will not be influenced by self-cherishing whatsoever. Not a single atom of self-cherishing. Everything that the person does is for others. For such an individual, the person’s path will be free of obstacles. 
As such, I think that is how you relate the practices of the person of small, middling and great capacity to the saying “for the mind to become the dharma, the dharma to become the path, and then culminating in the path to be free of obstacles”,
If you look at how the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment literature is arranged, if you look at any Lamrim text, it always starts with the path that is shared with the person of small capacity, then the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity, and the path of the person of great capacity. After that, the last two perfections, the training in calm-abiding and special insight is single out for additional attention. Then after that, as the Foundation of All Good Qualities says: Having become a pure vessel by training in the shared paths, in those general paths, then please blessed me to enter the holy gateway of the fortunate ones, the supreme Vajrayana.” Based on this structure of presentation in the Lamrim, then I asked you that question. 
Going by the structure, does it mean that we have to actualize bodhicitta prior to entering tantra? 
Do you need the calm abiding and special insight prior to entering the tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: Coming back to the question. Ok? Remember.
You have bodhicitta, you have calm-abiding focusing on emptiness, and you have special insights focusing on emptiness. These are all explained prior to entering the tantric path, at least in the structure of the presentation. 
This bodhicitta, calm-abiding focusing on emptiness, special insights focusing on emptiness are paths that are shared with Tantra. As such, they are discussed prior to Tantra. These bodhicitta, calm-abiding focusing on emptiness, special insights focusing on emptiness, are paths that are shared with Mantra.  As such, they are explained prior to the presentation of Tantra.  
Do they have to be necessarily manifested or actualized prior to entering the tantric path?  Then you have to answer “Not necessarily”. 
We know that the entry into the Path of Preparation is marked by the attainment of the union of calm-abiding and special insights focusing on emptiness.  It is clear that one need not have actualized or attained the Path of Preparation before entering the tantra. It is clear, isn’t it? 
Khen Rinpoche: Ok or not ok?
Now let’s look at mind generation (bodhicitta) which is essentially aspiration for the welfare of others and aspiration for complete enlightenment.  The mind that possesses these two aspirations, the main mind is called bodhicitta.  That is what bodhicitta (mind generation) is.  This lead to the question:
Is there any difference in the bodhicitta of sutra and mantra?  
Is there a difference in the refuge that is practiced in tantra and the refuge that is practiced in the Causal Perfection Vehicle? 
Khen Rinpoche Ok, we don’t go so far.
As for the entity of mind generation (bodhicitta), what exactly is it?  Whether it is sutra or tantra, it is essentially an aspiration for the welfare of others, and the aspiration for full enlightenment.  Bodhicitta is nothing less, nothing more.  So that doesn’t matter there is Mahayana sutra or Mahayana Tantra, the bodhicitta we are talking about is that. According to Khedrup Sangye Yeshe, probably a Lamrim lineage lama, made the statement: There is difference in the mind generation of sutra and tantra but there isn’t a difference in term of superiority and/or inferiority. There is a difference between the mind generation of sutra and tantra. You have to posit those two separately.  
He said that there is a difference in the mind generation of Mahayana sutra and Mahayana Tantra. So where is the difference?  It lies in the power or the strength of that attitude.  
In Mahayana Sutra, cultivating the intention to achieve full enlightenment to accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings with the idea “No matter how long it takes for me to achieve enlightenment, no matter how much hardship I have to bear, I will do it”. 
In Mahayana Tantra that individual has that aspiration to achieve enlightenment in order to accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings. Aspiration is there. From his own side he is willing to undertake whatever hardship that is necessary and however long it takes.  He is ok with it, but yet at the same time he is unable to bear the fact that sentient beings have to wait so long and that they have to suffer.  That bodhisattva cannot even to delay his enlightenment for even by one day, because sentient beings have to suffer for one more day.  
So there is a huge difference in term from that perspective. While the entity (nature) of the mind generation in the Mahayana Sutra and Mahayana Tantra is the same, but there is a difference in the strength or power of that mind. Due to this power perhaps we can then account for why Khedrup Sangye Yeshe said that there is difference in the mind generation of the sutra and tantra.  This is just my opinion. 
There is also a lot of discussion and debate as to whether entering the tantra and entering the tantric path means the same thing or not. There are scholars, wise ones, who said that entering the tantra and entering the tantric path are not necessary the same thing. Whatever I have explained so far is based on the position that there is a difference between entering tantra and entering the tantric path.
If one takes an initiation and actually received it, perhaps you can say that is the meaning of entering into tantra. This I have said in one of the earlier lessons, it doesn’t mean that you are there to take initiation mean that you actually obtain or receive it. If you have actually taken it and actually received it properly, perhaps you can say that there is a measure or the criteria of entering into tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: Ok? Ok? Keep that first in mind.
What is the essential purpose for taking and actually receiving an initiation?  
At the end of the day, the essential point, the purpose of taking an initiation and receiving is that one is empowered to meditate on tantra for the purpose of achieving enlightenment for others. 
Lama Tsongkhapa says “After I have trained my mind in the shared paths and become a suitable vessel”.  Here I take the shared paths to be the path that is shared with the person of great capacity. That is the reason why earlier on I brought up the topic of great compassion, and highlighting how Lama Tsongkhapa arranged his outline in the section on training the mind and bodhicitta through the sevenfold cause and effect instructions.  In essence, what I am trying to say is: “You need great compassion. If you have great compassion, then being in the shared path that is shared with the person of great capacity.  With this great compassion, then you are suitable vessel to enter into tantra. This is what I think on “Prior to entering the tantric path, you definitely must have great compassion”.
An individual who has this great compassion coupled with having disposition (imprints) for tantra, so the great compassion in that person’s mind and also the wholehearted resolve will also be much more powerful. Wholehearted resolve is taking on personal responsibility but there is an additional element of taking on the responsibility to do it myself now in this life.  If you are talking about Highest Yoga Tantra: “I must achieve enlightenment in this life, in this body” So that is additional element to that wholehearted resolve.  For somebody who is of the definite tantric lineage, who is definite to enter into secret mantra from the onset, this person has already received initiation and then generates great compassion. On the basis of that, he generates the wholehearted resolve that is induced by his great compassion. That wholehearted resolve then induces the generation of special bodhicitta - the bodhicitta of the secret mantra. When that special bodhicitta or the bodhicitta in his mind arises simultaneous with that, he enters the tantric path.
The person who enters the tantric path on the onset and with regards to the bodhicitta that this individual generates, he is seeking to achieve enlightenment to accomplish the welfare of sentient being. He is thinking “I am going to achieve enlightenment right now by meditating on the four complete purities of the result and meditating on those aspects right now, from now on and right now”.  I think there is an element there. So he takes initiation, he reaches the point where he has great compassion, and then wholehearted resolve with that attitude of taking the personal responsibility to do it right now and achieve enlightenment as quickly as possible. Then he generates special bodhicitta and this bodhicitta has the element of “I am going to achieve enlightenment by manifesting those four complete purities of the result right now by practising right now.  With that I am going to achieve my goal”. With this uncontrived special bodhicitta in his mind he enters the tantric path.  This is what I think.
There was also the reason why I cited the Lama Tsongkhapa’s Lamrim. There is a sentence in there that  says “it doesn’t matter whether you enter the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the secret mantra vehicle, the door is only bodhicitta”. It is clear that the only door to Mahayana, whether it is Causal Perfection Vehicle or Resultant Vajra Vehicle, is bodhicitta. That is clear and nobody disputes that.  The other thing is that in order to enter the tantric path, one needs not have entered the Causal Perfection Vehicle prior to that. That is also clear. When you put these two together, therefore, now I just offered my opinion as to how one enters the tantric paths for a person of definite tantric lineage, who enters the tantric path from the onset. 
There is still another complicated issue with regards to calm abiding. 
Do you need calm abiding to enter the path or not? 
This is something that needs to analyze. With regards to the position that you need calm abiding to enter the path, that is an assertion of Sera Je College’s textbook.  I don’t think this assertion is shared by other colleges in the Gelug tradition.  While there are scriptures that can be cited as the authority for such an assertion, but the thing that we have to focus on is “Why is there this assertion in the first place? What is the reasoning behind this assertion?” According to the Sera Je College’s textbook position you need calm abiding to generate the uncontrived bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: Ok, anyway we talk next.  If you want then just one question related to what I said so far. 
Student 1: I sense that the person who enters the tantric path has got exceptionally strong bodhicitta so how does that person cultivate the six perfections while doing the deity of approximation?
Khen Rinpoche: In tantra, you do not find an extensive explanation or discussion on the practice of the perfections like the perfection of generosity found in sutra. We should beget the question: Why is then there such an extensive explanation of practices of generosity and so forth in sutra? If you think about it in sutra, what is posited to be the cause of the form body? It is essentially the practices of perfection of generosity and so forth related to the collection of merits. 
In tantra, what is posited to be the main cause of the form body?  It is the factor of method and method in tantra means meditation on deity yoga. Since that is the main cause of the form body there isn’t an extensive explanation on the perfection like what you found in sutra. But there is no real contradiction here in that the meditator is not always in session. During those times in-between session there are always opportunities to practice generosity and he has to guard his ethical discipline anyway and there is practice of patience.