Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L2.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:21.510794
================================================================================

In Lama Tsongkhapa’s The Three Principal Aspects of the Path, at the beginning, he says:
The gateway of the fortunate ones desiring liberation –
This I shall try to explain as much as I can. 
“The gateway of the fortunate ones desiring liberation” means that for those who desire liberation, the gateway is that leads one to the Buddha’s teachings. This shows us the motivation that we must have whenever we learn and practice the Buddhadharma. What should be the driving motivation behind us for wanting to learn and practice the Buddhadharma? The motivation behind whenever we engage in any virtuous practice is to achieve liberation. 
In the same text he goes on to says: 
Those who are not attached to the pleasures of circling [samsara],
Who strive to make freedom and endowments meaningful,
Who entrust themselves to the path pleasing the Victorious Ones –
You fortunate ones: listen with a calm mind.
“Those who are not attached to the pleasures of cyclic existence” - for people who want to make their human life of freedoms and endowments meaningful, then they should not be attached to the pleasures of cyclic existence 
Most of you have already received the teachings on the entire Lamrim (The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment) and some of you have received it many times. Since most of you have already received many teachings on the Lamrim, as I have suggested before, you should memorize this short text The Three Principal Aspects of the Path and recite it on a daily basis as a kind of a practice. For all daily commitments and all kinds of recitation that we do in our daily lives, reciting The Three Principal Aspects of the Path from memory, and then using that as a basis to reflect would make it the best daily commitment practice. You should recite it slowly and take the opportunity to reflect, and if you persist, you definitely will be able to see some change in your life. 
“Those who are not attached to the pleasures of circling [samsara], who strive to make freedom and endowments meaningful” means that if we want to make our lives meaningful, we have to reverse our clinging to samsara and not to be interested in samsara. Continuing to be interested in samsara and being attached to cyclic existence is the opposite of liberation. There is no way to desire liberation and yet at the same time wanting samsara. In order to develop the desire for liberation, we first must look at samsara as disadvantage and as something as undesirable, and then we seek to turn away our attachment towards samsara. We have to turn away our attachment. We have to reverse our attachment towards samsara.
While that is what we all need to do to overcome our preoccupation with samsaric happiness but that is not easy at all. How do we do that?  That is why the Buddha was very skilful. First, he taught we should overcome our preoccupation and our strong attachment to this life’s happiness. As such, as Lama Tsongkhapa in The Three Principal Aspects of the Path says:
Freedom and endowments are difficult to find
And life has no time to spare.
By gaining familiarity with this,
Attraction to the appearances of this life is reversed.
As I mentioned in the last lesson, continual recollection and reflection of our impending death and our own impermanence is extremely important. By recollecting strongly and continually on our impending death and impermanence, we will start to reverse our attraction to the happiness of this life and to overcome our preoccupation and attachment to this life’s happiness. On that basis, then we go on to reverse our attachment to samsaric happiness. 
Lama Tsongkhapa continues:
By thinking over and over again
That actions and their effects are unbetraying,
And repeatedly contemplating the miseries of cyclic existence,
Attraction to the appearances of future lives is reversed.
That is by thinking over and over again how actions and their effects are infallible, and repeatedly contemplating the suffering of cyclic existence, then attraction to the appearances of the future lives or to samsara is reversed. 
Such short text like The Three Principal Aspects of the Path is really short and sweet but it is power pack with meaning. To be able to appreciate this, first it requires one having learned well the entire Lamrim (The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment). Once we have learnt it well, then by depending on short text like this which summarizes the key meanings in a few words, we will then be able to appreciate what the text is trying to convey. For those of you who have been around for a while, this is something you should really consider: memorizing The Three Principal Aspects of the Path and recite it as your daily prayer, and think about it when you recite. If you are able to do this, then it is very beneficial. It will be one of the best practice that you can do. However, when I say to recite it as part of your daily practice, I don’t mean doing it in the normal way that a lot of people just blah blah blah blah blah mindlessly. That is not what I mean. The meaning has to appear in your mind. So it is important to know what you are reciting and reflect on the words that you are reciting. Therefore, you should do it slowly and leisurely so to give yourself time for the meaning to arise in our mind. This is an opportunity for you to recollect and to bring to mind the words that you have already learnt. 
We should examine our own experiences in our life. In the course of our lives, we have all kinds of ideas, all kinds of thought, views, worries and fears which are just elaboration of conceptualization (rnam rtog) of all kinds of things that goes on in our head. If we sit down and try to pinpoint the source or the origins that give rise to the busyness of mind, it is clear that a lot of it comes from our preoccupation with this life’s happiness alone. In fact, all the fears and worries come from our emphasis with this life’s happiness. We don’t care about anything else except attachment to this life. This fundamental world view gives rise to all our fears, worries, unhappiness, problems and all kinds of conceptualizations in our daily lives. Since this is the source of our problems, and we are here to practise the dharma trying to make ourselves happy, so whatever practice we do must at least harm the source of our fears and the worries. If whatever we do are not able to even harm these troublemakers, then no matter what we do - studying the dharma, practising the dharma, doing prostration, doing circumambulation, reciting sadhana- or saying “I’m a dharma practitioner” or “I’m a tantric practitioner”, it is the same as saying that all those practices have not yet help us to close the door to the lower realms. We need to be careful about this point. This is about where the troublemakers are. We have to know why we are stuck, and why we are in trouble. If we are not careful about this and yet at the same time we do all kinds of things and being confident thinking “I am studying the dharma. I am a Buddhist. I am practising the dharma,” and with all these claims and labels, then whatever we do doesn’t even help us to close the door to our own lower realms. Then what is the point? So we really have to be careful about this. 
So if we are not able to damage or hurt our preoccupation and strong attachment to this life’s happiness, what will be the result? As I have mentioned in the last lesson, there is no way whatsoever to have real refuge or pure refuge in our hearts. It is impossible. If we don’t even have real refuge, how it is possible for us to close the door to our own lower realms? There is no way. The very thing that closes the door to the lower realms is refuge. As I have mentioned in the last lesson, in order for real refuge to come about, we first must overcome our attachment to this life’s happiness. This can be done by thinking about our own upcoming impending death and impermanence. Without which it is very difficult to even weaken our attachment to this life. Without which there is no way we are going to have real refuge, and without which there is no way we can close the door to the lower realms. As mentioned in the teachings, when we have refuge, we will close the door to the lower realms and be protected from the lower realms. But the refuge here does not refer to the mere verbal recitation of the prayer “I go for refuge to the Buddha.” The refuge is again the state of mind which has to come on the basis of having at least suppressed the very strong attachment to this life’s happiness. 
What I have just said is something that all of you have already known. I don’t think anybody here is not aware of this, at least intellectually. This is where we need to put our attention in our daily lives. We have to meditate on death and impermanence. This is what are being mentioned at the beginning of the Lamrim. We have to just think about it everyday and as much as possible continually to be mindful of that.  Only then we can see some change. Please pay attention to this.
If we have to be mindful about something everyday, what is that?  We have to be mindful and continually place our mind on death and impermanence and reminding ourselves that the attachment and preoccupation to this life’s happiness, in all its aspects and manifestations, is something that is not good and harmful to us. We have to continually remind ourselves of this.  If we don’t remind ourselves of this and be mindful of that continually, all we have to do is to just let the mindfulness slip and yet at the same time feeling that we are doing some virtue, then we may completely lost track of not trying to be attached to this life’s happiness, but at the same time we engage in practices that we thought we are actually doing some virtue. A lot of times all our supposed practices or our good intentions leads to more complications and leads to problems. If that is the case, it can’t be virtue, right? 
If we are being mindful continually in every moment of our lives and as much as possible turning away from the attachment to the happiness of this life, then we will see a lot of our all those unnecessary fears and worries that makes our lives so busy and complicated slowly reduce and go away. It is only when we find reduction in all these unnecessary worries and fears that makes our lives so complicated, then we have more mental space for the real wisdom that discriminates to arise, with the clarity of mind that has the ability to suss out what is really good and what is really bad. The reduction to the attachment of this life will give our mind the mental space for this wisdom to arise. If our minds are just focused on this life happiness, everything that is this life happiness, then we will have no mental space for that wisdom or clarity of mind to be able to suss out what is really good and what is really bad, what is really beneficial and what is harmful. There is no way.
If you think about that evolution that we are able to maintain strong continual mindfulness on reversing the attraction to this life happiness, and that leads to a reduction in all the conception thoughts, basically the busy mind that always thinking about fears and worries in all the various manifestations and aspects, this will gives more mental space for the ability to suss out things between what is right and wrong. And when that ability is developed, obviously that will also contribute to further reduction in those all kinds of conceptualizations. With more mental space come this ability to suss out what is right and wrong and to able to discriminate what is beneficial and what is not beneficial, and the more we develop this intelligence or wisdom, the easier it is for us to engage in what is virtuous, what is beneficial, and what is useful. This is what the wisdom leads us to. So with more and more wisdom, we will find it less and less difficult to engage in virtue. In fact, with more wisdom, when we engage in virtue, and we feel happily doing it thinking “This is something I really want to do and I enjoy doing it”. That is the effects of having this wisdom. 
If this is the case, we can safely say that without wisdom, there is no way for us to have joyous perseverance. We don’t joyously persevere because we don’t have wisdom. If we want to be really enthusiastic about our practice of virtue, we need to have wisdom. What is the necessary condition for wisdom to arise? We need to give it space. Firstly, that has to come from mindfulness of death and impermanence that leads to a reduction in our preoccupation and attachment with this life happiness. This will then leads to more mental space for wisdom to arise. With wisdom, then comes joy in taking delight or joy in doing virtue. 
With wisdom, comes joyous perseverance. This means that we take delight and actually really enjoy in the practice of engaging in virtue. With wisdom comes this joyous perseverance, we will see the fruits of the practice. Obviously that will lead to a lot of real satisfaction. Upon seeing that our own practice is so wonderful, we feel so happy of doing it because we see the point and the benefits it brings us. 
If you really want to practise dharma, just think about it, I think there is no other approach. There is no other way. First, we have to deal with our strong attachment to this life’s happiness. First, we have to overcome that. Otherwise, there is no way to open the door for the real dharma practice. If we really want to be a dharma practitioner, then this is really a crucial point. We really have to be careful and putting efforts thinking about this. 
As I had mentioned in the last lesson, the Kadampa masters say: What is the border that separates practising dharma and not practising dharma? Or “What separates dharma practice and non-dharma practice? It is whether we are attached to this life or not. It doesn’t matter what we do or how we look like externally. If whatever we do with the motivation that is mixed with still looking for something in this life, then it is not dharma at all. If it is not mixed, then it is dharma. Since we are trying to be a practitioner, we have to take this crucial step and to be very careful about it. 
With wisdom comes joyous perseverance. With joyous perseverance, one begins to see the fruits of practice. When one put in the correct effort with joyously persevere, of course the results will come. The more results we see, obviously we will feel more happy as we taste it. When we really feel joy in our practice, I don’t think that we will ever feel bored or tiresome of the practice and find it difficult to practice. Usually we don’t find doing things that we like is difficult.  
However, that doesn’t seem to be our experience. What is our experience? We get tired of practising the dharma.  Internally, we are not happy and we don’t feel joy. Externally, we are exhausted. We feel whatever is related to dharma such as study is a burden. It seems that we are forced to do it and feel like a burden. That is our experience, isn’t it? Why is it like that? We have to examine and honestly ask ourselves why it is like that. That is the whole essence that I have been trying to say now and in the last lesson. We don’t really enjoy the dharma. Many a times we do it like we are being forced to. We feel it is a burden and we don’t enjoy doing it. At times we hate doing it. We really have to honestly ask ourselves why we think like this and why we feel like this?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): So you must ask why, why, why, why like this. Every morning ask why, why, why, why. 
Sometimes we use the word “profound” to describe dharma in general. Sometimes we use the word “profound “to describe certain dharma practices such as “very high dharma”, “very profound dharma”. As to whether the dharma is profound or not, the dharma that benefits our mind is the profound one. No matter how profound a practice is said to be, if it doesn’t benefit our mind, then it is not profound for us. At our level, what is useful for us is thinking about death and impermanence; which will helps us to at least loosen that very strong grasp on this life’s happiness. If we can even loosen our mind, it will leads to giving us mental space to have real refuge from the heart. We have to feel the refuge. Then to us, refuge is the most profound; not tantra. Tantra is profound on its own and since it is not beneficial for us at our level, then it is not profound for us. So for us, refuge is profound. As to whether the dharma is profound or not, we have to think it in terms of whether it benefits our mind. If it benefits our mind, it is profound. 
As I mentioned in the last lesson, to be a real Buddhist and a practitioner, we should work towards becoming a person who really desires liberation from samsara. As such, at all times we have to be mindful continually and gradually work towards reducing our attachment to this life’s happiness. On that basis, then we have to work to overcome the attachment to samsara. Without which, we cannot be someone who desires liberation. So if we want to be a practitioner, we have to work towards this mindset all the time. Whether we are listening to the teachings, talking about the dharma, studying dharma, doing daily prayers and recitations, doing circumambulation, doing prostrations or whatever form it takes, at the minimum we have to be someone who desires liberation.  
I would like to emphasize again that due to continually with the mindset of having our strong attachment to this life’s happiness, we always put ourselves into troubles and create all sorts of problems, fears, worries, and unhappiness. We should be continually be mindful and work at trying to oppose our over preoccupation and attachment to this life’s happiness. We have to work to counteract that at all times. By consistently doing this, over time, this should lead to having more mental space that allows our wisdom to have the ability to suss out what is right and wrong, and what is good and bad. With that wisdom, we naturally take joy in virtue, and doing whatever is necessary and beneficial. Once we have that joy, we will not feel any real difficulty whenever we engage in dharma. 
I thought perhaps it might be useful to have some ideas of how our kind teacher and founder guru Shakyamuni Buddha had achieved enlightenment. There is an explanation according to sutra and there is an explanation according to tantra.
If we look at the view of the Great Exposition School (GES) and Sutra School (SS) as to how our kind guru Shakyamuni Buddha had achieved enlightenment, it was said that in the past many countless eons ago, in the presence of the Buddha called Shakya Thubchen or the Great Subduer or the Great Sage, he first generated the mind of enlightenment (bodhicitta) and started the Mahayana paths accumulated the collections over an extremely long period of times of three countless great eons.
During the era of the Buddha Rinchen Tsugtor, The Jewel Crown Protrusion, he accumulated the collections in one of countless great eons. Then for another one great countless eons period during the era of the Buddha called Namse, he accumulated the collections. 
When we talk about our kind founder Shakyamuni Buddha accumulating the collections, that didn’t happen in this fortunate eon. Literally, it happened eons and eons ago. For example, in one period of the countless great eons, he accumulated the collections during the time of the Buddha Namse but Buddha Namse was not the Buddha of this fortunate eon. 
According to the GES (Vabhashika), he accumulated the collections over the periods of three countless great eons while on the paths, mainly on the Path of Accumulation. We are in this fortunate eon where it is said that a thousand buddhas will descend. Of the thousand, three have already descended. Our kind guru Shakyamuni Buddha was not the first one. Even in this fortunate eon, such a long period of time has happened, came the first Buddha, then the second Buddha and then the third Buddha. Shakyamuni Buddha is the fourth one. 
Within these hundred eons, during the time while there was the first Buddha of this eon, the second Buddha of this eon, and the third Buddha of this eon, Buddha Shakyamuni was still accumulating the collections. Here we are talking from the perspective of GES (Vabhashika).
Prince Siddhartha, who was to be Shakyamuni Buddha, was born, grew up and engaged in the practice of extreme austerity. Finally on the 15th day of 4th month of the lunar calendar, Prince Siddhartha achieved enlightenment. Just before Prince Siddhartha became Buddha, he sat down on that seat on which he was to become a Buddha, he was on the Path of Accumulation. In that one sitting, he moved on to the Path of Preparation, Path of Seeing and the Path of Meditation. Also on the same seat he achieved the Path of No More Learning – full enlightenment. Out of the five Mahayana Paths, four of them happened over a very short period of time in one sitting. You have to keep in mind that here we are talking from the GES point of view. 
It is commonly known that he did not teach for 49 days after achieving full enlightenment. Then on the 49th day, Buddha turned the Wheels of Dharma at Sarnath, India and taught the Four Noble Truths. Most of the sub-schools of GES asserted that other than this turning the wheels of Dharma, the Buddha did not turn any other wheels of Dharma. He taught the Four Noble Truths. 
According to the GES, the Buddha did not teach the Mahayana Dharma. Then at the age of eighty, the Buddha passed away into the Parinirvana and he ceased to exist. His continuum was severed and literally the Buddha became nothing and gone out of existence. This is the assertion of the GES.  The GES does not explain the Buddha’s form bodies in the way that the Mahayana does. According to the GES, there is no such thing as Enjoyment Body. The GES also does not have the usual presentation of Supreme Emanation Body.
As for the Supreme Emanation Body, the Supreme Emanation Body can manifest in other world performing the 12 deeds and so forth even though this world ceases to exist. As the GES does not have this explanation, they do not assert that. To the GES, the Buddha died just like any ordinary person. When he died, he is finished. His continuum is severed. So according to the GES (Vabhashika), Prince Siddhartha is just an ordinary person like any of us. When he was born as Prince Siddhartha, he was on the Path of Accumulation. It is said that at the age of 35, he sat under the Bodhi tree in Bodhgaya and in one sitting he moved to Path of Preparation, Path of Seeing, Path of Meditation and Path of No-more-learning and manifested the state of full enlightenment and became a Buddha. 
When he became a Buddha, that Prince Siddhartha who is now Buddha, is essentially the same person in the sense of having the same body as when he was Prince Siddhartha. According to the GES, the Buddha’s physical body is still true suffering.  Although it is true suffering, the Buddha is no more Prince Siddhartha as the he has transformed to Buddha. What has transformed? Not his body but his mind. As such his mind has transformed, even though he has the physical body which is a true suffering, but it doesn’t cause any mental suffering. 
According to the Hinayana Tenets, this is the general presentation or assertion of who Buddha was. However, the Mahayana has different explanations of what the Buddha is. Even within the Mahayana, there are different explanations.
According to the Mahayana Paramitayana (Causal Perfection Vehicle):
-While the person who was Shakyamuni Buddha was on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation and Mahayana Path of Preparation,  he accumulated the collections of merit and wisdom over the 1st countless great eons. 
- He accumulated the collections while he was on the 1st to the 7th bodhisattva grounds (bhumi) during his 2nd countless great eons.
- He accumulated the collections while he was the 8th, 9th and 10th bodhisattva grounds over the 3rd countless great eons
In his very last existence when he reached to the end of the 10th grounds, the 10th ground bodhisattva who was to become Shakyamuni Buddha resided in Akanishta. In Akanishta, he was surrounded by many Buddhas. The Buddhas told him that in order to achieve enlightenment, he still has many more things to do. The Buddhas then conferred on him the empowerment of the great light. He then newly achieved enlightenment with the state of existence in Akanishta within the Complete Enjoyment Body that is adorned with the signs and exemplification. This assertion is according to the assertion of the Mahayana Paramitayana (Causal Perfection Vehicle).
Where is Akanishta?  We use to hear of the word ‘Akanishta.’ According to the Paramitayana, the form realm is divided into 17 sections. How the divisions are made? 
The form realms are divided into four Concentrations. 
- There are 12 sections of ordinary beings (Ordinary beings’ abode). Each of the 4 levels has 3 sections. So 4 x 3 = 12  
-  There are 5 sections of Superiors beings (Arya Pure Lands)
Total = 12 + 5 = 17 sections
Within the Superiors section, the highest land is called Akhanista. Akhanista is the abode of the form realm gods and is the highest place in the form realm. When we said the Buddha achieved enlightenment in Akhanista, obviously it is not this as this is included in samsara. This form realm land Akhanista is used as the reference point for Akhanista Pure Land where the 10th ground bodhisattva who was to become Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment. It is only in this Akhanista Pure Land that we can find the Complete Enjoyment Body which never displays birth and death at all. There you will only find bodhisattva superiors have the Complete Enjoyment Body and only Mahayana Doctrine is taught there.  
So, according to the Mahayana Paramitayana (Causal Perfection Vehicle), Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment and abided in the aspect of having the Complete Enjoyment Body. This Complete Enjoyment Body becomes the basis of emanation of the Emanation Body. It is said that from there the Buddha sent out the Emanation Body that perform the 12 deeds. (See extract below).
According to the Mahayana, the 12 deeds that were performed by the guru Shakyamuni Buddha is usually narrated starting from the deeds of entering the womb up to the deeds of passing into parinirvana.  These were not done by an ordinary being. These were only done by Buddha that show the display of the Emanation Body which is emanated from the Enjoyment Body. That means he is already a Buddha. So from the Mahayana view of the 12 deeds and who the Buddha is are radically different from what is asserted by the Hinayana tenets.
According to the Buddhist cosmology, our world is called Jambudvipa; the southern continent, but this is not just the only southern continent that exists. There are 10 million times 100 of such a southern continent in other world systems. Buddha Shakyamuni did not just display whatever he displayed on this one particular southern continent. In all the others similar numberless southern continents, Buddha Shakyamuni also displayed whatever he displayed here. The Emanation Body works for us sentient beings until the end of cyclic existence. Because the Buddhas have brought their great compassion to perfection, the Buddhas work tirelessly and uninterruptedly till the end of time for us sentient beings. This is the explanation according to the Mahayana Paramitayana (Causal Perfection Vehicle). 
What about the tantric perspective? The Buddhist tantra is divided into 4 classes: 
Action tantra
Performance tantra
Yoga tantra
The unsurpassed yoga tantra (Highest Yoga Tantra)
According to the perspective of Action tantra and Performance tantra, Buddha Shakyamuni’s manner of achieving enlightenment is the same as explained in the Mahayana Paramitayana.
According to the Yoga tantra’s perspective, the 10th grounds bodhisattva who was about to be Shakyamuni Buddha, in his last existence while abiding in Akhanista Pure Land, he was absorbed in concentration. All the Buddhas from the ten directions came and invoked and caused him to arise from his concentration meditation and said to him, ‘Just by meditating in such a way will not enable you to achieve enlightenment.’ Then all the Buddhas granted him the different initiations such as the crown empowerment and so forth and caused him to go through the process of the five manifest enlightenments and achieved enlightenment. So, from the perspective of Yoga tantra, the 10th grounds bodhisattva achieved enlightenment in the aspect of the Complete Enjoyment Body. With this Complete Enjoyment Body as the basis of emanation, the Emanation Body manifested in the aspect of Vairochana, having 4 faces and so forth and was sent to the peak of Mount Meru. The Buddha then first taught the Yoga tantra. After that was an emanation sent to the planet Earth to perform the 12 deeds. 
According to the Guhyasamaja tantra, which is the unsurpassed yoga tantra (Highest Yoga Tantra), the manner of achieving enlightenment is pretty much the same in that in his last existence while in Akhanista, he was given empowerment and then achieved enlightenment. 
According to the Guhyasamaja tantra, in Akhanista, the Buddhas bestowed the 10th grounds bodhisattva who was to be Shakyamuni Buddha the wisdom initiation by means of the wisdom mother. On that basis of having received that empowerment, that 10th grounds bodhisattva actualized the all empty clear light, the meaning clear light. From within the meaning clear light, he arose into the pure illusory body. 
After that, the Buddhas conferred on him the word initiation. After having received the word initiation, that bodhisattva achieved enlightenment in the dawn time. After having achieved enlightenment in Akhanista with the Complete Enjoyment Body as the basis of emanation, he sent forth emanation into this world and then performed the 12 deeds.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Okay, that is all about the story.
From this we can see the difference as to who was that person who performed the 12 deeds. According to the Hinayana tenets, the person who performed all those 12 deeds was an ordinary being. But according to the Mahayana, whether it is Paramitayana or the Vajrayana, person who performed  the 12 deeds were actually manifested by a Buddha and not an ordinary being.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I have given a chart. For, those really want to study then take this. Those doesn’t really want to study please don’t take. No point. 
You have to understand that we are doing some kinds of little cursory look at what the Buddha’s teaching in the one or two sessions. This study is a very long term thing. We have to think in term of months and months and months. It is a progressive thing, so you need to build up the information. If you really want to know what the Buddha’s teaching is then you really have to put in effort to learn and study; not just sit there. If you want to study, then you have to make it a point to not to miss class. Not only that you have to read the material on your own and have to think about it on your own. You have to do many things and putting in effort. You have to sustain that for over a period of time before you can really come to know what exactly in the Buddha’s teachings. Is it true or not? Is it accurate or not? Really?
We are still at the beginning of this particular topic. Right from the beginning, you have to think “I really want to study. I want to know as much as I can. I want to put in effort.” You have to have this mindset from the beginning. If you don’t have this mindset from the beginning, thinking “It doesn’t matter, and whatever come, just take it easy”, then you know what will happen? As we move through the topic with time, the subject is not going to become easier but it is only going to become more and more tough, more and more difficult and the amount of materials will become more voluminous. If you don’t have the idea right from the beginning, and not reading, thinking and sustaining it, then it is not going to work because you will be overwhelmed. When you get overwhelmed, obviously the natural psychology reaction, it will become difficult and then you won’t feel like reading anymore, and start to miss class and don’t feel like coming to class. And then you get depressed.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You get depressed? 
It is always in the case with every new module, always there a lot of people at the beginning.
__________________________________________________________________________________
Three Principal Aspects of the Path by Lama Tsongkhapa (http://www.lamayeshe.com/)
Expressing the Homage 
I bow down to my perfect gurus.
The Promise to Compose
[1] The essential meaning of the Victorious Ones’ teachings,
The path praised by all the holy Victors and their Children,
The gateway of the fortunate ones desiring liberation –
This I shall try to explain as much as I can.
Persuading to Listen
[2] Those who are not attached to the pleasures of circling [samsara],
Who strive to make freedom and endowments meaningful,
Who entrust themselves to the path pleasing the Victorious Ones –
You fortunate ones: listen with a calm mind.
The Purpose of Generating Renunciation
[3] Without the complete intention definitely to be free from circling,
There is no way to pacify attachment seeking pleasurable effects in the ocean of circling.
Also, by craving for cyclic existence, embodied beings are continuously bound.
Therefore, at the very beginning seek renunciation.
How to Generate Renunciation
[4] Freedom and endowments are difficult to find
And life has no time to spare.
By gaining familiarity with this,
Attraction to the appearances of this life is reversed.
By thinking over and over again
That actions and their effects are unbetraying,
And repeatedly contemplating the miseries of cyclic existence,
Attraction to the appearances of future lives is reversed.
The Definition of Having Generated Renunciation 
[5] When, by having trained in that way,
There is no arising, even for a second,
Of attraction to the perfections of cyclic existence,
And all day and night the intention seeking liberation arises –
Then the thought of renunciation has been generated.
The Purpose of Generating the Mind of Enlightenment
[6] Even if renunciation has been developed,
If it is not possessed by the mind of enlightenment
It does not become the cause of the perfect bliss of unsurpassed enlightenment.
Therefore the wise generate the supreme mind of enlightenment.
How to Generate the Mind of Enlightenment 
[7] Swept away by the current of the four powerful rivers,
Tied by the tight bonds of karma, so hard to undo,
Caught in the iron net of self-grasping,
Completely enveloped by the total darkness of ignorance,
[8] Endlessly reborn in cyclic existence,
Ceaselessly tormented by the three sufferings –
Thinking that all mothers are in such a condition,
Generate the supreme mind of enlightenment.
The Definition of Having Generated the Mind of Enlightenment
[8a]1 In short,
If like the mother whose cherished son has fallen into a pit of fire
And who experiences even one second of his suffering as an unbearable eternity,
Your reflection on the suffering of all mother sentient beings
Has made it impossible for you to bear their suffering for even one second
And the wish seeking enlightenment for their sake arises without effort,
Then you have realized the supreme precious mind of enlightenment.
The Reason to Meditate on the Right View
[9] Without the wisdom realizing ultimate reality,
Even though you have generated renunciation and the mind of enlightenment
You cannot cut the root cause of circling.
Therefore, attempt the method to realize dependent arising.
Showing the Right View
[10] One who sees the cause and effect of all phenomena
Of both cyclic existence and the state beyond sorrow as forever unbetraying,
And for whom any object trusted in by the grasping mind has completely disappeared,
Has at that time entered the path pleasing the Buddhas.
The Definition of Not Having Completed the Analysis of the Right View
[11] If the appearance of dependent relation,
Which is unbetraying, is accepted separately from emptiness,
And as long as they are seen as separate,
Then one has still not realized the Buddha's intent.
The Definition of Having Completed the Analysis of Right View
[12] If [these two realizations] are happening simultaneously without alternation,
And from merely seeing dependent relation as completely unbetraying
The definite ascertainment comes that completely destroys
The way all objects are apprehended [as truly existent],
At that time the analysis of the ultimate view is complete.
The Particular Special Quality of the Prasangika View
[13] Furthermore, appearance eliminates the extreme of existence
And emptiness eliminates the extreme of non-existence.
If you realize how emptiness manifests in the manner of cause and effect
Then you are not captivated by wrong notions holding extreme views.
Having Gained Definite Ascertainment, Advice on Pursuing the Practice
[14] In this way you realize exactly
The vital points of the three principal aspects of the path.
Resort to seeking solitude, generate the power of effort,
And quickly accomplish your final goal, my child.
Extract from Opening the Eye of New Awareness by His Holiness the Dalai Lama
The Four Bodies, Qualities, and Activities of Buddhahood
Independence upon the paths of sutra and mantra mentioned above, bodhisattvas attain the resultant four bodies of a buddha-nature body, wisdom truth body, enjoyment body, and emanation body.
The Superior Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realization says:"
The naturt, complete enjoyment,
and likewise emanation
and truth, as well as activities,
are expressed as the four aspects [of buddha bodies].
NATURE BODY
Through the vajra-like [or diamond-like] meditative stabilization at the end of the continuum of the ten grounds, bodhisattvas exhaustively abandon the obstructions to omniscience. When the path of release induced by that uninterrupted path is attained, bodhisattvas attain the nature body, which is the state of having abandoned all adventitious defilements –the obstructions to liberation and the obstructions to omniscience. This is a factor of purity from adventitious defilements.
Also, the emptiness of true existence of the mind that previously, during the ordinary state, was posited as the naturally abiding lineage [providing the capacity to develop into buddhahood] becomes fully transformed. At that point, it becomes the emptiness of the omniscient mind of a buddha. It is a factor of natural purity. The truth body endowed with these two purities -purity from adventitious defilements and natural purity- is the nature truth body. Although it occurs only when buddahood is attained, it is not impermanent-it is not constructed through causes and conditions. It has a nature of permanence, that is, not changing into something of another nature.
WISDOM TRUTH BODY
A wisdom truth body is the exalted omniscient wisdom that directly perceives all modes and varieties of objects of knowledge as if they were in front of oneself. When it is divided in terms of conceptual isolates, there are twenty-one categories of uncontaminated exalted wisdom-ranging from the thirty-seven harmonies with enlightenment through to exalted knowledge of all aspects. These will become clear in the explanation of the mental qualities of a buddha below. The nature and wisdom truth bodies are directly perceivable only by buddhas. 
COMPLETE ENJOYMENT BODY
A complete enjoyment body is achieved through training in a pure land on the occasion of the paths of learners. It is the form body in which a bodhisattva initially becomes fully enlightened in a special place called a heavily adorned highest pure land. Having five certainties, it is the basis of emanation of a supreme emanation body. Those five certainties are:
1. Definite abode: it dwells only in a heavily adorned highest pure land.
2. Definite body: it is clearly and fully adorned with the thirty-two major marks and eighty minor marks.
3. Definite retinue: it is surrounded only by bodhisattva superiors; common beings as well as hearers and solitary realizer superiors are incapable of meeting it.
4. Definite doctrine: it teaches just the doctrines of the Great Vehicle and it does not set forth the doctrines of the Low Vehicle.
5. Definite time: it dwells without displaying the aspects of birth or death until cyclic existence has been emptied.
A form body that has all five certainties is an object within the sphere of activity of Great Vehicle superiors who have directly perceived the truth. Therefore, such a form body is called an enjoyment body [that is enjoyed or used by Great Vehicle superiors]. 
EMANATION BODY
An emanation body is a form body that can be met even by disciples who are common beings; it does not possess the five certainties. There are three types:
supreme emanation bodies, 
artisan emanation bodies, and 
birth emanation bodies. 
A supreme emanation body must be identified as one emanated by a complete enjoyment body, adorned with the major and minor marks, which brings about the welfare of disciples through twelve deeds in various world systems, such as Jambudvipa [this world]. An example is the teacher [of this era] Shakyamuni Buddha.
The twelve deeds, in the case of Shakyamuni, are:
1. Descent from the Joyous Pure Land [to this world]
2. Entry into his mother's womb
3. Birth in Lumbini Garden
4. Becoming skilled in the arts and playing the sports of youth
5. Taking charge of the kingdom and keeping a harem
6. Upon going to the four gates of the city, becoming discouraged with cyclic existence and, due to that attitude, leaving the householders life 
7. Practicing austerities for six years at the Nairanjana River
8. Going to the Bodhi Tree and sitting [in meditation under it]
9. Overcoming all the hosts of demons
10. Becoming fully enlightened on the fifteenth day of the fourth month
11. Turning the wheel of doctrine on the fourth day of the sixth month
12. Passing from sorrow in the city of Kushinagara
To the sight of ordinary disciples, some of those twelve deeds are of the bodhisattva [Shakyamuni before attaining enlightenment], and others are [his] deeds [after becoming a] buddha. However, all twelve are simply displays of such [activities] out of a buddha's skillful means for taming disciples; all of them-beginning from descent from the Joyous Pure Land are deeds of Buddha [since he was actually enlightened many eons earlier].
An artisan emanation body is, for instance, the teacher Sakyamuni's emanation in the form of a lute player in order to subdue the king of the Gandharvas, Sunanda. A birth emanation body is, for instance, the devaputra Shvetaketu in the Joyous Pure Land.
From among the four bodies, the nature body and wisdom truth body cannot be seen by disciples. Both form bodies, the enjoyment body and emanation body, fulfill the welfare of transmigrating beings on a grand scale through appearing directly to disciples.
In addition to the fourfold division described above, the buddha bodies can also be divided into three - truth body, enjoyment body, and emanation body – by grouping together the nature body and wisdom truth body as one truth body.
The four bodies can also be treated as two-truth body and form body through including the enjoyment body and emanation body in one form body.