Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L20.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.702074
================================================================================

We have seen that it is not necessary to enter the Hinayana path prior to entering the Mahayana path.  While there are those who do enter the Hinayana path, there are also others who enter the Mahayana path from the beginning. However, it is also clear that one must have trained in the path that is shared with person of small capacity prior to entering the Mahayana path.
The Mahayana itself is divided into two:
The Causal Perfection Vehicle (Paramitayana)
The Resultant Vajra Vehicle (Vajrayana)
Khen Rinpoche: I am just repeating of what I have said in the last class. Concentrate. I can try to make it shorter.
Is it necessary to enter the path of the Causal Perfection Vehicle prior to enter the path of the Resultant Vajra Vehicle?  
The answer is no. There are people who enter the path of the Vajrayana from the beginning.
So these are the two Mahayana paths – either Causal Perfection Vehicle or Resultant Vajra Vehicle. As stated in the Lamrim that whichever the two paths you enter, the gateway is only bodhicitta.
I did cite Khedrup Sangye Yeshe who says that there are no difference in term of superiority or inferiority of the mind generation of the Causal Perfection Vehicle and the Resultant Vajra Vehicle. 
The mind generation is a mind that aspires to enlightenment and to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings.  While this is not the technical definition of mind generation but in essence, this is what it is: the mind that aspires to enlightenment and to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings.  This is the mind generation that you need whether you are entering the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the Resultant Vajra Vehicle. However, the mind generation which is the doorway to tantra is said to be stronger than the mind generation that is explained in sutra; while essentially is still the mind aspiring for full enlightenment in order to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings.  The mind generation in tantra is called the special mind generation in that it is more powerful. It is a mind aspiring wanting to achieve full enlightenment quickly in one lifetime.  In that sense it is more powerful form of mind generation. 
That individual also needs the determination to achieve enlightenment quickly through meditating on the aspects of the Buddha’s body, the Buddha’s abode or environment, Buddha’s enjoyment and Buddha’s activities. He meditates on the aspects of these four things right away and right now during the time of the path in order to achieve full enlightenment. 
Sentient beings are varied because of having different imprints (predispositions). As such, we say sentient beings can be from different lineages.  There are some sentient beings who are predisposed to the idea that others are more precious than one. When they hear that concept, they take a liking to it and are attracted by it.  Their mind is agreeable with that.  While there are others, even if you were to explain it to them, at least for that time, maybe they find it difficult to accept. As such, individuals who probably find it easy to accept the instructions like seeing all sentient beings as their mothers, recognizing and remembering their kindness and the practice of exchanging self and others, and when you talk about these practices to them, they probably are more incline to accept the practices and they are attracted to it.  Therefore you can then say that there are sentient beings that are more likely to enter the Mahayana path from the beginning.
Within the category of sentient beings who are predisposed to the Mahayana ideal, they want to achieve enlightenment to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings i.e. they want to work for sentient beings.  Within this group of individuals, you can definitely say that there are individuals who want to achieve enlightenment quickly. In order to do that, I guess these individuals probably must have some kind of predisposition for tantra as well.  They have imprints for that. These individuals have the wish to achieve enlightenment quickly and will take tantric elements into consideration. Then they have the wish and the ability to practise the tantric path, like meditating on the path that is concordant with aspect of the four complete purities of the resultant stage right away.    
About entering the Mahayana sutric path, if we based our discussion on the assertion on the works of Jetsunpa who is the author of textbook, including textbook of Sera Je College, probably have to say that for the person who has entered the Mahayana path would have union of calm abiding and special insight. It is mentioned in the Lamrim that once calm abiding is attained, one will not be moved by the wind of discursive thoughts.  On the basis of calm abiding, one will be able to achieve insight that leads to abandonment of all the wrong views. That is once you have that insight you will be able to abandon all wrong views, and through which you will become unassailable and you cannot be disturbed by any conditions; almost similar to developing of irreversible faith. In short:
with calm abiding, one become immovable and 
with special insight, one becomes as firm as a mountain.
The point is that with special insight, you develop definite ascertainment of whatever object you focus on.  From that you become fixed onto the object and will not waver, because you have definite ascertainment of the object and you become very stable. 
It is also said that with calm abiding, whatever virtues that one performs becomes very powerful.  The virtue that is done not on the basis of calm abiding is very weak. It is also mentioned in Shantideva’s Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds that any recitation or meditation that are done with a distracted mind will not bear fruit, and will not fulfill its purpose. Therefore, whatever virtue that is done with the mind that is focused on a focal object becomes very powerful. 
According to the position of the Sera Je College’s textbook, when one develops  uncontrived mind generation enter to the Mahayana path, that individual necessary also has calm abiding and special insight. 
Let's think about it in this way:
There is a relationship to the claim that with bodhicitta, your virtue becomes very powerful. 
Without a stable and focused mind, it is probably difficult to produce an uncontrived mind generation.
While what I am going to say is not found in the text, my opinion is this: 
You have great compassion which is followed by whole hearted resolve, which precede mind generation. Perhaps we can say that it is during the whole hearted resolve that calm abiding must be attained.  Calm abiding here makes that resolves thinking “I will do this for sentient beings alone.” That makes the resolve firm, stable and unmovable. 
There is whole-hearted resolve thinking “I will work for the welfare of sentient beings myself.” With a mind of calm abiding you have that thought, and that makes that resolve firm and stable.  That calm abiding induces analysis of one’s ability of “Can I do this or not?”  Then one discovers “I cannot do this by remaining as I am. Therefore, I must achieve full enlightenment in order be able to do this”.  
You have mind generation, and that thought thinking “I must achieve enlightenment” is the result of the analysis that is induced by that calm abiding. So the point is that you have calm abiding and special insight. 
I am not saying that this is definitely the case. I am just offering my opinion. If you were to go along with Sera Je College's assertion that upon achieving bodhicitta, the uncontrived mind generation, you would also have calm abiding and special insight.  That is clear. That is mentioned in the Sera Je College’s textbook but you will not find an explanation of that.  What I have just said is my own personal opinion on how you could explain that assertion. 
There are 5 obscurations that interfere with the achievement of calm abiding:
The desire that is included in the desire realm manifests
Malice (ill will)
Regret and excitement
Lethargy and sleep
Doubt
These are the 5 obstacles. If we think about it, if that individual has not managed to suppress the manifest desire that is included in the desire realm and malice, probably it is difficult to say that individual will generate the uncontrived bodhicitta. In order to get rid of these or to suppress them, you need calm abiding and special insight. 
If we were to think along this line in order to understand why we need calm abiding to generate uncontrived bodhicitta, would it work?
That is the Sera Je College’s assertion that when you enter the Mahayana path on the onset, the individual has calm abiding and special insight. But it is also said for those of definite Mahayana lineage:
On the great Path of Accumulation, they achieve calm abiding focusing on emptiness
When the special insight focusing on emptiness is achieved, they enter the Path of Preparation.
This is clear and you must not mix everything up. From our college’s position you need calm abiding and special insight to enter the Mahayana path:
On the great Path of Accumulation, the bodhisattva achieves the calm abiding focusing on emptiness
When special insight focusing on emptiness is achieved, the bodhisattva achieves the Path of Preparation.
If you are clear of this, you need to keep this in your head. Then you move to tantra: When is calm abiding achieved in context of the tantric path?
If we follow what was explained earlier on with regards to entering the Mahayana path, are you going to say: For those who enter the tantric path on the onset, when they enter the tantric path they need bodhicitta as well? Are you going to say that individual necessary also have calm abiding and special insight.
Is it possible to say that for those of the definite lineage enter the tantric path, they definitely have calm abiding and special insight?
Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting what I am asking? Thinking?
You cannot mix everything up. You need to place them as this, this, this.  Now if we look at action tantra, we have repetition and without repetition, of which the concentration without repetition is divided into three:
Concentration abiding in fire
Concentration abiding in sound 
Concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound
It is said clearly in the root text that:
Calm abiding is achieved during the concentration abiding in sound. 
Special insight is achieved during the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound.
When is this concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound achieved? It is achieved simultaneous with the attainment of Path of Preparation. That is also clear in root text. 
Based on the root text statement that calm abiding is achieved during the concentration abiding in sound, it is like saying that calm abiding is achieved after entering the path.
Does the concentration with repetition happen prior to entering the path or after entering the path? That is not very clear. Based on the explanation of Mahayana Sutra, according to Sera Je College’s position, you enter the tantric path with special bodhicitta and the individual also has calm abiding and special insight. 
When that individual attains the concentration abiding in sound, he has calm abiding focusing on emptiness. 
When he achieves concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound, he has special insight focusing on emptiness. 
Would it be ok to explain it like that? 
Khen Rinpoche: Your brain must be very active. Otherwise nothing goes inside and you will be totally lost to what I am talking. You must be lost; totally lost. 
I think it is possible to have those concentrations with repetition after entering the path. 
Now let’s look at how you can answer an earlier question about the cultivation of calm abiding in tantra
In sutra we were told that calm abiding is to be achieved while focusing on a chosen focal object. 
In action tantra it seems that there are many dissimilar objects of observation moving from 3 to 2 to 1 and moving from here and there and everywhere. 
That is what the question raise last session. Let’s answer that.
As you move from the concentration observing the form of letters to the concentration observing the sound, from the front generation to self-generation and so on and so forth, i.e. you start with 3 objects of observation and the objects of observation become more subtle from 3 become 2 and then become 1. They are dissimilar. If that is the case, at the end of the day, do you focus on generating calm abiding in all these dissimilar objects of observation which seems dissimilar to the sutric explanation of cultivating calm abiding? 
I will refer to the Lamrim in the section of cultivating calm abiding, and the words are exactly the same whether in the Lamrim chenmo or in the Middle Length Lamrim. There is a talk about how the practice of calm abiding is done with the mental consciousness and not with the sense consciousness. As such, the actual object of meditation for developing calm abiding is an actual object of mental consciousness, not an object of the sense consciousness. 
According to the outline of Middle Length Lamrim, it says there is a need to determine one focal object right from at the beginning. The Lamrim chenmo says:
Furthermore there are both subtle and gross features of the Buddha’s bodily form, it is stated elsewhere that at first you focus on the gross features and later when these are solid you must focus on the subtle. 
Does the word ‘it is stated elsewhere’ refers to the tantric explanations?
Khen Rinpoche: This is a Lamrim question.
Does ‘It is stated elsewhere’ means it is stated in mantra?
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know
The Lamrim chenmo continues: 
As experience also shows, it is very easy to raise an appearance of the gross features, you must develop your object of meditation in stages, starting with the gross features.
Especially important point is that until you have accomplished satisfactory concentration, it is never appropriate for you to cultivate meditative concentration by shifting your focus to many different types of object of meditation. For if you cultivate concentration by moving to many dissimilar objects of meditation it will be a great impediment to achieving calm abiding.
I didn’t get to read the annotations to the  Lamrim chenmo pertaining to this particular section. There is another set of text for the annotations. Back to the earlier statement, ‘it is stated elsewhere’, does this “elsewhere” refers to the tantric position or is it referring to some other learned one view?
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think?
Let’s say I take this statement ‘it is stated elsewhere’ to mean how it is usually explained in tantra, and apply in the context of tantra to what we have been looking at so far, so in the context of self generation in action tantra, we meditate on the 6 deities culminating in the sign deity. At that point, you are supposed to elicit a clear appearance of yourself as the deity, and you meditate on the entire body, which is the coarse body. You can call that object of observation as coarse because you are focusing on the entire deity’s body. Once you have developed stability with regards to that object of observation, then you move your attention to subtler object of observation like what we have seen so far. 
At the end of the 6 deities when you have the sign deity, you have arisen as the deity. That is the entire deity’s body - the coarse deity’s body. You focus on the coarse deity body. With that as a basis, you elicit clear appearance and divine pride. I think you can achieve calm abiding focusing on that. 
The Lamrim chenmo says “it is stated elsewhere that at first you focus on the gross features.” Let’s apply to what we have been discussing and take that to be the deity’s coarse body. 
“and later when these are solid you must focus on the subtle” - the subtle being the form of the letters, then moving on to sound. The objects of observation become more and more subtle. Then you move on to the concentration abiding in fire and concentration abiding in sound.
This presentation of moving from the gross to the subtle object as one develops concentration is only explained in tantra, but is not explained in sutra. In tantra, as the concentrations develop, you make the object of observation smaller and more subtle. With that the mind that is meditating becomes more subtle. As it becomes more subtle, it becomes clearer and therefore more powerful. What is explained in tantra “moving from gross to subtle” can be seen in experience. As it seems to be that case, then Lamrim chenmo says: 
‘As experience also shows that it is very easy to raise the appearance of the gross features. You must develop your object of meditation in stages starting with the gross features’. 
Therefore Lama Tsongkhapa (Je Rinpoche) says that if you look at the manner of presentation in tantra, it is like that. But also in your experience, that is how it works. Lama Tsongkhapa is stating this in definite terms. The point that Lama Tsongkhapa’s intent lies in the position of tantra. 
Lama Tsongkhapa continues by saying: “important point is that until you have accomplished satisfactory concentration, it is never appropriate for you to cultivate meditative concentration by shifting your focus to many different types of object of meditation”. If you try to understand this verse, it is saying that after you have achieved calm abiding you can do whatever you want. The point here is that you can shift your focus to something subtle and you are not going to be harmed by it because you already have concentration. But prior to achieving calm abiding you don’t move around which means if you apply it to the context of concentration with and without repetition, even before that, once you have developed stable calm abiding on the basis of the deity’s coarse body, then you can move on to observing the form of the letters at the heart and at the sound, this not going to harm you. 
What I have said here is the answer to student’s question. I have thought about the question and this is what I think so far. I am not saying that this is definitely the case. I have pointed my reasons for saying what I have said to you, and you should compare the material in the root text and as to what is mentioned in the Lamrim chenmo about cultivating calm abiding and see whether the position that I have offered here is okay or not. You need to think about it and discuss. 
Further down in the same section, Je Rinpoche goes on to say:
When you are practicing deity yoga in the mantra vehicle, you definitely have to establish a clear image of that deity. So until this arises you must use many methods for developing it.
Lama Tsongkhapa said that you have to establish a clear image of the deity. So until this arises you must use many methods for developing it. With the basis of oneself abiding in deity yoga, you are the deity and you focus on the deity’s body. Then you try your best to elicit the clear appearance and divine pride. 
As explained in the LamRim in the context of sutra, if you have great difficulty in making the deity image appear, you may adopt any one of the objects of meditation presented above and keep your attention on it.
In short, to answer the question, one can achieves calm abiding during the time of the sign deity. After you have arisen as the deity through the six deities and then at the sign deity, with the deity of coarse body as object of observation, you try to elicit clear appearance and divine pride.
During that time you, I think you can achieve calm abiding. After calm abiding is achieved then you can move to subtler object of observation moving on to cultivating the concentration observing the form of the letters at the heart and so forth.
If you read the root text and then compare with it in the section of calm abiding in the Lamrim chenmo or the Middle Length Lamrim, and think about it. Moving on, what about achieving the calm abiding focusing on emptiness and the special insight focusing on emptiness in the context of the path of the action tantra? Is it okay to say:
At the time of concentration abiding in sound you achieve calm abiding focusing on emptiness
When you achieve the special insight focusing on emptiness that is when you have the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay my talk is done. I am answering that question.
Student 1: It was taught that when the person reaches the concentration abiding in sound, the person actually focuses on the sound that is inside the flame. You just mentioned it is also the calm abiding focusing on emptiness. How did the object suddenly change from the sound to emptiness? At that point, you are actually focusing on the sound inside the flame, right? 
Khen Rinpoche: What if we say that you focus on the emptiness of the sound? This is because if you look at the stages leaving the session at the end, you leave from the sound to the emptiness of the sound. You focus on emptiness of the sound. Definitely the sound exists because you can experience it. However, when you analyze it you cannot find it. When you search for the imputed object, the sound, you cannot find it but yet it exists because it exists in dependence upon various causes and conditions. Therefore, by nature it is necessary empty. So you focus on the suchness of the sound.
Student 1: So all these repetition, concentration with repetition, concentration without repetition, even though the three focal objects, the deity form, the moon disc, and mantra garland on the moon disc, essentially you will also be meditating on each of their emptiness. Am I right? 
Khen Rinpoche: In general, this is how it is being done in tantra. It all leads down to the understanding of how all things exist in mere names. That is why you have letters. That is why you have the generation of stuffs such as deities from the syllable. This is like showing how everything exists in mere names.
There is no problem in saying that one can realize emptiness prior to realizing calm abiding focusing on emptiness. But it doesn’t mean that when you have realized emptiness you necessary have calm abiding focusing on emptiness. Even if you are talking about it in the sutric context, those of the sharp facultied have realized emptiness prior entering the path. 
When does calm abiding focusing on emptiness is obtained? On the great Path of Accumulation.  Then what is calm abiding focusing emptiness?
Student 1: Actually I was very curious about the subtlety of the mind. We say that the object from the gross form to the moon disc, to the form of the letters of the mantra, then to the sound of the mantra, and the emptiness of the mantra. So in terms of the object, it becomes subtler as the object has become smaller. So correspondingly the mind is also subtler because of the object of observation. When it comes to the sutric explanation focusing emptiness and tantric explanation of focusing on emptiness that mind is equally subtle. They are both emptiness, just as both objects are equally small. 
Ven Gyurme :  You are talking in general or in tantra in general or which level of tantra? 
Student 1: Let’s talked about action tantra. I think Highest Yoga Tantra talks about wind and channel and so forth. If it is said that the concentration abiding in sound is emptiness of sound, what about sutric explanation on emptiness of apple? Emptiness per se is just as subtle. Why would one mind be more subtle than the other? 
Khen Rinpoche: There is no dispute about the mind being extremely subtle in the context of the Highest Yoga Tantra. At the path, the consciousnesses take emptiness as its object, let’s say in the three lower classes of tantra, are they more subtle then the consciousnesses that realizes emptiness in the sutric context? That is something to think about. 
In tantra, they talked about taking attachment as the path. So the three lower classes of tantra definitely have the practice of taking attachment as the path. Through that, they generate the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. Having said that then the question is: Is the mind which realizes emptiness, the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity, is more subtle compare to the wisdom realizing emptiness in the sutric context? This is something to think about.
You don’t talk about the yoga of the non-dual profundity and clarity in sutra. You do talk about that in tantra as in the three lower classes of tantra.
Khen Rinpoche : Okay I think you are already confused. Don’t ask anymore. 
Sunday Discussion: I think Sunday we have discussion. Last time we have eight bodhisattvas and we have eight groups. Now I am going to make them into five groups. You all will be in different groups and not in same group as before anymore. I thought of doing that today but we don’t have much time today. I will divide the group into five on Thursday. We used to have very active Sunday discussion and was doing quite well for some time but now is not functioning. Could be the leader or could it be the members, I don’t know. My point is to make the discussion better. Hope in this way we can learn better. That is the idea. Thursday I will divide you all into five groups. Whatever group you are, please go to that group. I also highly encourage you to come to the discussion if you can. If you really don’t want to do that then that is your own choice. I encourage you to come, and this is what I think. 
QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION ON SUNDAY, 18 JUNE 2017
(a) In tantra, how are both method and wisdom present in one consciousness?
(b) What is the purpose of this?
	(c) What would be the fallacy of positing method and wisdom as separate entities as in                                     sutra?
Are the practices of refuge and mind generation in tantra more powerful than in sutra?
(a) What are the initiations in the three lower classes of tantra?
(b) What is the meaning of receiving an initiation, i.e., how is an initiation received?
It is said that when you take a tantric initiation and keep the vows purely, you can achieve enlightenment in seven or 16 lifetimes even if you don’t practise the path (p. 10, Lesson 12). How is this the case?
Yoga with signs is said to be the concentration with repetition and the concentration of abiding in fire and the concentration of abiding in sound. Yoga without signs is said to be the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound. What is the difference between yoga with signs and yoga without signs?
Do you need to achieve calm abiding prior to achieving bodhicitta? 
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t repeat of what I have said. This is not the point. You get your own idea. What I said may be totally wrong. So don’t follow. You get your own new idea and have some conclusion. 