Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L21.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.635319
================================================================================

What is the difference between having heard and reflected on the teachings especially the treatises and not having done that? Is there a difference? There are quite many people who say that there is no difference and saying “What is the point of studying all these great treatises?” Je Rinpoche Lama Tsongkhapa has said very clearly that the dharma that one studies and thinks about is the very dharma that is to be practiced. There isn’t a dharma that is to be practiced is separated from the dharma that one learns and reflects upon. If you look at Lama Tsongkhapa’s Lamrim Chenmo, at the beginning he said very clearly that the whole purpose of studying whatever one learns along the way is to put it into practice. We have to remember this in the deepest recesses of our heart that the whole point of learning and reflecting on the dharma is so that one can put into practice for the purpose of subduing and disciplining the mind. You just have to keep this in mind all the time. Otherwise you will not achieve much purpose from just learning and thinking about the dharma. Any dharma practice that is done on the basis of having studied and thought about it, that quality of the practice will be good and hits the mark. This means that it is able to bring forth its intended purpose. 
As an example, let’s take the prayer for going for refuge and generating bodhicitta that we recite very often. Essentially it is a verse about generating bodhicitta. However, for someone who has a very good idea of the entire path structure, the entire Buddhadharma, and who knows the stages of the path to enlightenment well, just by reciting that one verse that individual is able to think about the entire path. Thus it is possible for that individual’s heart to be touched and moved when reflecting even on just that one verse. For somebody who hasn’t done much study or who hasn’t understood well the Buddhadharma, there is no way this can happen. Perhaps at most the person has an idea that verse is talking about refuge but other than that, I don’t think that individual will feel anything. This is just a verbal recitation. Let look at the first two lines of the prayer:
I go for refuge until I am enlightened, 
to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha
It points to refuge, but refuge is a mind. You have to feel something. In order for the individual to be able to wonder what these two lines are talking about, if that individual has studied the Lamrim well and knows the path structure, he will know that in the first two lines, he has to think about the stuff that is found in the path that is shared with the person of small capacity and the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity. This is like the bare minimum. In order for it to be refuge there must be a real fear of the suffering of the lower realms. On top of that, the fear of the suffering of samsara. For a person who hasn’t studied and who is not able to think of what he has studied, he can recites these two lines but there is no real refuge at all.
For real refuge to arise, there must be real fear in the heart; the fear of worrying of having to go to the lower realms. So there is a fear of suffering of the lower realms. On top of that, the fear of suffering of the samsara. Only when there is this real fear, and if you also have that entrustment to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, from your heart you know they can protect you. When you are convinced, then that is refuge. This is like the minimum. In order to feel this, you must have first studied and thought about the material that will help you to produce that fear and conviction. To produce even just refuge, if we don’t study and if we don’t think about what we have studied then what other method is there to produce refuge?
The remaining two lines of the verse is generating bodhicitta. What it contains is the entire Mahayana path. At the end of the day the prayer points to generating bodhicitta. Simply speaking, the thought “I must achieve enlightenment, I will achieve enlightenment” will not arise without having trained the mind in the techniques for generating bodhicitta such as the sevenfold cause and effect and/or the exchanging self with others. Without training the mind like that, there is no way to produce a mind generation that is induced by some feeling in the heart. It is not just going to arise just by sitting there thinking “I will achieve enlightenment. I will achieve enlightenment.” The heart is not moved at all. How would this bodhicitta arise one day? We have to train the mind gradually in those techniques that lead up to bodhicitta. Without thinking about them and without studying them, how is it possible to develop bodhicitta?
The word “I” comes up in the prayer as in “I go for refuge until I am enlightened. By the merit I create through practising generosity, may I achieve enlightenment” What is the nature of this “I” that wants to achieve enlightenment? What is the nature of this “I” that practise the perfections? For somebody who has done some study and reflection on the view of the Middle Way School, and because the person has done some study and has thought about it, and when the word “I” comes up, then it is possible for that person to have the understanding and feeling that “I go for refuge. I go to enlightenment.” and so forth does exist but does not exist from its own side, and it is empty of existing from its own side. Such an “I” with this nature of emptiness that is going for refuge practising the perfections and so forth is only possible for those who have studied and is familiar with the view of the Middle Way School. 
It is common to hear people asking questions like this: “You know you are very busy people. Our lives are already so complicated and so busy, instead of studying studying studying and thinking thinking thinking, isn’t it better to just sit down and meditate? 
This begets the question: What kind of meditation is that person doing? Even to meditate, you first must learn how to meditate. Especially these days there is proliferation of meditations. Everybody is talking about it. Advertisements have been put everywhere encouraging people to meditate. However, you have to understand that there are different kinds of meditation. In the Buddhist context, we don’t meditate for the purpose of achieving mental peace in this life alone. That is not the main point and that has never been the main point. Of course mental peace is important. Without mental peace, you wouldn’t even want to practise the dharma. So mental peace is important but that has never been the main goal of practising the meditation.
There are many different kinds of meditations. There are different things that we are supposed to meditate on starting with the four close placement of mindfulness. If you meditate on even just the four seals - all composite phenomena are impermanent, all contaminated phenomena are suffering, all phenomena are empty and selfless. When you meditate on these things, then the mind does really change for the better and not just some temporary peace. It will leads to a reduction in the afflictions like ignorance, anger and attachment. Through this we can say that life becomes better and better from life to life. It is a real change and has real benefit from life to life. 
When we talk about meditation in the Buddhist context, at the very minimum the Buddhist meditation must benefit you in your next life. That is the very minimum. That means your meditation at the end of the day must stop you from going into the lower realms. 
In the Buddhist practice, we also emphasize the achievement of a concentrated mind. We also have the teachings on calm abiding. It is important to develop calm abiding. But calm abiding is not an exclusively Buddhist thing. Calm abiding is a realization and it is an attainment that is also common to non-Buddhist. Anybody can achieve it; not only Buddhist. Yes, there are teachings for developing calm abiding and people do develop a concentrated mind. This meditator who is developing calm abiding may even develop calm abiding but if he misses the training in the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity, what happens is that it is just holding on to the bliss, and just the nice feeling that he gets from calm abiding. With that realization of calm abiding, he then develop that concentration creates the karma to be born in the form and formless realms. You can even create the cause to be born in the highest possible state of existence in samsara which is called the Peak of Samsara, the fourth level of the formless realm. It is a state where you don’t have any manifest afflictions and one feels as if one is enlightened. As one has to die anyway, on the day of death, one has to go back somewhere in samsara again.
Meditation is important but it depends on what kind of meditation you are doing and what is the purpose you are doing that. If you do not know what is the correct and good meditation, the purpose and if you just think meditation is just to have peace of mind and peace of heart, then at the end you will not achieve anything purposeful. Therefore you must never ever think that study and reflection are pointless. They are important. At the same time you must not forget what is the purpose of studying and reflection;, which is to practise and to change the mind. If you hold on to “study and reflection is very important” but then if you forget the point of study and reflection, then you are not going to achieve any real purpose behind holding onto that position.
**********

As for the concentration without repetition, there are three: 
1) Concentration abiding in fire
2) Concentration abiding in sound
3) Concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound
The root text mentioned that during the concentration abiding in sound, calm abiding is achieved. Can we say the calm abiding that is said to be attained when you practise the concentration abiding in sound  is not the calm abiding in general; but rather it is the calm abiding that has emptiness as its object of observation or focal object? Can we say that or not?
In one of the writings of Longa Lama Rinpoche (?) on the summary verse on tantra, he did say that when you achieve the calm abiding focusing on emptiness, the concentration abiding in sound is culminated. It is not stated like this in other texts on the tantric paths and grounds but in the summary by Longa Lama Rinpoche, the words calm abiding observing emptiness is used. I will use this as a justification or as a support for my position which I have shared with you in the last lesson. 
In the writing by Kangyi Geshe Gyaltsen (?) he makes this statement: Prior to meditating on the concentration abiding in sound, I think it is possible to achieve calm-abiding focusing on the deity’s body. Do you see the implication? 
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t forget what I have said in the last lesson!
But there are learned ones, scholars, who hold the position that calm-abiding is newly attained during the concentration abiding in sound. In another text on the tantric paths and grounds, it is stated that calm-abiding is achieved together with the pliancy associated with it during the concentration abiding in fire. There are few positions which you have to think about which is better. Back to what I have mentioned earlier on, if we take the position that is similar to the mode of progress in sutra, and we say:
During the concentration abiding in sound, you achieve the calm-abiding observing emptiness. Then that is Great Path of Accumulation. 
When you achieve the yoga without signs that is when you achieve the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound. Then that is when you enter the Path of Preparation. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay? Should be  
Student 1: We take the position of calm-abiding focusing on the deity’s body before the concentration abiding in sound. During the time of the six deities, when you generate the empty deity, is there calm-abiding focusing on emptiness? 
Khen Rinpoche: No.
Student 1: The empty deity is all about focusing on emptiness. So how does one not realize emptiness? Let’s say if somebody already realizes emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Just because somebody has realized emptiness, doesn’t necessarily mean he has calm-abiding observing emptiness. For example, if you follow the sutric mode of progress, the calm-abiding observing emptiness is only achieved on the Great Path of Accumulation. Of course we are talking about those of definite Mahayana lineage. If we are talking about those with sharp faculties, they realize emptiness prior to entering the path. When they enter the path, they have calm-abiding but they don’t have calm-abiding observing emptiness, right? 
Student 1: How does one differentiate then? You have a realization of emptiness, and you have attainment of calm-abiding and yet that calm-abiding before you achieve the Great Path of Accumulation. That calm-abiding and realization of emptiness doesn’t come together. So someone realizes emptiness and has calm-abiding, but his calm-abiding cannot focus on emptiness. That is the implication.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, whatever. 
Student 1: How does that work? He has calm-abiding and he realizes emptiness but his calm-abiding cannot focus on emptiness. In the first place through what measure does he realize emptiness? What sort of mind does he use to realize emptiness if he is not using calm-abiding to realize emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: Using calm-abiding to realize emptiness is definitely. Not other mind
Student 1: That is before the stage of calm-abiding focusing on emptiness
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s say prior to realizing calm-abiding focusing on emptiness, he has realized emptiness. He is definitely meditating, but the question is why he doesn’t have the calm-abiding focusing on emptiness? Probably you have to say he is not able to meditate on it. When we say calm-abiding observing emptiness, we are talking about calm-abiding that is induced while taking emptiness as its object of observation. By taking emptiness as its object of observation, then you develop calm-abiding with respect…..So prior to achieving it he cannot. Why he doesn’t achieve it prior to the Great Path of Accumulation? Prior to that he is not able to take emptiness as the object of observation to produce the calm-abiding observing emptiness. 
Student 1: How does the person realize emptiness when he has attained calm-abiding and he is not using calm-abiding to realize emptiness? 
Khen Rinpoche: There are also individuals who achieve calm-abiding prior to entering the path, right? 
Student 1: Yeah.
Khen Rinpoche: It is highly possible for people to achieve calm-abiding prior to entering the path.
Then after having realized emptiness, immediately he has the calm-abiding focusing on emptiness. From the beginning why he doesn’t have?
Student 1: Yeah, that would be an absurd consequence because you have to say calm-abiding focusing on emptiness is achieved on the Great Path of Accumulation. 
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s hold on to what is said in the text. On the Great Path of Accumulation, you achieve the calm-abiding observing emptiness. When you achieve the special insight observing emptiness, you achieve the Path of Preparation. Prior to that, you don’t achieve those two realizations. Is it possible to realize emptiness prior to entering the path? Yes. 
So you got three things. During the Small Path of Accumulation, does the bodhisattva have the calm-abiding observing emptiness? No. Because it is not achieved prior to the Great Path of Accumulation. Question: Why they don’t have it? They have realization of emptiness and they have calm-abiding. What is the reason they don’t have the calm-abiding observing emptiness? That is the fundamental question. That is the question end of the day, right? 
Khen Rinpoche: That is your question?  
Student 1: Yes. If I were to take the position that he achieves calm-abiding focusing on emptiness upon reaching the middling rather than the great. So far there is no text says that. If he achieves on the middling….
Khen Rinpoche: Then what is the problem? You like to say, you can say but what is the problem? No problem.
Student 1: Yeah.
Khen Rinpoche: If you say there is no problem right, then why not before that?
Student 1: Not everybody realizes emptiness. That is my point. Not all the bodhisattvas realize emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: We are talking about sharp facultied definite lineage. 
Student 1: Alright.
Khen Rinpoche: According to you, once you have realized emptiness, the next thing is once you get calm-abiding then you necessarily have calm-abiding observing emptiness. That is the position you are taking, right? 
Student 1: Let’s say. Just for the purpose of clarifying all this.
Khen Rinpoche: You cannot say that. We are not able to say that, right?
Student 1: The fallacy of saying that would be? 
Khen Rinpoche: It is scriptural authority because it is posited that on the great Path of Accumulation you have the calm-abiding observing emptiness. Only on the basis of that, then you can have the special insight focusing on emptiness, and without which you cannot.  If you say that, then you might as well say on the small Path of Accumulation there is also the union of calm-abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness. Possible right? Because if you say you have calm-abiding observing emptiness on the small Path of Accumulation, then you can also say definitely there is special insight. Why not? Then prior to entering the path also can, right? There is another problem. Are the calm-abiding observing emptiness and the special insight observing emptiness generated serially or simultaneously? 
Khen Rinpoche: Sutra path.
Student 1: On the sutra path, serially.
Khen Rinpoche: For a person of definite Mahayana lineage, simultaneous with entering the Mahayana path, can that individual have the calm-abiding observing emptiness and the special insight observing emptiness? Possible or not? 
Student 1: Prior to? 
Khen Rinpoche: No, simultaneous with entering the Mahayana path, for a person of definite Mahayana lineage. 
Student 1: No
Khen Rinpoche: Why? What is missing? We have three things – generating bodhicitta, calm-abiding observing emptiness and special insight observing emptiness - which is missing? 
Student 1: Special insight focusing on emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: For this person of definite Mahayana lineage, at the time of entering the Mahayana path, does he has the special insight observing emptiness? 
Student 1: Cannot say they have.
Khen Rinpoche: It follows that you have to say that he has the special insight observing emptiness because he has special insight and he has realization of emptiness. You asserted that. If you have special insight and you have realization of emptiness, it follows that these two must be combined. 
Student 1: No. You have to alternate between the two as that is the training for achieving union of calm-abiding and …
Khen Rinpoche: Listen. It follows that this individual has the special insight observing emptiness because he has special insight and he has realization of emptiness. What are you going to say for that? 
Student 1: Can I clarify first before
Khen Rinpoche: First you say that 
Student 1: I say yes to that. 
Khen Rinpoche: You say yes? 
Student 1: Yes, but I qualify that with making a difference between the union of calm-abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Huh? 
Student 1: The union of calm-abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness, this training has to come with alternating between the two and then eventually…
Ven Gyurme: Basically you are saying special insight observing emptiness and the union of calm-abiding and special insight observing emptiness are two different things. 
Student 1: Is that possible?
Khen Rinpoche: Union of calm-abiding and special insight means the individual has both calm-abiding and special insight, right?
Student 1: That part yes. Union means there are, but before that….
Khen Rinpoche: If the individual has calm-abiding and also realize emptiness, why is it necessarily so that he has calm-abiding observing emptiness? Why? 
Student 1: Because it is a union. 
Khen Rinpoche: What union? You have calm-abiding, you have realization of emptiness, why then the person necessarily must have the calm-abiding observing emptiness? Why? 
Student 1: Because my thinking is that his realization of emptiness is within the state of calm-abiding. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why? 
Student 1: Because he has calm-abiding. He uses calm-abiding to meditate on…
Khen Rinpoche: How you know that? The mind realizing emptiness need not necessarily be calm-abiding. You need that? To realize emptiness you need calm-abiding? 
Student 1: Not necessarily.
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, why? 
Student 1: You don’t need calm-abiding to realize emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: You don’t need yeah? Why don’t need? 
Student 1: You don’t need. If you have calm-abiding, when you are meditating and trying to realize emptiness, would that calm-abiding be utilized at all? Not necessarily at all? If you have calm-abiding and you are trying to realize emptiness…. 
Khen Rinpoche:  What did I say? He realized emptiness already. He realized emptiness before achieving calm-abiding. 
Student 1: Alright. Thank you.
Continue with the root text:
Union of calm abiding and insight
You must first establish the four branches of recitation and the three absorptions to properly accomplish the limitless feats of the special siddhis that are stated in the action and performance tantras. Mantric Stages, however, mentions that they may not be necessary to establish many of the minor siddhis. 
The three absorptions or the concentration are:
The concentration abiding in fire
The concentration abiding in sound
The concentration bestowing liberation at the end of the sound
In order to achieve the special siddhis in the action and performance tantra, first one must have done a proper approximation of the deity in dependence upon the concentration with repetition and without repetition. On that basis then you achieve the special siddhis. It is the special siddhis that are achieved that makes the path of action and performance tantra quicker than the perfection vehicle.
In the action and performance tantra performing a valid approximation of the deity is highly emphasized. Because with a proper approximation of the deity that is done through depending on the concentration with and without repetition that you are able to achieve the special siddhis or attainments. With the attainments of these special siddhis that makes your path to enlightenment much quicker, i.e. quicker than the perfection vehicle. It is said that with these siddhis you can achieve enlightenment in one life.
How to establish the siddhis having achieved approximation
The fourth has three types of siddhi—supreme, intermediate, and lesser—and there are many ways of categorizing them in three.
We categorize the siddhis by means of entity.
(1) By means of nature, the supreme siddhis are the knowledge bearer, higher perception, and knowing all the treatises.
As mentioned earlier, if one does a proper approximation through engaging or practicing the concentration with repetition and without repetition then you achieve the siddhis. At the different levels of siddhis, the supreme siddhis are included here.
The siddhis of the knowledge bearer (vidyadhara) - the vidyadhara here refers to not just knowledge bearer (knowledge holder) but having the life knowledge bearer means you achieve the realization of immortality. Based on that the individual is able to achieve enlightenment in one life. Therefore it is called a supreme siddhis. The knowledge holder attainment is the supreme siddhis.
By engaging in the proper approximation then one also achieves the siddhis of higher perception – sometimes translated as clairvoyance but it is more than that. It is higher perception. 
Also by engaging in the valid approximation one achieves the siddhis of knowing all the treatises. It is said that whatever texts one pick up and without difficulty, one understand all the words and meanings.
Khen Rinpoche: Supposed we need the do retreat I think.
So, these three are the supreme attainments (siddhis):
Siddhis of the knowledge bearer
Siddhis of higher perception
Siddhis of knowing all the treatises
The intermediate siddhis are invisibility, extracting the essence, speed walking, and so on. 
Invisibility is just being able to move around without people seeing you. 
Extracting the essence or practice of chulen. Where you are able to sustain your body without having to rely on coarse food but rather you can, for example, survive on just the practice of extracting essence from chulen pills. (Footnote from Principles of Buddhist Tantra: The practice of extracting the essence (chu len) is described by Tsongkhapa as: “Taking the essence is the medium siddhi of empowering a pill so that all nourishment can be derived from it.”)
Then speed walking is you are able to walk very fast.
Khen Rinpoche: Chulen is good for one to be diet or to be slim. I think must have that chulen. Those people who do the chulen become very thin, very skinny like bamboo. I heard their mind is very very clear when they do chulen. The mind is extremely clear. I heard last time someone did in Dharamsala during Lama Yeshe’s time. That person is very skinny. Everyday just eat this small pill for one month like that become very skinny. So, I recommend that for those who want to slim down. That really works. Other slimming pill doesn’t work much. That one really works. I am advertising that, anybody wants to buy I? 
The lesser siddhis are subduing others, killing, expelling, and so forth.
2) By means of signs
By means of signs, there are three: igniting substances, making them emit smoke, and heating them.
There is the practice of accomplishing pills. There are different kinds of pills that one can make. At the time of accomplishing/blessing the pills, for somebody who has performed the prior approximation well for the deity then they do receive the signs during the accomplishment of the pills. For example, the pills catch fire, they ignite smoke or at least they become warm. The pills become kind of heated up or become warm. There are the signs like that.
For example, it is said in the Highest Yoga Tantra when they prepare the inner offering pills, these are the signs that are spoken of.  For somebody who has those realizations and have the power, it is said that when they bless inner offering pills, such signs do appear.
Khen Rinpoche: Check your inner offering, whether there is fire or not. Maybe smoke. Whether there is heat.
(3) By means of basis
By means of basis there are siddhis of body, substances, and resources.
[Principles of Buddhist Tantra: From the point of view of the basis, 
The supreme siddhi is full control of one’s body and the capacity to manifest a magnificent appearance. 
The intermediate siddhi is the capacity to gain mastery over and use various substances.
The lesser siddhi is the capacity to use and enjoy various extraordinary resources.
. (Footnote; Siddhis of resources means “changing ordinary resources into marvelous ones]
 (4) By means of the bestower
By means of the bestower, there are mantras of ārya beings, deities, and earth deities.
There are mantras spoken by arya superiors, deities. Here I guess refer to the desire realm gods and the earth deities refer to beings who are abiding on the earth. They could include yaksas, basically non-human entities. (Footnote from Principles of Buddhist Tantra: Nonhuman beings abiding above the earth are yakṣas (nature spirits), gandharvas (celestial musicians), and so on. In this case Losang Palden states that the knowledge is bestowed by yakṣas]
You do hear of these accounts of these mantras taught by nagas, by yaksas, by spirits and so forth. They live on earth. People practice the mantras and they seem to achieve the ability to pacify sicknesses, obstacles and so forth just by reciting those mantras. 
(5) By means of lineage
By means of lineage, Mantric Stages states:
The actions of pacification, increase, and wrath are achieved respectively by those of the tathāgata lineage, the lotus lineage, and the vajra lineage. This is how the supreme, intermediate, and lesser siddhis are attained.
It is saying that:
the actions of pacification are achieved primarily by depending on the tathagata lineage,
the actions of increase primarily by the lotus lineage
the actions of wrath is achieved primarily by the vajra lineage. 
As I mentioned before, when we think of these three lineages, we have to think of them as being deities as the personification of the appearance of factors of purity of the body, speech and mind. 
The factor of purity of the body appearing as deity is the tathagata lineage,
The factor of purity of speech appearing as deity is the lotus lineage 
The factor of purity of mind appearing as deity is the vajra lineage.
How do we know that a particular deity belongs to the tathagata lineage? 
If you look at the rituals of the deity of the tathagata lineage, you will see the statements like:
 “This deity is crowned by Vairochana.” That is an indication that it is the tathagata lineage.
If the deity is crowned by Amitabha, then it is the lotus lineage.
If the deity is crowned by Akshobhya, then it is the vajra lineage. 
If you look at the action tantra ritual of Avalokiteshvara or Chenrezig, in the ritual you will see the deity is crowned by Amitabha, so you know that the practice of action tantra practice of Chenrezig is practice of the lotus lineage. 
Likewise, Tara is also crowned by Amitabha, the action tantra practice of Tara belongs to the lotus lineage. 
So by looking at the rituals of the deity, you can tell which lineage they belong to by looking at the deity that they are crowned with. 
Summary of Sunday Discussion Grouping
All BP students are grouped into 5 groups under the Dhyani Buddhas name:
Grouping: Everyone in BP must join the group. The group is not solely for Sunday Discussion.Group leaders and groups will be change for every module
Purpose: Groups will rotate so that everybody gets the chance to know each other well and become friends. Communicating to each other, talk well to each other, care for each other.
Direct to the leaders on anything that is related to BP.
Khen Rinpoche: So I am going to divide the group into five groups. There are five groups. I will pass you the numbers. You just pick up the number. At the very beginning we have 8 group leaders, and each modules we change the group leaders and we change the groups. Then after that people said we want to stick to one group all the time. Recently, I have meeting and some of the people suggest that better to rotate. There are many different views. There is not only for group discussion. Everybody who is Basic Program take the number. Whether you come discussion or not, it is different. This is just making the group. You want to receive email anything, you must join the group. Okay? Discussion doesn’t matter? But you must take the number. Whoever coming for class must take the number. We used to have 8 groups, we have some of discussions, some of them want to step down, some become small group, some leaders want to rest. Some group becomes smaller. At the very beginning, the idea is to rotate, the groups rotate. The idea is to know everybody. That is my point. To rotate is like that, that is the whole goal of know each other. If you are in your own group forever then you will not know anyone. This is not so healthy. To know each other is important. Whichever you fall into group please make sure you are inside, make sure you are communicating well. This is the part of the practice also. Don’t become so much “I don’t like this, I don’t like that”. This is also not good. So, one part of the practice, I want you to do that. Make sure you are well in that group. Talk well. Discuss well. Know each other well. Care each other well. Okay? After next module then we will change different one. At the end of the day, you know everybody. Everybody becomes friends. That is my hope. That is my point. Whether it will become or not, I am not sure. I thought it is good to change from beginning. It is important not to stick to one group forever. So, it is better to everybody. That is one of my points. Therefore we have 5 groups. 
I put the 5 Dhyani Buddha names. So, tantra you know what is the 5 dyani Buddhas? 
Vairochana group so those number. Thiam Teck is now becomes Vairochana. Assistant is Jay Goh. 
Next one is Akshobya, the group leader is Swee Kim. Regina is assistant. 
The third one is Ranasambhava, , leader is Guat Cheng. Assistant is Seow Kheng
The next one is Amitabha, group leader is Benny Law, Assistant is Patricia.
Next one is Amogsaidhi, Leader is Kelvin Ong. Assistant is Priscilla Lim
Not everybody is here tonight. Those who didn’t come tonight. If you part of BP class then should be in the group. So, just let other people know then join one of the groups. Maybe you can tell the center manager, you want to join the group then she would put you in one of the 5 groups. My point is making new group, I want group leaders to be active. 
Also I want the students to be active. Any related questions BP you don’t understand you can ask direct to your group leaders. He may be able to answer. If he not able to answer then bring back to class. Also on Sunday, I request you to come to the discussion groups. In this way, you can learn more. Any questions you can ask but we have already some questions. Before that, Friday and Saturday, you read a little bit about the questions. You think about the questions, oh I say that, I will say that, I will say this. Think about a little bit. You get some ideas in the mind. So, Sunday you come there, you are able to able to say something. First you think then later you present your view. Could be right or could be wrong, it doesn’t matter? 
If you are wrong, somebody will say you are wrong then you have to prove that I am right because I have this, I have this, like that. So, this is the way then you will learn better. I want you to be together as a group discuss questions and answers. 
Sometimes of course, in debate of course, when questions answers, sometimes who are not mindful, who are very strong, aggressive, sharp become like that you really hurt others heart. Always this has to be mindful. Sometimes, it happens but you must mindful that and try to immediately recognize that and do that. It happens for everyone. 
So, it is something have to be mindful not to hurt anybody. So, this is the mindfulness that you need. Otherwise sometimes we are not mindful we just say really strong of course, I mean of course you are discussing about Dharma. But sometimes happen even to me. I don’t mean it but sometimes debate strong words just come out.
 Especially during discussion, something like that then hurt then don’t like each others then becomes unhappy there. After that, you don’t like each other then you don’t want to join the group.
This is what happens in the past. So group leaders also have responsibility if that happens, group leader make sure says that oh this is going to far. Leader has the job to do that. 
Group leader is just not for the name but you have also the responsibilities. That is why gives the 5 Buddha names, it is about that. Remember that. I mean we all like that so make sure. I am not sure if group leader himself becomes like that then what to do? Then the assistant’s job “Group leader you are getting a little bit strong, just cool down. Remind that. So, I think this is important. So, this Sunday, I don’t have Chinese Lamrimclass, I will come. Everybody comes. So, please everybody comes to discuss. Some people I  know because they don’t want to discuss at all.
One thing is of course you come from work, you come here, finish class you run back. There is no like communication each others, spend time to each others and talk to each others. I don’t see that. Just come, run, come, run. Like a working place or job place. 9:30pm cannot stay. One is that Sunday is good. getting together so the whole point is to know each others then discuss. It is not easy but we try our best now to improve. Only my talk cannot contibute much. From your side also need the discussion group. I hope that. Then after this module then I thought to change again the group. That I is my point. Last time, I notice that some people said, oh I don’t like this group leader, I don’t want to go there. I mean the problem is everywhere. Whenever you go, problem is there. So, you must learn how to make less problem within the group. respect the group leaders. I want to tell you respect the group leasers. This is important. I give the Buddha’s name there, hope you respect that. Any questions you can ask. Any notes you need, what kind of notes you need, what kind of summary you need, ask your group leader. Which way you can learn better, so you can ask your group leader. So those didn’t come please tell them, you must sign in the group. Because if you don’t sign then you don’t receive any email which related to the Basic Program you don’t get that, so make sure you are part of Basic Program, make sure you register there. 