Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L22.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:21.592634
================================================================================

In Action Tantra, it is said that the accomplishment of the siddhis is very important. That makes achieving enlightenment much quicker than in sutra.  The siddhis are to be accomplished on the basis of having done well the approximation of the deity via concentration with repetition and concentration without repetition. Among of all the siddhis, if you accomplished the siddhi of life knowledge bearer then one achieves a very long life and in that very life, one achieves enlightenment. So this is much quicker than the sutra path.
In Action tantra, there the 3 lineages:
Tathagata lineage - the factors of purity of body
Lotus lineage - the factors of purity of speech
Vajra lineage - the factors of purity of mind
Essentially they are respectively, the factors of purity of body, speech and mind appearing as the deity.
And:
Also each lineage has three siddhis and the three Actions of pacification, increase, and wrath. From among these, the lord of each lineage, the consort of each lineage, and the wrathful deities of each lineage, respectively, perform the three actions of pacification and so on.
These statements alone do not clarify the issue. Also I have not seen this point clearly explained by later scholars.
[Footnote from Yoga of Tibet:
 Actions of pacification (zhi ba): include pacifying untimely death, illnesses, epidemics, harmers, and  contagion 
 Actions of increase (rgays pa): include increase of life span, youth, magnificence, power, qualities [of realisation] etc.  
 Wrathful actions(drag po): include killing, expelling, [confusing], and so forth [of harmful beings].   
Khen Rinpoche: If the scholars cannot explain, I don’t know what to explain then. 
Within the 3 lineages -the tathagata lineage, the Lotus lineage and the Vajra lineage - they themselves have few subdivisions.  
As for the tathagata lineage, there are many subdivisions:
the principal of the Tathagata lineage, 
the lord of the Tathagata lineage, 
the mother of the Tathagata lineage
When we talk about the tathagata lineage in general, we are talking about the principal of the Tathagata lineage. The principal of the tathagata lineage is essentially the Tathagata, Buddha Shakyamuni.
The lord of the tathagata lineage is Manjushri.  
If we were to expand on this:
What are the deities that constitute in the tathagata lineage?
What are the deities that are included in the lord of the tathagata lineage?
If you want to go into detail on these, then that is not very clear.
The principal of the tathagata lineage is said to be Buddha Shakyamuni.
The lord of the tathagata lineage is said to be Manjushri. Manjushri sometimes is also referred to as the king of the tathagata lineage. Whether it is the king or the lord of the tathagata lineage, I am not sure why that is the case. There are tantras of the tathagata lineage.  Could it be that Manjushri is posited as the lord of the tathagata lineage because he turns the wheel of the dharma of the tantra of the tathagata lineage?  I am not sure whether one can make a connection between Manjushri being the person who holds and spread the tantra of the tathagata lineage and that makes him being the lord of the tathagata lineage.
The mother of the tathagata lineage is Marichi. 
Next is the division of the lotus lineage. 
The principal of the lotus lineage is Amitayus. 
The lord of the lotus lineage is Avalokiteshvara (Chenrezig) 
The mother of the lotus lineage is Tara.
The principal of the vajra lineage is Buddha Akshobhya.  
The lord of the vajra lineage is Vajrapani.
The mother of the vajra lineage is Mamaki.
Usually we see Manjushri, Avalokiteshvara and Vajrapani depicted as a trio. Many a time they are depicted together forming a trinity. I guess mainly it is because they are the lords of the 3 lineages.
It is said in the root text that each lineage has 3 siddhis and 3 actions and so forth.
One scholar says: There are disciples of action tantra with sharp faculties who attain enlightenment in one life through accomplishing the siddhi of the knowledge bearer permitting them to live for many eons.
Reply: This is not stated clearly in Mantric Stages. Further General Classes of Tantra states:
The action and performance tantras present no system of enlightenment other than that presented in the Perfection [Vehicle] system.
This should be analyzed, for if this is true, then that being would attain enlightenment in the supreme buddhafield called Gaṇḍavyūha.
The point here is to dispel the objection or resolving the qualm. There is a quotation from the General Classes of Tantra which states that the Action tantra present no system of enlightenment other than that which is presented in sutra (the Perfection Vehicle), yet it is also said that the tantric path is a quicker path than Paramitayana path.  
Earlier on it is said that in the practise of Action tantra, you can accomplish the various siddhis, and one of which is the siddhis of the life knowledge bearer, which means you achieve the attainment of immortality in that life, i.e. you have very long life to achieve enlightenment. You have to say you can achieve enlightenment in one life. 
According to the sutric system, is it possible to achieve enlightenment in one life?  You have to say “No, it doesn’t exist”.  
Khen Rinpoche: Exist or not?  You still doubt?  
What does it actually mean when you say one can achieve enlightenment in one life?  
Khen Rinpoche: In sutra possible? You must have confidence to say “No”. What is the doubt?
Does the person at the end of the continuum achieve enlightenment in one lifetime or not?
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t confuse. You must be able to say “Yes” or “No”. You say something then it works. Otherwise, I ask something and you keep quiet, I don’t know what need to say.  What do you think?  My question is, according to sutra, in one life time is it possible to achieve enlightenment?  No? Then I am saying if not possible, does the sentient being at the end of the continuum achieve enlightenment in the same basis? Doesn’t that individual achieve enlightenment in that very life?  In sutra, there is achieving enlightenment in one lifetime, isn’t it?
That is very simple. Why people confuse. I don’t know.  So what are you going to say if I say there is enlightenment in one life time in sutra base on what I have just brought up earlier on?
Khen Rinpoche: You answer my question.
Student 1: In sutra, one cannot attain enlightenment within one lifetime.  
Khen Rinpoche: That is clear. I say possible. Just now I give example, what is the answer for that?
Student 1: In order to get enlightenment you need 3 countless great eons. So that is one of the lifetimes of the 3 countless great eons.
Khen Rinpoche: So one lifetime you can get enlighten?
Student 1:  One lifetime has to start from the entrance from the path. When we say attain enlightenment in one lifetime, it means from the moment when you enter into the path until you get enlightenment in one lifetime.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, you have to be quick like what she said.  She said not possible to get enlightenment in one lifetime means after entering the path you are not possible to get enlightenment in one lifetime.  So that is the meaning of it is not possible to get enlightenment in one lifetime. She says like that, is that correct? 
In Action tantra, it is said that the individual can get enlightenment in one lifetime through accomplishing the siddhi of life knowledge bearer; in simple English is immortality. The manner of achieving enlightenment is no different from that which is presented the Perfection Vehicle, which means if follow that that individual will achieve enlightenment in Akanishta. 
If you look at the way of achieving enlightenment in Action tantra, somebody who has a desire realm basis enters the path of Action tantra, take initiation, generate bodhicitta and enters the path, then actualizes the yoga with signs and then the yoga without signs.  
When he achieves the yoga without signs, he enters the Action tantra Path of Preparation. 
If he has accomplished the siddhis of immortality and within the lifetime he achieves the Path of Seeing because he has to achieve Path of Seeing on the basis of the desire realm basis. 
After enter the Action tantric Path of Seeing, he progresses to enlightenment. 
All of these is said to have happened in that lifetime.
He enters the Action tantric path and achieves the Path of Seeing with the desire realm basis, by then he would already have the siddhis of immortality. This mean he will have achieve enlightenment with the desire realm basis. 
Question: Is there enlightenment in one lifetime on the basis of desire realm basis?
If you accept that on the basis of Action tantra path, one can achieve enlightenment. In essence, you will have to posit enlightenment in term of Action tantra context is done on the desire realm basis.  If that is the case, yet at the same time if you say that Action tantra present no system of enlightenment other than presented in the sutric path, i.e. when you put these two together, you will have a contradiction, because in the sutric path, it is said that you achieve enlightenment in Akanishta. The basis is in Akanishta.
Khen Rinpoche: You understand what I am trying to say?  If you understand, then I will give the answer.  First you have to understand what I am saying.  Without understanding, no point I give answer. 
This is the qualm. There seems to be a contradiction, so how should we resolve this?
Khen Rinpoche: You say something, that I give answer.  If I keep give answer there is no point if you don’t think at all. You understand my question, the qualm here?  So what are you going to say? OK, so just leave it there.  You have to think about that on how we should resolve that qualm
If you understand the qualm which is basically an apparent internal contradiction, between sayings that one can achieve enlightenment in one lifetime in one body in Action tantra, resolving that point with the sutric system assertion of having achieving enlightenment in Akanishta, how do you resolve this?  
Khen Rinpoche: You get the qualm or no?
As for the path of Action tantra, you know that there is concentration with repetition and concentration without repetition. If you have a rough idea of the mode of progress, through those concentrations, and seeing how that is a method for developing concentration, then I think that is enough. 
Next is Performance tantra.
How to progress on the path of performance tantra
This has four divisions:
1. How to become a suitable vessel
2. How to keep the vows and commitments purely
3. How to approximate the deity
4. How to establish the siddhis
How to become a suitable vessel
First, you become a vessel suitable to meditate on the path by obtaining empowerment bestowed in the maṇḍala of the essence of great compassion and so on that are mentioned in performance tantra. You must obtain the five knowledge empowerments since you are not permitted to practice if you obtain just the water and crown empowerments. Apart from these distinctions it is similar to action tantra.
One takes or receives wang (initiation) into Performance tantra. One is empowered to meditate on the path of Performance tantra. As for the initiations that are received, the root text says that you must obtain the 5 knowledge initiations since you are not permitted to practice if you just obtain the water and crown initiations. Apart from these distinctions it is similar to Action tantra. 
Why is there such a difference in terms of the necessity of receiving all the 5 knowledge initiations? In Action tantra it is sufficient just to receive the water and crown initiations. 
In Performance tantra those two alone are not sufficient. On top of that you have to receive the vajra, bell, name initiations. Why this is the case? It is something that we can think about. I don’t have any answer now.
As for the next outline ‘How to keep the vows and commitments purely,’ this is similar to what was explained earlier in Action tantra. You take the bodhisattva vows and have to guard against the 18 root downfalls and 46 vices. 
How to keep the vows and commitments purely
Second, the root downfalls are similar to those of action tantra. Other commitments also explained in action tantra are said to be common to both. The Vairocana Complete Enlightenment Tantra states:
You must not give up the pure Dharma and bodhicitta, even to save your life, you must not act with avarice or harm sentient beings, and you must maintain the practice of abandoning the ten non-virtuous actions.
How to approximate the deity
The third has two parts:
1. Yoga with signs
2. Yoga without signs
[Page 47 Principles of Buddhist Tantra: In both action and performance tantras:
yoga with signs denotes deity meditation that engages relative or conventional appearance either through visualizing our ordinary body, speech, and mind as the body, speech, and mind of a deity, or through visualizing ourselves as inseparable from the nature of the deity we have generated in the space before us. 
Sign refers to relative truth
Yoga with signs refers to practices engaging and focusing on relative truths.
Conversely yoga without signs engages the non-inherent existence of the deity. It is meditation on the emptiness of the divine body that does not apprehend any relative signs.]
Yoga with signs
Yoga with signs consists of recitation of the four external branches and recitation of the four internal branches, engaging in whispered and mental recitation without deteriorating either set of four branches, and engaging in restraint through vitality exertion during mental recitation
Here the yoga of signs in Performance tantra consists of:
recitation of the 4 external branches and 
recitation of the 4 internal branches. 
Let’s look at the 4 external branches first.
The names of the 4 branches are the same as the one used in Action tantra. So the 4 branches are:
Self-basis
Other basis
Mind basis
Sound basis.
The self-basis refers to oneself having arisen as the deity. Before one generates as a deity one has to bring to mind the meaning of emptiness. You have to reflect on emptiness. You could start with a doubt tending towards the factual - a mind which is a doubt with emptiness as its object, but it is a doubt tending to factual. 
Next you have correctly assuming consciousness which is a better state of mind with regards to understanding of emptiness. Ideally, if you have the valid cognizer apprehending emptiness then that would be the best. So whatever it is, one meditates on emptiness through applying many reasons. So many different proofs or reasons one can use to ascertain emptiness. For example, the reason that is called the freedom from being one or different or one or many, whatever it is, one comes to ascertain that:
the meditator, the person, the I who is meditating and
 the deity that is being meditated upon do not exist truly. They do not exist inherently. 
These two are equal in state of emptiness.
That mind ascertaining emptiness arises as the deity. One can do an instantaneous self-generation. In the context of Performance tantra there is no specific mention of generating oneself as the deity via the 6 deities. In Action tantra, the process of generating oneself as the deity is explained via the 6 deities. Here in Performance tantra, sometimes you can see them talking about instantaneous self-generations. In some texts, they also talk about the generation through the 3 rituals (3 processes):
1st part: It is the mind ascertaining emptiness then arises in the aspect of the seed syllable of the deity. 
2nd part: The seed syllable transforms into respective hand implements.
3rd part: From the hand implements one arises in the complete aspect of the deity. 
These are the 3 parts. So you could say the 3 part process. 
To make it easier, let’s have an illustration.
First one meditates on the meaning of emptiness.
Then the mind that ascertains emptiness takes on the aspect appears arises as a moon disc.
On top of that moon disc there is a syllable Om in the middle of it. This syllable Om is visualized as golden in color.
From this syllable Om light rays you need do the visualization of emitting and re-absorbing. Through that you perform the visualization accomplishing the two purposes of self and others. 
Light rays are emitted and make offerings to the buddhas and bodhisattvas
They are re-absorbed as light rays and perform the activities for the welfare of sentient beings. 
Light rays are re-absorbed back into the syllable Om and the syllable Om transformed into Vairocana.
One arises as Vairocana and develops the clear appearance and divine pride in relation to that. 
In short, this is the self-basis.
Then one generates the front generation in the aspect that is completely like the one you have generated yourself into. In short, you generate Vairocana in the space in front of you although at a slightly higher level. 
In the heart of the front generation, you visualize a moon disc which by nature is your own mind but in aspect of the moon disc in the heart of the front generation deity. 
This is the mind-basis.
It is not exactly very clear in the root text but if you read this root text as it, it seems to be saying you visualize the mind basis which is the syllable Om in the heart of the front generation. I am not sure whether it means in the heart of oneself and the front generation or just the front generation. But if you look at the text, what it seem to be saying is visualize in this heart. So “this” here refers by context, seems to be talking about the front generation.
Anyway, you visualize the moon disc in the heart of the front generation deity. That is the mind-basis. On it, you place the letters of the mantra that is to be repeated. That is the sound-basis.
I am not sure whether at your own heart you also place the moon disc and the letters of the mantra that is to be recited or repeated. I am not sure whether that is similar to the Action tantra. 
Khen Rinpoche: Action tantra is clear, yeah?
In the context of Action tantra, it is quite clear that you visualize the moon disc and the mantra that is to be recited at the heart of yourself and the heart of the front generation. But here in Performance tantra it is not clearly stated. 
After visualizing these 4 branches then you engage in repetition. I am not sure the repetition here is like what it is being explained in Action tantra - the repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra and the mantra repetition observing the sound of the mantra. I would think that there is the repetition observing the form of the letters of the mantra and the repetition observing the sound of the mantra because you have already visualized the mind basis and the sound basis whether it is in the heart of the front generation only or in both hearts. The point is that the mind basis and the sound basis are there. Anyway, I would think there is the repetition the form of the letters of the mantra, and repetition observing the sound of the mantra. With regards to these two forms of repetition, there are also whispered repetition and mental repetition.
The mode of the practice should be the same as Action tantra. 
First we need to have a stable concentration focusing on the deity’s body.
Once that has achieved, move the attention to observing the form of the letters of the mantra
Then move on to the repetition observing the sound of the mantra. 
First you start with whispered repetition 
Once that is done well, with restraining vitality exertion you engage in mental recitation. 
That is the 4 external branches of repetition. 
Next is the 4 internal branches of repetition. 
In the text that I am reading from, it says:
Bring the mind back to the meaning of emptiness; reflect on the meaning of emptiness. 
From within the state of emptiness visualize the syllable Ah. It could be the syllable Ah or the long Ah as there are different forms of Ah. Whatever you choose, the syllable Ah you either arise as Vairocana or Shakyamuni Buddha. 
Let’s say you generate yourself as Vairocana. That would be the self-basis. 
Visualize an orb of light at your heart of yourself as the deity.
In that orb of light in your heart, there is a Vairocana. That small Vairocana at your heart is the other basis. 
In the heart of that small Vairocana is an orb of light; a moon mandala. That is the mind basis. 
On the moon disc in the heart of Vairocana are the letters of the mantra that you are going to recite. That is the sound basis. 
When these 4 internal branches are completed, you engage in repetition:
First whispered repetition
Then through restraining vitality exertion you engage in mental recitation (repetition).
In the text that I am reading from,
When you engage the 4 external branches of repetition, you recite the mantra of the deity 100,000 times 
When you engage the 4 internal branches of repetition, you recite the mantra of the deity 100,000 times 
So it is 100,000 times each. Therefore:
With the 4 external branches of repetition, you do 100,000 times  
With the 4 internal branches of repetition, you do 100,000 times. 
What it means individually you do 100,000 times each for these two branches - 100,000 times and then 100,000 times. 
There is another text which says you perform the approximation with recitation of the mantra 300,000 times. 
How do you go about that? 
You have the 4 external branches of repetition and the 4 internal branches of repetition.
First you start with the 4 external branches of repetition and accumulate 100,000 repetitions.
Once you have done that, then you stop and make offerings for one month. 
After you have finished making offerings for one month, then you accumulate another 50,000 repetitions with the 4 external branches of repetition. 
In total you have 150,000 repetitions with 4 external branches of repetition. 
Then you do the same thing with the 4 internal branches. 
First you accumulate 100,000 repetitions. 
Then you break and make offerings for one month. 
Then you have finished off with 50,000 repetitions based on the 4 internal branches of repetition.
This is what is stated in the Vairocanabhisambodhi tantra which is Performance tantra. Then there is a statement in there having to recite the 300,000 mantras. 
As for the boundary with regards to achieving calm abiding in Performance tantra, I have not seen any clear indications. Unlike with what we saw in Action tantra, you achieve the concentration abiding in sound. But here I have not seen any clear indication. Let’s say the mode of progress is similar to what we have discussed in the debate in the recent time.
You enter the path and by the end of the Path of Accumulation you have the calm abiding observing emptiness. 
After that you achieve the special insight observing emptiness. 
With that you enter the Path of Preparation. 
After that you progress on the Path of Seeing and so forth. 
According to the root text, the repetition of the 4 external branches and the repetition of the 4 internal branches through which we engage in the whispered and mental recitation through restraining vitality exertion come under Yoga with Signs. 
Yoga without signs
Yoga without signs consists of attaining a calm abiding that focuses on the body of the deity and so on, then meditating on emptiness mixed with deity yoga, and then establishing a union of calm abiding and the insight that comprehends emptiness through alternating between analysis and placement.
As to the difference between the two yogas – yoga with signs and yoga without signs: 
The meaning of yoga with signs and without signs is given in Mantric Stages:
Yoga with signs is deity meditation and mantra recitation without meditation on emptiness. Yoga without signs is deity meditation and mantra recitation with meditation on emptiness but not meditation on emptiness alone.
This is what Lama Tsongkhapa said in his Mantric Stages. But if you are looking at the verse, it seems to be saying that Yoga with signs does not involved meditation on emptiness. We have to think about this. We cannot say that somebody who is meditating on the Yoga with signs is somebody who has necessarily not realized emptiness.
In Action tantra, one generates as the deity through the six deities. The first deity is the empty deity or the ultimate deity, which essentially is a meditation on emptiness. In tantra we say the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness arises as the deity. In short, that wisdom, the mind that ascertained emptiness arises as the deity. That is how you move from the ultimate deity (empty deity) to the sound deity and so on and so forth. So there is meditation on emptiness.
This is what Lama Tsongkhapa said in his Mantric Stages. Can one say that a person who meditates on the yoga with signs is somebody who doesn’t meditate on emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: What are you going to say?
Points of debate
One scholar says: The meaning of yoga with signs is deity yoga not influenced by the mind realizing emptiness, while yoga without signs is deity yoga influenced by the mind realizing emptiness.
Reply: This should be analyzed, because there is yoga with signs that is influenced by the mind realizing emptiness— because it is said that meditation on emptiness exists prior to yoga with signs, and if the mind realizing emptiness at that time is sufficiently strong, the yoga with signs that follows will be influenced by it.
Condensed Stages of the Path states:
When wisdom realizing emptiness is strong, it is not contradictory that when you practice generosity, prostrations, circumambulations, and so on, the minds that focus on these actions engage these actions with the force of that wisdom, even though they do not comprehend emptiness. Similarly when bodhicitta is strongly generated at the beginning of the session, it is not contradictory that when (you later) engage in concentration on emptiness, at that time bodhicitta influences that (concentration on emptiness), although it does not manifest.
How method and wisdom are united in tantra
This is how method and wisdom are conjoined in the sūtra system, but method and wisdom are not conjoined in the mantric system by this means alone. There both the extensive practice of deity yoga and the profound wisdom realizing non-inherent existence are taken to be the inseparable union of method and wisdom by nature simultaneously combined in a single awareness.
Khen Rinpoche: Have you read this before you come or not? What I am reading now, did you read before you come or not? If you read then that is very easy to understand of what I am reading.
Now the author cites the Mantric Stages, which essentially is an explanation of one of the pertinent question in what is the meaning of method and wisdom conjoined inseparably in single awareness.
The answer is in the root text, so you should read on your own. The answer is clear.
Mantric Stages states:
In the resultant phase both the deity basis that is adorned with marks and signs and its supported mind of non-observation abide simultaneously and inseparably. So too in the path phase, both the method—that is, your body appearing to your yogi mind as a tathāgata’s body—and the wisdom focusing on the non-inherent existence of the suchness of the mind are by nature necessarily simultaneously and inseparably combined in a single awareness, which is the inseparable union of method and wisdom.
That is the description at the time of enlightenment. This is the resultant phase - both the deity body and mind abides simultaneously and inseparably. So likewise, in the path phase, both the method, your body appearing to your yogi mind as a tathāgata’s body and the wisdom focusing on the non-inherent existence of the suchness of the mind are by nature necessarily simultaneously and inseparably combined in a single awareness, 
In essence, what they are saying is that during the resultant phase, the Buddha exalted body and speech abides inseparably one; indivisible entity. Likewise, at the time at the path, in tantra, both method and wisdom aspect of the path abides simultaneously and inseparably one.
And:
Though wisdom realizing the non-inherent existence of its held aspect—the appearance of the deity—is one in nature with the mind of extensive deity yoga, method and wisdom are posited as distinct due to being designated as different isolates that negate wrong (modes of ) distinction.
This is a very essential point to understand: Why and how method and wisdom abides simultaneously and inseparably one in one single awareness; which is a unique feature of tantra. So you really need to get this point and understand it.
After that short discussion or debate, to summarize.
The yoga severing the root of saṃsāra
Therefore, in this context, yoga without signs is profound, clear, non dual yoga. It is not merely deity yoga influenced by the mind realizing emptiness, for if it lacked meditation on emptiness it would not be concentration without signs.
So basically, the author now is saying that you cannot distinguish yoga with signs and yoga without signs just by the reason; “Oh, if this is conjoined with meditation on emptiness then it is a yoga without signs, and if it is not conjoined with the meditation conjoined with emptiness, then it is a yoga with sign”. You cannot say that. 
The author Ngawang Phalden cites Khedrup Je’s  General Classes of Tantra
General Classes of Tantra states:
Though they accomplish absorption with signs, they still do not have the direct antidote that severs the root of saṃsāra; for this they need yoga without signs. When they cultivate yoga without signs, they do not meditate on any relative aspect, such as the body of the deity; rather they skillfully cultivate analytical and placement meditation on emptiness based on past advice.
The General Classes of Tantra says that just by the concentration with repetition, you cannot cut the root of samsara. Such concentration cannot be the direct antidote that severs the root of samsara. So the yoga with signs alone cannot do that. 
During the time of the yoga with signs, the ability to sever the root of samsara has not formed. But when the power to sever the root of samsara comes into being then you have the yoga without signs.
There is no way to strike at the root of samsara without actualizing the special insight observing emptiness. Even if one has the calm-abiding observing emptiness alone, that itself cannot strike against the root of samsara. You need the wisdom that is induced by calm abiding observing emptiness. Therefore, you need special insight. Without special insight focusing on emptiness, you cannot even suppress the manifest afflictions.
As for the presentation according to the perfection vehicle, when the special insight focusing on emptiness is achieved one enters the Path of Preparation. One enters from the heat level of the Path of Preparation. From the heat level then one moves to the peak, forbearance and then supreme mundane qualities. As one progresses through the four levels of the Path of Preparation, the yogi’s ability to suppress the manifest grasping at true existence increases as he progresses through the Path of Preparation. 
Here in tantra, there are two main meditations:
Meditation on the wheel of the deities – belong to the side of appearance
Meditation on suchness – belong to the side of emptiness
Although in the practice of tantra, you meditate on both but the yoga with signs is the practice that focusing primarily on meditating on the side of the appearances - the wheel of the deities. 
I guess you can say the yoga with signs is the practice that primarily focuses on the meditation on deity, which belongs to the side of the appearances. With the deity as a basis then you try to elicit clear appearance and divine pride. Such a practice that focuses primarily on this is called the yoga with signs. The practice that focuses primarily on the side of the appearance meditating on the suchness of the deity is called the yoga without sign.
This is how you explain the statement from Je Rinpoche’s Mantric Stages with the quotation that is cited earlier on. In short:
The practice that focuses on the side of the appearances, meditating on the deity body is the yoga with signs.
The practice that focuses primarily on the side of the emptiness, meditating on suchness of the deity is called the yoga without signs. 
You have to keep in mind that the yoga without signs starts when you have the special insight observing emptiness. 
[BP1: In Performance Tantra, the deity practice is that of Vairochanabhisambodhi, a deity of the Tathagata lineage of Performance Tantra, who is yellow in colour with one face, a crown protrusion, two arms with the hands in meditative equipoise, sitting on a lotus and moon disc in the aspect of the complete enjoyment body (sambogakhaya). There are 116 deities in his entourage. With the principal, there are 117 deities in the mandala.]
FOUR EXTERNAL BRANCHES 
External self basis 
• One generates oneself as the deity in the beginning and meditates on emptiness. 
• The mind that ascertains emptiness transforms into a moon disc. 
• On top of the moon disc is the gold-coloured syllable, AH. 
• Light rays radiates from the AH and performs the two purposes, i.e., purifying the negativities and obscurations of sentient beings and making offerings to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
• The light rays then gather back into the syllable AH on the moon disc and one then completely transforms into the deity, Vairochanabhisambodhi. 
External other basis 
One visualises the deity Vairochanabhisambodhi in the space in front of oneself. 
External mind basis 
One visualises a moon disc, which entity is one’s own mind realising emptiness, at the heart of the deity in the space in front. 
External sound basis 
On top of the moon disc at the heart of the front generation deity, one places the mantra garland that one is going to repeat. 
These are the four external branches. 
After one has visualised these four branches, one then maintains clear appearance of oneself as the deity and generates divine pride on the basis of that deity. When that is done well, one focuses on the mantra garland on the moon disc at the heart of the deity in front and performs the mental repetition of the mantra while retaining the life-force exertion. 
The way of performing the above visualisation is similar to that of Action Tantra but the generation of the six deities is not clearly stated in the text for Performance Tantra. 
As stated in the text, the recitation of the four external branches involves the whispered and the mental repetition, “Whispered and mental repetition without deterioration of each set of these four branches, and retaining life-force exertion during mental repetition.” 
FOUR INTERNAL BRANCHES 
Internal Self Basis 
At the beginning, one meditates on emptiness. Within the state of emptiness, one arises as a deity through any one of the following four syllables: AH (long), AH (short), AUM, AH. 
Internal Other Basis 
Then visualise at one’s heart standing upright like a mirror, a moon disc. On the surface of that moon disc, there is another Vairochanambhisambodhi deity similar to the self-generation deity. 
Internal Mind Basis 
In the heart of that deity, there is a moon disc. 
Internal Sound Basis 
On the top of that moon disc is the mantra garland of the deity.
On the basis of these four internal branches, one performs the repetition of the mantra progressing from whispered repetition to mental repetition. At this point in time, one strives to achieve calm abiding. Once that is achieved, one analyses the meaning of emptiness. Through the practice of alternating between analysis and placement, one develops the union of calm abiding and special insight and when that is achieved, one actualises yoga without signs. 
Summary 
• Recitation with the four external branches. 
• Recitation with the four internal branches. 
• Whispered and mental repetition without deterioration of each set of the four branches. 
• Retaining life-force exertion during mental repetition. 
• Actualising yoga without signs. ]
Khen Rinpoche: That is it. If have question then ask. You all have the text so you must read before come to class. You try to read at least one page, two pages. Then when I talk then become very easy. Otherwise, you are reading for the first time, more difficult.
Student 1: There is definitely the dualistic appearance during the yoga with sign as well as yoga without sign before the Path of Seeing. How does one differentiate dualistic appearances on these stages with non-dual profundity and clarity?
Khen Rinpoche: The non-dual in the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity refers to the mind realizes emptiness appearing clearly as the deity.
So yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity is a way of saying how the method and wisdom are found in one mind. Both are one entity. It is the mind realizing emptiness appearing clearly as the deity. 
So this yoga on non-dual profundity and clarity is the mind realizing emptiness yet at the same time the deity is appearing clearly to that mind.
Let say somebody on the Path of Preparation who is practicing this deity yoga, there is deity appearing to that individual. But as the individual progresses to enlightenment, even that appearance has to subside.
When the deity is appearing to this mind, is there dualistic appearance or not? There is dualistic appearance. Because the deity body appears, that means you have to say there is dualistic appearance. 
Is the appearance of the deity body always there? No, such an appearance does subside. For example, when you hit the Path of Seeing then in meditative equipoise direct perception of emptiness, there is no dualistic appearance.
You are talking about direct perception of emptiness. For that meditative equipoise, you have to say that only the suchness of the deity appears and the deity does not appear. 
But this begets the question: Isn’t this particular wisdom of meditative equipoise directly realized emptiness a yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity? Yes or No?
Does the appearance of the deity appear to this meditative equipoise or not? 
If you say it doesn’t appear then how does it becomes a yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity? There is only profundity, there is no clarity.
[BP1: The phrase “non-dual profundity and clarity” is used in the first three classes of Tantra – Action Tantra, Performance Tantra and Yoga Tantra. What do these words mean? 
• “Profundity” refers to the wisdom realising emptiness. 
• “Clarity” refers to the clear appearance of the deity’s body 
• “Non-dual” means that these two are united in one causal collection, i.e. they are present in a single consciousness. ]
[BP1: A question that often comes up is how one knows whether one’s approximation retreat has been successful or done well. According to the Susiddhi Tantra, which is an Action Tantra, the signs of the approximation retreat having hit the mark are when, during the retreat: 
• one’s experience of hunger, thirst and general suffering subside 
• if one is sick, one’s sickness becomes less serious 
• one feels very happy 
• one’s physical appearance becomes more majestic 
• one experiences good dreams 
• one is eager and happy to recite the mantra 
• one’s body or the retreat room is infused with a pleasant smell 
• one develops strong faith in the deity that is being practised in the retreat 
Another Action Tantra text called The Concentration Continuation mentions the following signs of an unsuccessful retreat when one experiences the following during the retreat: 
• more hunger and thirst 
• the mind is disturbed or becomes unhappy 
• one has doubts questioning, “Why am I doing this retreat?” 
• lack of real desire to practise, meditate or recite mantras 
• experiencing bad dreams 
• one wants to engage in idle gossip 
In short, when one feels happy during the retreat and enjoys the retreat, then that is the sign that the retreat is going well. However, when one feels miserable or unhappy, then that is the sign the retreat has not gone well.
We should distinguish between what is meant by: 
(1) one is entering into Tantra and 
(2) one is entering the Tantric path. 
There is a lot of debate on this issue. Are they referring to the same thing or are they different? 
Entering into Tantra 
The doorway into Tantra is by taking the initiation. What is the meaning of “to receive an initiation”? The entity of an initiation has two parts: consciousness and the non-associated compositional factors. At the time of the initiation, one has to understand what is being said, what is being conferred, what to meditate on and so forth for one to receive the initiation. If one has received the initiation properly, then one has entered into Tantra. 
Entering the Tantric Path 
One must enter a path. We will discuss this in the context of the path of Action Tantra. 
First one enters into Action Tantra by receiving an Action Tantra initiation. Then comes the time when one develops the uncontrived bodhicitta by thinking, “I must achieve enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings.” At this time, one enters the path of accumulation of Action Tantra. What constitutes this path? It starts from that beginning up to the concentration abiding in sound. 
In the practice of Action Tantra, when one achieves the meditative stabilisation which is the union of calm abiding and special insight, that is when one enters the path of preparation of Action Tantra, which means one has actualised yoga without signs. 
We had seen how the path of Action Tantra is divided into the two yogas: 
(1) the yoga withsigns and 
(2) the yoga without signs. 
The yoga with signs has many divisions that constitute the path of accumulation. When one achieves the yoga without signs for the first time, then one achieves the path of preparation of Action Tantra. 
At the yoga without signs, which is the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity, when that wisdom directly perceives emptiness, one has entered the path of seeing of Action Tantra. The direct perception of emptiness by this wisdom of non-dual profundity and clarity acts as an antidote to the intellectually acquired afflictive obstructions: 
• When one achieves the wisdom of non-dual profundity and clarity that directly perceives emptiness for the first time, one enters the uninterrupted path of path of seeing. 
• The intellectually acquired afflictive obstructions are abandoned when one achieves the path of thorough release. 
• When one arises from that meditation, one is in post meditative equipoise, which is a wisdom which is neither of those two. 
• One is still on the path of seeing. 
• Through greater familiarisation with the wisdom of non-dual profundity and clarity, which then acts as the antidote to the innate afflictive obstructions, one then enters the first uninterrupted path of the path of meditation. 
There are nine levels of innate afflictive obstructions to be abandoned on the path of meditation:- 
1. three big innate afflictive obstructions 
2. three middling innate afflictive obstructions 
3. three small innate afflictive obstructions 
According to the explanation given by one scholar, Jedun Sherab Wangpo, the three big innate afflictive obstructions and the three middling innate afflictive obstructions are being abandoned sequentially from the first to the sixth grounds. When one achieves the path of thorough release on the seventh ground, these afflictive obstructions are completely abandoned. The abandoning of the three small innate afflictive obstructions takes place simultaneously on the seventh ground. 
On the eighth to the tenth grounds, the three levels of knowledge obstructions (or obstructions to omniscience) are abandoned. When those are abandoned, one achieves enlightenment and the four bodies of the Buddha simultaneously.
In the General (Presentation of the) Classes of Tantra composed by Khedrup Je, it states: 
In the Action and Performance Tantras there is no system of enlightenment separate from that (presented) in the Perfection system. (Pg. 6 of the root text) 
For the trainees with sharp faculties, by depending on the path of Action Tantra, completing the four branched repetition and bringing the concentration without repetition to culmination, they will achieve the supreme siddhi (or the siddhi of knowledge bearer). Once that siddhi is achieved, one has the ability to live for thousands of years and based on that lifespan, one can achieve enlightenment. 
According to the Perfection Vehicle (Paramitayana), one achieves enlightenment in the Akanishta pure land. Is this necessarily so for the trainee of both Action and Performance Tantra? 
One should examine the assertion of needing to attain enlightenment as a being of the Dense Array Akanishta Buddha Field. (Pg. 6 of the root text) 
One needs to achieve enlightenment in the Akanishta pure land because the basis for actualising the sambhogakhaya is Akanishta. We talked about the four bodies in the last module on the Ornament for Clear Realisations. There are five certainties connected with the complete enjoyment body or sambhogakaya, one of which is the certainty of abode, that it abides only in Akanishta.  
If the abode of the complete enjoyment body is necessarily Akanishta Pure Land, does that mean one has to be there when one first achieves enlightenment? If that is the case, does the Action Tantra trainee necessarily have to be there when he first achieves enlightenment? Do you understand the reason why, in accordance with the Perfection Vehicle, the place of enlightenment is necessarily Akanishta Pure Land and not the desire, form or formless realms? 
Yet according to Khedrup Je’s text, “In the Action and Performance Tantras there is no system of enlightenment separate from that presented in the Perfection system.” Is there any fault then in asserting that for the Action Tantra trainee, the abode of enlightenment is necessarily Akanishta? 
Let us say a person from the desire realm enters into the path of Action Tantra. By actualising the yoga with signs and yoga without signs, with the culmination of those concentrations, he achieves the supreme siddhi of knowledge bearer and has a very long life. Where does this person achieve enlightenment? Is it in the desire realm? When one practices Tantra, one achieves enlightenment in one life and one body. In the context of Action Tantra, it is not necessary then for that person to first achieve enlightenment in Akanishta. If that is the case, then the system of enlightenment in the Perfection Vehicle and in the Action Tantra are different. Can we say then that Khedrup Je is wrong? I brought this issue up for the purpose of discussion. 
• In the context of Action Tantra, when the trainee of Action Tantra first achieves enlightenment, is that place of enlightenment necessarily Akanishta? 
• According to the Mahayana Sutra, is it possible to achieve enlightenment in one life and one body? When one achieves enlightenment, doesn’t one do so in one life and one body? Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment in the same life and same body, didn’t he? 