Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L24.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:19.671094
================================================================================

The key point to do the meditation is mindfulness.  So, to have good meditation, mindfulness is extremely important. Training in morality is one way to develop mindfulness. That means on how you talk.  If you are not mindful and say harsh words, physically you are not pleasant and hurtful to other. If you are mindful, you recognize that is not good then you change. That is mindfulness. Immediately when you recognize any action from the body, speech and mind of the ten non-virtues actions such stealing, killing and so forth. Sometimes because of our habits, the hands just go this way because of very strong past imprints. Harsh words also like that. Being habituated, the words just come out without thinking.  Of course, that is not easy but the point is that we must be mindful on that. We must immediately recognize when it is not good. This is negative karma because it harms others. So immediately recognize that and restraint.  So it is very important to practise mindfulness.  That is morality and is one way of training mindfulness. If you live your life like that in mindfulness, and when you want to meditate it become much easier.  As you are already trained in mindful, then it is easier to concentrate on any object that you choose. So, your concentration depends on your mindfulness.  If you have good mindfulness, you are good for meditation. That mean you have good concentration that able to focus on that object.
If you are not trained in morality, and if you are not trained in mindfulness, then our mind normally will be wandering all the time.  Without mindfulness our mind will wander to different objects throughout the day. Your mind has no rest continuingly following the thought. Without mindfulness, your thoughts just wander one after another.  Therefore, when not train in mindfulness, habituate like that, then it is difficult to meditate. Without mindfulness, it is impossible to meditate. That is the biggest challenge for us.  The point is that if we don’t have mindfulness, it will to lead to dementia. I think so. If you are not trained in mindfulness, I think it will lead to dementia. I am not exactly sure. I think. Logically, if you are not mindful and you keep thinking, thinking, keep forgetting, forgetting, and dementia is all about that.  You don’t remember. When I think what really lead to dementia, maybe it is the accumulation of that. After a while, you also don’t remember what you eat yesterday. What you eat this morning, you also don’t remember. In another way, if you are very good in mindfulness, then I think there is less dementia. If you are so mindful, then you develop concentration with single pointed mind. Then I think there is less chance of getting dementia in the future. Because you concentrate on each object, how to have dementia?  I don’t think it is possible. Therefore, you need concentration. When you have good mindfulness, and you have good concentration, you are able to focus on the object. That mean you are very mindful and you don’t forget the object.  Mindful, means you very mindful in the object, you don’t forget the object. That is the meditation. Your mind is there and your mind doesn’t go anyway; just being mindful on the object. That is the kind of meditation with single pointed mind. The point is only when you have single pointed meditation, and when you look at the object with concentration you are able to see the object much clearer than before. That is the whole point of training.
As for wisdom it is about that. When you look at the object with concentration, then you see the object much clear. For example, like the flame, when there is wind, the flame move then it is not so clear. When the wind doesn’t move, the flame is very stable and you see very clearly. Similarly, when your mind is very focus, and when you look at the object, you see it very clearly. Within concentration, then you are able to see the object much clearer. So the wisdom is about that. So within wisdom, then you are able to judge whether it is right or truth wrong. It will be so much easy, because you understand reality clearly. I think that is the whole point. Here when we do the meditation of the deity, emptiness in extremely important. I just give simple idea. If we have more time, I thought to do meditation on emptiness, but I don’t think we can do today.  That is the basis. To meditate on the deity, understanding on emptiness is important.  Just to give some idea, for example, when you write ‘A’ with this, this and this (Khen Rinpoche showed the strokes). If you write only one line, it is not A. You don’t know what. If you write another line, it is still not A. When you write another line in the middle, then the shape of the A comes about.  That is the basis; the designation of the A. Itself is not A. That is just the basis to label the A. The shape is there, and based on that, your mind label that.  It is only like that, there is the shape like A. A comes to exist based on labeling that was taught by somebody to you; “This is A.” After that you label it and thereafter whenever you see that shape, then you see A. From beginning, and from no where and without labeling, when you see this shape you don’t see it as A. Is it clear? When you are young, before someone taught you A, you have no idea whenever you see this shape and you don’t see as an A. You see the basis of the A but you don’t see it as A.  Only when you see the A with someone label it as A and teach you “This is A.” Immediately your mind also label “This is A” on that basis. The problem is how we see the A. When we see the A, we never see the A is labeled by the mind. We never see that. Whenever we see of the shape of that, it was labeled but you never see it is labeled by the mind. You see something existing there; the object A is there.  You get the idea?  In reality, it is not there. A is just being labeled with the shape. Your mind just labels that. In reality, our mind just label that A is there. Then the big question is “What is A?”  When you say “What is A?” that is just the shape of the A but that is not A. You see the letter of the A but that is not A. That is the designation of the A in dependence   upon that you label the A, then the A exists. The problem is that in reality our mind didn’t see that. Whenever we see A over there, it has nothing to do with your mind.  Whenever you open eye, you see the basis you think A is there, and nothing to do with your mind. So, here emptiness is about that. A is empty from its own side. The idea is that A is empty from its own side, A exists. How does A exist? It exists by labeling. It doesn’t exist from the basis. A exists only through labeling but we don’t see that. We see it as coming from own side. This is something that doesn’t exist. What we see doesn’t exist. When we see, we grasp at something over there as solid. A is there but is something that doesn’t exist.   A is empty of that. A is just mere label and it doesn’t exist from its own side; empty existing from its own side. That is the emptiness of the A. Maybe is an easy example to understand. Whenever we see, for us in reality is like that. Our ignorant mind sees it exists there. It doesn’t see the merely label A.
Our ignorance just labels the A as truly existence and we grasp at that and believe that. But this is not reality. It doesn’t exist. Whenever we see the basis, immediately we see that. Even if you are bodhisattva at the 1st bhumi, 2nd bhumi, 8th bhumi, 9th bhumi, 10th bhumi, you are sentient being, you will see that. You don’t see merely label I, you see truly existence A appearing to your mind. It is that powerful. Only Buddha doesn’t see that.  Every sentient being, from 1st ground to 10th ground bodhisattvas, will see that. The difference is that they see but they don’t believe after having understood emptiness. You see A exists from its own side, but after having realized emptiness, you don’t believe that. You don’t have the grasping there as you don’t believe that. That is the difference. If you still have the imprint of ignorance, you still see that except when in meditative equipoise on emptiness then you don’t see that. Otherwise, once you see the basis, you immediately see the truly existing A. It is extremely powerful.  From the imprint of the ignorance, you will see that. There is no other way until you have abandoned the ignorance and the seed - the imprint of ignorance.  You may not see that. Only the Buddha can see the merely label A. Others will always see the truly existence A appear. For every sentient being, it is like that. For us, not only see, we truly believe that. That is the biggest problem. Here I am just giving the example of A. When you meditate, you meditate as I, yourself. Yourself is exactly like that when you say me.  I give example A. On the basis of that, you label A. The same thing, when you say I, base on the body and mind, I is labeled. Exactly like A and there is no difference, but we don’t see that. Within the body somewhere, the true I, myself is there. When we see that, we grasp for something that doesn’t exist. That is called the ignorance - true grasping at self. This is the root of samsara. This is the root of the problem. In order to remove this true grasping, the ignorance, there is no other way without understanding or realizing emptiness. You have to see this I is just merely labeled and doesn’t exist from its own side. This meditation on emptiness is about that; basically is emptiness of the self.   I am talking about your self. On the basis of the mind and the body, the aggregates, I is being labeled.  It does exist from its own side and from the object.  Then you go deeper. Does it exist from the body and mind, from its own side? When you meditate, and analyze looking for that I, you are able to find if I exists from the base. With the basis there then when you analyze and search for it, then you are able to find somewhere there within the body or within the mind. But when you look deeply and slowly, it is impossible for you to find the I within the body or within the mind. That shows I doesn’t exist from the basis. It is clear that when you look each part of the body, it is not your self. When you look at each part of your mind, it is not your self. You are able to see that very clearly. When you meditate like that you don’t really find I there. You go deeper deeper and search up to your heart, and even you go down at your heart, at the end of the day you cannot find your self there. Not finding the I is not really realizing the emptiness. It doesn’t mean that when you don’t find anything there, that mean I doesn’t exists. If you think that way then you fall into nihilism. That is another danger. So when you meditate like that, suddenly then I doesn’t exist, nothing is there, I doesn’t exist, then why create virtue, why create negative karma, then you fall into nihilism. That is the danger. The conclusion is that there still have the I, the I is still there. The conclusion is that the I doesn’t exist on the basis. You have to understand that the I exists just merely label on the basis. The I exists in dependent upon the aggregate, the body. I is merely a label exactly like A. I exist as label by the mind. I think we have to get this conclusion.   The idea is that I is empty and emptiness is I. This is the conclusion that you should get. I is emptiness. When you look there, it is empty but within emptiness I appear, I exits. The emptiness is I. In the Heart Sutra, form is emptiness, emptiness is form. The meaning is that. When you look for the I you don’t see there, really nothing there. Within emptiness, in dependence upon the basis, the I is there. That means emptiness is I. Within emptiness I appear.  Clear?  So emptiness is quite more challenging. We need more meditation. . 
<< Guided meditation >>
(Student question inaudible)
As a practice you can move after 10 or 15 minutes. You can put your time. Like the Lamrim meditation you actually can go half an hour like this. Each meditation you do 10 or 15 minutes.  In reality, until you experience very good and stable concentration on that, then you move to next. It is similar to Lamrim meditation. Beginning I think it is good to do like that so you have some idea. After that, try to get that clear from the beginning. When you are very good, very stable then move to the next.
Student 1: For the mantra, when we recite, the form of mantra will turn around or just leave it there?
Khen Rinpoche: Just sit there. If turn, then your mind will be distracted and your mind also go like this.
Student 1 :What is the purpose of the front generation?
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know exactly. Maybe one way is to understand that everything is coming from your own mind. Could be that.  Another way is that front generation, we are able to make offerings, able to make prostration. The object is something similar to the merit field.
One way to understand is that the front generation is coming from your mind. It is your mind that creates everything. Mind creates your nirvana and your mind creates samsara. Mind is the basis of everything; samsara and nirvana. Maybe can understand in that way. Your mind create nirvana. All these beautiful in front of you. Your mind creation. When you looked at the sadhana, merit field comes before already. Before the self-generation, merit field already done. You visualized merit field then make offerings, seven limbs prayer, this and that. Everything done, then merit field dissolve. Then self-generation. After that front generation. So when you look deeply the front-generation is actually nothing outside but really coming from your mind. Part of your mind visualizes the compassionate Buddha, and then dissolves back into you and become yourself.
Maybe there is some reason there. During dissolution, the front-generation disappear. I don’t know exactly. Maybe you people have better idea.
Student:  This morning I got this thought also. I have done Nyungna in the past two days. The reason why we need this front generation, I think, is for our mind “my mind always have this image, and when I died then I can follow this image”.
Khen Rinpoche: To go there?
Student 2:  Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Good. Front generation helps. She said next time she can go there. I don’t know. 
Student 2: Actually in Nyungna text it also says, front generation with the four buddhas. At one part you invite the Buddha and then the deities actually pour water purify the front generation. Why do you need to purify the front-generation? 
Khen Rinpoche : Because you don’t see pure.
Student 2: Actually this is quite interesting. Because when we want to prostrate, you actually think that the wisdom being come out and absorbed to the front-generation then you prostrate, right? I also don’t quite understand what is the purpose of this wisdom being absorbed into oneself? The whole idea is to hold oneself…
Khen Rinpoche : Oneself?
Student 2: The whole idea is to hold oneself with divine pride. Whether we absorb or not absorb, if we don’t have divine pride means don’t have divine pride. So it is not going to make much difference if don’t have divine pride.
Khen Rinpoche: That is why in many of these action tantra, some texts they have to invite wisdom being. They also invite meditation deity, initiate, shower, purification. I mean this practice is there. Then you have Amitabha. Nyungna practice also have. But some texts don’t have. They say whether you do this meditation or not is okay. The point is you meditate yourself as Chenrezig, then you visualize like that. 
You will have very clear divine pride I am Chenrezig” without any doubt. Very clear then I don’t think it is necessary to invite those wisdom beings there. The whole point is to invite wisdom being dissolve and you feel something there and real. Something comes into it. I mean yourself if got something come, you will feel. The idea is that if is real that is more like…
Student 2: But it is not really a necessity, right? 
Khen Rinpoche: Now you are very clear divine pride, there could be some blessing there. The whole point is that, visualize that you are more self grasping there, continue to self grasping..
Student 2: Divine grasping 
Khen Rinpoche: That could happen and have to be careful. Otherwise it contributes to the self-grasping then problem.
Student 2: So actually when we do 35 buddhas..
Khen Rinpoche: About the purification, many rituals such as bathing the Buddha in Saka Dawa. In reality, Buddha doesn’t have any obscuration to purify. Then the question is why you need to bath the Buddha. Buddha is pure. Why you go and bathe the Buddha?  When you bathe the Buddha, the idea is to purify of what we see the impure perception of ourselves. We have this impure perception of the Buddha. So when we bathe we will purify that. Not the Buddha. You see the guru does the bathing. Buddhas, bodhisattvas also like that. What kind of impure appearance you have. To purify that, they do the bath offering. For the Buddha, the same thing, to the front-generation. 
Student 3 : Firstly there are two breathing in and hold meditation, do we breathe in all the way to our navel and hold. I remember the second time you said that we visualize the mantra and the moon disc on the other basis down to the heart but we still breathe all the way down to our navel, but we hold the visualization on these and the mantra garlands on our hearts?
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah