Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L25.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:16.880334
================================================================================

You have heard of the phrase “yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity” that we have talked about it recently. You have to know the words and you must be able to say the words. On that basis you must seek to understand the meaning of those words. This is an important point.
In the phrase “yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity”, what does “profundity” refers to?  It refers to the mind that realizes the absence of inherent existent.  So, profundity refers to this specific mind and this mind is wisdom.  
“Clarity” here refers to the deity yoga appearing clearly.
The meaning of yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity is the same as saying the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as deity or arising as deity.  In this context here, the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness refers to the mind realizing emptiness. This mind has the aspect of emptiness.
Even if you don’t get everything, you must at least remember what I have said about the meaning of the phrase “the apprehensions aspect of the wisdom realising emptiness arising as deity”.  You must at least keep in mind what was said and hold on to that.
In sutra, we talk about the union of method and wisdom.  “Method” in sutra refers to bodhicitta. 
The bodhicitta compliment the wisdom realizing emptiness; which is wisdom. Wisdom is complemented or assisted by method.   With these two assisting or complementing one another, then one moves to enlightenment.
In tantra, there are method and wisdom.  With method and wisdom one progresses to enlightenment. Here in tantra, it has its own uncommon presentation about union of method and wisdom.  In short, in tantra, the union of method and wisdom refers to both factors of method and wisdom present in one consciousness. 
Whether we talk about the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity or the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness arises as deity, at the beginning there is always a reflection or meditation on emptiness. Whether we are talking about the mind that has some understanding of emptiness or the mind has ascertained emptiness, it is this very mind that arises as the deity.
So, whether we call it the mind the understand emptiness or the mind that ascertains emptiness, this is the very thing that arises or appear as the deity.  Essentially, it is one mind - this mind is ascertaining emptiness and at the same time deity’s body appears to that mind. 
This one mind is both method and wisdom. Why is it method?  Because this mind appears in the aspect of the deity. 
Why is the appearance factor of this mind or the appearance of the deity body to this mind is called the method?  This appearance of the deity body is the cause for actualizing the form body.
This very same mind is also wisdom. Why?  This very same mind realises emptiness. Therefore, it is called wisdom.
It is wisdom because it is that which is suitable to be transformed into the truth body; it is that which becomes the dharmakaya. This very same mind is also that which becomes the form body of the Buddha, the factor of method of appearance of the deity. 
Then this begets the question: Why do you need a mind that has both method and mind conjoined into one entity at the time of the path? While you are training on the path, why do you need such as mind?
The reason is being that at the time of enlightenment the truth body and the form body are one undifferentiable entity.  
It is said that the Buddha’s mind pervade all phenomena. Wherever Buddha’s mind pervade, Buddha’s holy body is there. So, which means to say there is nowhere that is not pervaded by Buddha’s body. This is possible because Buddha’s body and mind are one undifferentiable entity. Because this is the characteristic of the result, the path must share the same characteristic.  In short, both method and wisdom must be fused into undifferentiable entity at the time of the path, which is the cause of the result.  
Khen Rinpoche: OK?  You must be clear. You understand?  Don’t forget! Next time I ask, cannot forget. It is important to keep in your brain “This is important and I have to know that”.  There is so many divisions and if you can’t remember, it doesn’t matter but at least some of the points should catch up.  Next time I asked you “Why you need wisdom and method in one mind?”, and you say you don’t know then it is not correct. You know the reason why? If somebody asks you “Why you need one mind both method and wisdom within one mind”, now you can answer, yeah? By now should be.  If not clear, ask.  If you are not clear of what I saying this sentence now, ask immediately if you don’t understand.  Don’t ask other things not related to what I said just now.
Student 1: Method and wisdom is indivisible in one entity, one consciousness, there is no dualistic appearances to this mind. Is it correct to say?
Khen Rinpoche: No, because the deity body appears to this consciousness. That means there is dualistic appearance because the deity body appears to this mind. 
Student 1: Yes, in earlier lesson, t was mentioned that there is no dualistic appearance during that occasion.
Khen Rinpoche: No, I don’t think so I said that.  It depends on the context. If you are talking about the wisdom directly realizing emptiness then that is a different thing. The wisdom directly realizing emptiness, in the context of tantra, is also yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity.  So, in this context, if you are talking about wisdom directly realising emptiness, then there is no dualistic appearance for the meditative equipoise. 
Student 1: The thing is the wisdom directly realising emptiness, the deity doesn’t even appear.  During ordinary path, the deity appears to this wisdom realizing emptiness. Now I confirmed there is duality.  I was very confused on lesson 18 or what because there is no dualistic appearance, not directly realizing but just wisdom realizing emptiness. So, there is dualistic appearance. During the direct realization of emptiness the deity doesn’t even appear. Can I understand how is there a dualistic appear for this non-dualistic mind? The non-dual profundity and clarity during the time of ordinary path, dualistic appearance means there is a mental image, so there is a separation of consciousness and the mental image. In this case, we are conceiving it as non-dual, so how is it non-dual and yet there is a mental image?
Khen Rinpoche: In the phrase “yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity”, the “non-dual” refers to method and wisdom not being of different entities. You must be clear on this one.  So, must listen and put your full attention here. 
The “non-dual” in the non-dual profundity and clarity means the method and wisdom are one undifferentiable entity.
The question from the student “Is there dualistic appearance for this yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity?” The answer is: Yes, there is dualistic appearance.
Khen Rinpoche: You see the difference?  
Student 2: Does it mean that the deity that appears clearly appear as in inherently existing?  That is why it is dualistic appearance. 
Khen Rinpoche: There are different meanings to the phrase “dualistic appearance”. 
One of which is the appearance of subject and object as different - as being distinct. That is one kind of dualistic appearance.
Another meaning of dualistic appearance is conventional appearance; basically anything other than emptiness are dualistic appearances to the mind.
If there is appearance of true existent to that mind, then we can say that for that mind, there is dualistic appearance. That is another meaning dualistic appearance which refers to the appearance of true existence. 
Student 3: Just now I think I clearly hear that the mind appears as deity, which then is actualizing the form body.  Can I interpret in such a manner: The mind that ascertains emptiness appears as deity and there is no contradiction because it is really one entity?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student 2: Thank you.
Khen Rinpoche: So, you must understand. I just explain only one word. I tried to explain in one sentence. Please try to get that. If you don’t understand what I am saying then go there. 
Student 3:  The mind appearing as a deity, so that appearance of the body of the deity is an appearance to the mind.  The form body is the final result. Can we understand the form body to be form versus consciousness?  Previously Khen Rinpoche explained that consciousness can only come from a moment of consciousness and form can only come from the previous form.  Now I am trying to reconcile the fact that the mind generates the appearance of the deity. The final result of that is going to be the arising of the form body.  I am making a connection that the consciousness is now giving rise ultimately to something that is form.  
Khen Rinpoche: Anybody able to answer for that?  
Student 4: In tantra, it is mentioned that the form arises from the wind, and the wind and the mind is actually one entity.  So that is the reason. 
Student 3: But a wind is also something that is physical.  I can accept something physical coming from a physical source. We do know that when you become a Buddha, when you mind attains Buddahood, the form body and the wisdom truth body arise simultaneously. So, there is something about that mind that transforms into a form. The only way I can reconcile that is to think that the form body is just the English word form and I shouldn’t think of the form body of the Buddha as something that is physical.  Then I don’t have a problem with this. 
Khen Rinpoche: There are different kinds of form. There are forms that are appearing to sense consciousnesses. There are forms that do not appear to sense consciousnesses but would only appear to wisdom consciousness. For example the phenomena source form.
Student 2: Yes. .
Khen Rinpoche: For example, what is water for us appears as pus to the preta. So this appearance of pus to the preta is a phenomena-source form. It is a form that appears only to the mental consciousness.
What if we say that the appearance of the deity’s body to the wisdom realizing emptiness is a phenomena-source form? 
Let’s see whether we can posit the appearance of the deity’s body to the wisdom realizing emptiness in the context of tantra as a phenomena-source form. While positing that is a phenomena-source form, yet we also need to think about its substantial cause. What is its substantial cause? It doesn’t mean that we are trapped or we have to say the substantial cause of the appearance of the deity’s body is the consciousness itself. Because it is just a factor of appearance, it is in an appearance to the wisdom consciousness. We don’t have to force to think that it is the wisdom consciousness that acts as a substantial cause for this appearance.
Khen Rinpoche: So still need to think more.
Student 3: Is it alright to ask …we talk about this so much.
Khen Rinpoche: Philosophical text is like that. It is not so simple you can say in one sentence. This is just an idea. Because when you think more, more to think until you get very clear. 
Student 3: So the fact it is an appearance to the mind.  At the end, the final result is a mind that has evolved to a state of Buddahood that gives rise to the wisdom truth body and the form body (rupakaya). What is the entity of that rupakaya? That rupakaya is supposedly a form but is still coming from a mind. I can no longer say it is an appearance because it is already the final result. Of course it is not the blood and flesh coarse body. It is energy body but you still can say energy body is still something physical. How do I reconcile that?
Khen Rinpoche: First, let’s start with at the time of the path. There is wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. To this mind, there is an appearance of the deity’s body. It is form and you posit that as a phenomena-source form.
You must catch the word of what I am saying. What is phenomena-source form? You must know is this this this. Can you give another example other than that? 
In short, in the 3 lower classes of tantra, other than this explanation, there is no other explanation of what constitute the cause of a form body. While this is the presentation of the 3 lower classes of tantra, it doesn’t mean that this is the reality. The explanation that accords with reality is found only in Highest Yoga Tantra. In Highest Yoga Tantra, there is a presentation of the extremely wind mind which acts as the substantial cause for the form and truth bodies. Only in Highest Yoga Tantra,  you will find the correct and detailed explanation of the causes of the two bodies.
In Highest Yoga Tantra, they talk about the substantial cause of the form body and the substantial cause must be a continuum of a similar type. Therefore in Highest Yoga Tantra there is a presentation of the two illusory bodies, impure and pure illusory bodies, which then acts as the substantial cause which is of a continuum of a similar type that goes on to enlightenment. That is why in Highest Yoga Tantra the explanation fits nicely and with no difficulty at all. 
The substantial cause of the form body is the illusory body in the path. 
Likewise it is the extremely subtle mind that acts as the substantial cause for the truth body. 
Student 5: Why is the emptiness of the form body not mentioned as one of the bodies of Buddahood?. The reason I am asking this question is because in order for the form body to manifest the enlightened activities or to carry out the enlightened activities, in the first place, the form body has to be empty of inherent existence. But somehow this phrase “The emptiness of the form body” is not mentioned as one of the bodies of Buddahood. The only conclusion that I can get is that the form body is the reflective appearance of the truth body (dharmakaya). That somehow it dissolves into the dharmakaya and it manifests from the dharmakaya. In the case of the truth body, we have the wisdom truth body and the nature truth body which is the emptiness of the truth body. Somehow when it comes to the form body, there is only the body of complete enjoyment and the emanation body. And there is no mention about the emptiness of the form body of Buddahood. Can Rinpoche please explain that? Thank you.
Khen Rinpoche: You are saying why the emptiness of the form body is not a Buddha body? 
I guess you can posit the emptiness of the Buddha superior’s mind and the emptiness of the form body are the same. When we talk about the naturally abiding lineage we are essentially talking about the suchness of the mind, and we don’t talk about suchness of the body. Likewise, with the nature body of the Buddha. Since at the time of the basis we talk about the naturally abiding lineage we are talking about the suchness of the mind, likewise, at the time of the result, we only talk about the body in relation to the mind: the wisdom truth body and the emptiness of that which is the nature body. This is how it goes at the time of the basis. At the time of the result, those two truth bodies - the wisdom truth body and the nature truth body- are basically the same thing; just that it is without any defilement.
Student 5: The Tathagata essence, the naturally abiding lineage, is written from the perspective of the Mind Only School perspective. Isn’t it Asanga? The impression I get was that the explanation of the naturally abiding lineage is actually explained from the Mind Only School perspective. That is why the emptiness of the mind is emphasized.
Khen Rinpoche: Did you get what I have said earlier on? The point is this: why do we talk about the nature body. The nature body is essentially the emptiness of the wisdom truth body. Why is that the explanation? Because at the time of the basis, when we talk about the naturally abiding lineage, we are essentially talking about suchness of the defiled mind. .
Student 5: I have actually thought about it.
Khen Rinpoche: Do you agree with that first?
Student 5: I would like to add that the naturally abiding lineage seems to be written from a Mind Only School perspective. They also talk about the developmental lineage, the tatagatha essence. It is written by Asanga, isn’t it? At the basis of the path it is the suchness of the mind. So at the time of the result…
Khen Rinpoche: You got the answer? 
Student 5: But not with regard to the form body. The basis for the path should also …
Khen Rinpoche: We talk about the naturally abiding lineage, and we are not talking about emptiness of the form body.
Student 5:  Yes that I understand.
Khen Rinpoche: That is the answer for your question.
Student 5: Perhaps the qualm is that at the time of the basis of the path should also constitute the union of the mind and the body as well. So at the time of the result you have the union of the body and mind. It is just that one is unenlightened aspect, and at the time of the result it will be the enlightened aspect. Similarly, the method to achieve the truth body and the method to achieve the form body of the Buddha should be cultivated simultaneously in unison, simultaneously together at one time and not so much in one consciousness. 
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway you have to know the meaning or the essential points behind the phrase “the yoga of non dual profundity and clarity”. 
In particular when we talk about yoga without signs, it is necessarily a mind which realizes emptiness. In the context of the 3 lower classes of tantra, when we talk about yoga without signs, it is basically a special insight observing emptiness. 
During the time of yoga with signs, there are instances where there is realization of emptiness. Therefore, one cannot distinguish yoga with signs and yoga without signs on the basis of whether one has realized emptiness or not. 
For simplicity sake, what is the yoga with signs? 
Between the meditation on emptiness and the meditation on deity’s body, the yoga with signs is the yoga which primarily meditates on the deity’s body - the appearance 
The deity yoga which is the yoga without signs is a mind that meditates primarily on emptiness.
Between the meditation on emptiness and the meditation on deity’s body, the yoga without signs is the yoga that primarily meditates on emptiness. 
I think you can say that the yoga without signs is basically the union of calm abiding and special insight. 
As I have mentioned before, the process of being able to hurt ignorance starts when the special insight observing emptiness is achieved. Only when one attains this special insight focusing on emptiness, you enter the Path of Preparation. Only then is the meditator is able to suppress the manifest grasping at true existence. Before that nothing happens. It is only when special insight observing emptiness is accomplished, he gains the ability to suppress the manifest grasping at true existence. That is when the process of acquiring the direct antidote to ignorance starts.
While this is not clear in the text, but if you think about it, the mode or procedure of the path of action tantra, with the concentration without repetition you have the concentration abiding in fire, then you have concentration abiding in sound. It is said that calm abiding is achieved during the concentration abiding in sound. It is also explained that when you reach that level of practice, slowly even the mind does not observe sound. The mind move on and goes into emptiness. If that is the case if the mind goes into emptiness, then that would also suggest a subsiding of dualistic appearance.
The yoga severing the root of saṃsāra
Therefore, in this context, yoga without signs is profound, clear, non-dual yoga. It is not merely deity yoga influenced by the mind realizing emptiness, for if it lacked meditation on emptiness it would not be concentration without signs. General Classes of Tantra states:
Though they accomplish absorption with signs, they still do not have the direct antidote that severs the root of saṃsāra; for this they need yoga without signs. When they cultivate yoga without signs, they do not meditate on any relative aspect, such as the body of the deity; rather they skillfully cultivate analytical and placement meditation on emptiness based on past advice.
Here it says that they do not meditate on any conventional aspect.
Khen Rinpoche: You go and read the text. I am reading from the text and based on that.
This quotation is saying that during the yoga without signs, the meditator do not meditate on the deity body. 
Khen Rinpoche: Is that true? It is contradicting to what I have said earlier. Reading this become contradictorily. You see or not? Doesn’t complementary but contradictory. You must see the point. What I read and what I said is opposite. Or no?
And:
Yoga without signs continuously cultivates the mind certain that all dharmas are empty of inherent existence through the logic of being neither truly one nor many, and so on.
Here it is saying that it is the mind that meditates only on emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: First, you must get that.
When does the basis of emptiness appear?
Someone says: Take yoga without signs; it follows it is not deity yoga because a deity body with a face, arms, and so on does not appear to it—because it is awareness explicitly realizing emptiness.
Then our position, or the author position, 
Reply: That is not logically necessary because you must accept that the subject—a basis that is empty—appears to rational conceptual awareness realizing emptiness— because [Tsongkhapa’s] Great Commentary to the Madhyamakakārikā and Stages of the Path state just
that.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting of what I am trying to say here?
Basically it is saying there is no problem. There is no fallacy in saying that the deity body appears to the wisdom realizing emptiness. There is no fallacy in saying that the deity body appears to the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity.
[BP1: The author is basically saying that to the inferential cognizer apprehending emptiness, that consciousness realizes emptiness and it is also possible for the deity’s body to appear to that consciousness. These two are not necessarily contradictory.]
In fear of overstating the point I will not write more, but I refer you to my work Exposition of the Two Truths.
Khen Rinpoche: I am reading the text. Must read the text.
In response, the objector who raise the qualm.
In response he says: It follows that the physical form of the deity will appear when such yoga without signs perceptually comprehends emptiness due to the power of meditation, because your [NgawangPalden’s] thesis is tenable.
Again there is a reply:
Reply: That is not logically necessary. Instead deity yoga is posited due to the continuity of mind, even though the body of the relative (conventional) deity does not appear to it.
The author’s position is that when you have the special insight observing emptiness, you achieve the Path of Preparation as the Path of Preparation is not a direct perception of emptiness. It is a conceptual. So to this conceptual consciousness realizing emptiness on the Path of Preparation of tantra, the deity body appears to that consciousness. There is no problem with that.
If it is a yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity, does it means that the deity body will appear to that mind? 
No, not necessarily so. For example, on the action tantra Path of Seeing, which is direct perception of emptiness, the dualistic appearance does not exist for the consciousness. Nevertheless, is it a deity yoga? It is a deity yoga because it is posited due to the continuity of mind. It is a continuation of a former moment of the deity yoga. Therefore, even the direct perception on emptiness on the action tantra Path of Seeing is considered the deity yoga although the deity body does not appear to that wisdom directly realize emptiness. 
Is it yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity? Yes. 
Is it deity yoga? Yes.
Anyway, that is the answer. 
In the case of the action tantra, is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness on the Path of Seeing a deity yoga? 
Yes, because it is posited due to the continuity of the mind even though the body of the conventional deity does not appear to it.
This is something to think about: anything that is a continuity of yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity necessarily deity yoga or not? 
There are many continuities of that mind. Here we talk about the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. If it is a continuity of that, is it necessarily deity yoga?
That paragraph is essentially saying: If it is a deity yoga it does not necessarily mean that the deity body’s has to appear to it.
That is why I have said you have to read the text before coming to class so at least you know what I am referring to. 
The four types of deity yoga
In general, it is not logically necessary that the physical form of the deity appears to either yoga with signs or yoga without signs because in this context there are four yogas—deity yoga, empty yoga, wind yoga, and recitation yoga—and because these (four) occur within both yoga with signs and yoga without signs. 
There is no pervasion in that the deity body must necessarily appear to deity yoga, because in this context, there are four yogas:
Deity yoga, 
Empty yoga,
Wind yoga, 
Recitation yoga. 
Whether it is deity yoga, empty yoga, wind yoga, or recitation yoga, all of these are fall either into the yoga with signs and yoga without signs.
Mantric Stages states:
Action and performance tantras have four significant yogas, namely deity yoga, empty yoga, wind yoga, and recitation yoga. Together relative deity yoga and ultimate deity yoga are the main factors establishing the two bodies. Recitation yoga is a branch invoking the mind of the deity meditated upon and thus it is included as a branch of relative deity yoga. Wind yoga is a branch stabilizing both deity yogas and thus it occurs within both yogas. Therefore the four yogas are subsumed by both yoga with signs and yoga without signs.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay? Is clear? Alright? It is clear. Nothing to take long breath.
Student 4: Just now you mentioned that the conceptual consciousness realizes emptiness during Path of Preparation, the deity does appear. If you were to ask: “For that consciousness, what is the appearing object of this consciousness realizing emptiness? Usually for a mind there is appearing object as there are different types of object. Previously we learned about mind realizing emptiness, the appearing object is emptiness. For a conceptual consciousness on emptiness, it is actually a mental image of emptiness. If you were to say the deity actually appears then the mental image is emptiness or a deity?
Khen Rinpoche: Since the deity body appears to this conceptual consciousness, we have to say that it is the meaning generality of the deity body is the appearing object to this consciousness. Probably not the meaning generality of emptiness.
Student 6: Then why would you say that it is a conceptual consciousness realizing emptiness? 
Khen Rinpoche: What does this conceptual consciousness comprehend or ascertain? It ascertains emptiness, right?
Student 6: Yeah.
Khen Rinpoche: The ascertainment factor of the consciousness is ascertaining emptiness. The appearance factor of this consciousness is the appearance of the deity body, which is the meaning generality of the deity body. So there is the ascertainment factor and the appearance factor. 
Student 6: So you are saying that the appearing object is actually a mental image of the deity.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, can say that.
Student 6: There is something called ascertainment. You will still ascertain the deity. So that mind actually ascertains two things - the deity body as well as the emptiness. Even though appear is the mental image of a body but ascertain two things.
Khen Rinpoche: When we say: What is the mind ascertaining, we have to think primarily about its object of the mode of the apprehension. What is the object of the mode of apprehension of this mind? Then you can see what it is ascertaining.
That will take us back to Mind and Mental Factor again.
Student 6: In sutra, if a person never learns about tantra were to look at the deity, the appearing object of the deity in front, for example the person meditate on Chenrezig, he can actually explore to think about the emptiness of Chenrezig, right? Let’s say the person never take initiation. It is possible because any object is an object of meditation. So that person can call to mind a mental image of Buddha and also ascertained the emptiness, right? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student 6: But you don’t call that deity yoga?
Khen Rinpoche: That is why long time ago we have a question, in sutra, is there such a thing of method and wisdom fused in one consciousness or not? The answer is very clear. There is no need to doubt. The answer is no. 
In sutra, they are not able to posit method and wisdom as in one undifferentiable entity.
Back to the question, for somebody who is not involved in tantra, does not have initiation, visualizes the deity in front and at the same time meditate or focuses on the emptiness of that appearance. Are you going to say that is the case of method and wisdom is one undifferentiable entity?
Is this an example of yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity or not?
Somebody says it follows that it is a yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity because the deity body is appearing and you are observing the emptiness of the deity body.
What are you going to say?
You have to go back to the meaning of the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as deity. This example of a sutra practitioner meditating on the deity in front and thinking of its emptiness is not an apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing or arises as deity. 
Student 7: Isn’t another key part of this is the part that comes arising as the deity. In our group discussion, we did talk about this: In sutra, yeah, you can look at the deity and can still meditate on its emptiness. In that sense the deity is appearing in front of you. The main thing about tantra is that you have the practice of self generation, where we actually practicing the four complete purities at the time of the path. Another key part of the apprehension of the wisdom realizing emptiness arising as the deity is important. It is just an observation. In our group discussion, for the difference in the sutra part and the tantra part, we felt that one of the key things is in tantra, there is this practice of self-generation “I am the deity”. That is what make it different. So it is just not a matter of looking at the deity and meditating on its emptiness. You are meditating on emptiness, yourself being empty and the deity that you are arising as being empty also.
Khen Rinpoche: Among the sutric practitioner, you mean they are not able to find even one person who thinks about emptiness and he is just thinking arising as the deity?
(Student response inaudible)
Of the four yogas, the two main ones are the conventional deity yoga and the empty yoga. These are the main factors for establishing the two bodies.
Recitation yoga is a branch invoking the mind of the deity meditated upon. Because it is such, therefore it is included as a branch of relative (conventional) deity yoga. 
Wind yoga is a branch stabilizing both deity yogas: conventional and ultimate. 
We have talked about holding the wind. Since it is the branch stabilizing both deity yogas and thus it occurs within both yogas. 
From this you can see that if it is a deity yoga, it is not necessarily a mind to which a deity body has to appear, because there are four yogas here. There are recitation yoga and wind yoga as well.
[BP1: The yoga of the relative deity establishes the form body and the yoga of the ultimate deity establishes the truth body. The wind yoga refers to the practice of keeping the wind (subtle energy) inside the body as we perform repetition yoga. Under these yogas, there is the concentration abiding in sound and concentration abiding in fire. In those concentrations, we do not focus on the deity’s body but rather focus on sound but these are deity yogas. 
Does the deity’s body appear in those deity yogas? No, it does not. 
The main point is that if it is a deity yoga, it does not necessarily mean that the deity’s body will appear to that consciousness.]
[Principles of Buddhist Tantra:
Empty yoga means yoga without signs - the ultimate deity yoga meditating on the emptiness of the deity body. 
Deity yoga means yoga with signs - relative deity yoga where the body of the deity appears. 
Recitation yoga is subsumed within relative deity yoga.
Wind yoga acts as a stabilizing factor for both yoga with signs and yoga without signs and is therefore classified in both.]
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. That is it. I think I am finishing
We are almost done with the performance tantra. There is a little bit of yoga tantra. Once we have finished that, then we start with Highest Yoga Tantra. You could read up on the yoga tantra section.
Student 6 : Right in the beginning we talked about the bliss from gazing the goddess, from holding hands etc. Where this bliss of gazing the goddess does comes into picture in the yoga with or without signs? 
Khen Rinpoche: You read another two or three pages there from where I stopped. After that you read that, there are some discussions there.
[BP1: Q&A
Answer to question: The practice of method and wisdom is to achieve the two bodies - the truth body and the form body. This is the same in both Tantra and the Paramitayana. The method in Paramitayana is great compassion and bodhicitta which are the causes for achieving the form body of the Buddha. The wisdom realising emptiness is the cause for achieving the Buddha’s mind, the dharmakaya. 
This is mentioned by Nagarjuna in the Precious Garland and also in the concluding prayers of the Eight Mahayana Precepts, “May I and all sentient beings achieve the two enlightened holy bodies created by the two vast accumulations of merit and transcendental wisdom.” Why do we need method and wisdom? In order to achieve the two bodies - the form body and the truth body. Method and wisdom are posited as the collection of merits and wisdom. The collection of merits is accumulated through the meditation on bodhicitta which results in the form body of the Buddha, i.e., that meditation is the cause for achieving the form body of the Buddha. Wisdom is likewise the cause for the attainment of the truth body. 
Question: In terms of method, how come bodhicitta is replaced by deity yoga in Tantra? 
Answer: The way to achieve these two bodies – the truth body and the form body - is the same in Tantra, i.e., through method and wisdom. However in Tantra, the method is the practice of the extensive deity yoga which is the cause for the attainment of the form body. In Tantra, the way of achieving the form body is posited in an uncommon way. Therefore the method in Tantra is more profound than the method posited in the Paramitayana. This means that the method posited by the Paramitayana is not the ultimate method. 
The reason for meditating on deity yoga to achieve the form body is because, at the time of the cause, there must be a meditation that accords with the aspects which exist at the time of result, enlightenment. A specific cause leads to a specific result. Concordant causes lead to their respective results. A concordant result cannot arise from a discordant cause. That is why the method posited in Tantra is more profound and the method is changed from bodhicitta to deity yoga. 
Student: I can’t believe that bodhicitta is a discordant cause for achieving enlightenment. 
Response: Bodhicitta is a consciousness. A form body is form. If you assert that bodhicitta is the substantial cause of the Buddha’s form body, this follows that a consciousness can act as the substantial cause for form. That is not possible. Can our present consciousness act as the substantial cause for the physical body of the next life? 
A vase is a product and is also impermanent but these two, product and impermanence are not the same but are different. The vase is impermanent because the vase is the reverse of not undergoing change in each and every moment. Therefore it is posited as impermanent. The vase is a product because it is the reverse of that which is not produced. Product and impermanence are mutually inclusive but they are not the same because they have different names. One is the reverse of a specific thing and the other is the reverse of another specific thing. Therefore, they are not the same but they are mutually inclusive. 
In Tantra, there is the inseparable yoga of method and wisdom which are found in one collection. It is method and also wisdom. The wisdom in this inseparable pair of method and wisdom is so called because it is the reverse of apprehending reality in the distorted way. The method is so called because it is the reverse of the lack of potential to achieve the Buddha’s form body.
Question: Please explain the meaning of “the aspect held” in the above quotation. What is the referent object here? 
Answer: “Aspect held” is sometimes translated as the aspect of the apprehender and the apprehended. In this context, the aspect of the apprehended refers to the mind realising emptiness which then arises as the deity. The aspect of the apprehender is in the aspect of the object that is appearing to that consciousness. For example, there is a consciousness apprehending vase. What appears to that consciousness is the object, vase. We can say that consciousness is in the “aspect” of vase. 
The two paragraphs from the root text are quotations from The Stages of Mantra. The first paragraph establishes the reason for having method and wisdom in one inseparable entity. It shows that there is such a thing. A qualm may then arise. If method and wisdom are inseparable, are these two the same thing? The second paragraph then goes on to explain that although they are one inseparable entity, they are posited as “distinct method and wisdom.”