Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L26.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:16.070182
================================================================================

The Buddha said that all composite phenomena are impermanent. So, the Buddha was saying that continual remembrance of change and impermanence is very important; without which nothing can be accomplished.
Geshe Potowa said that if we don’t meditate on impermanence constantly or continually then doing practices is like building a house on ice. Without continual remembrance of death and impermanence, then whatever kind of practices one does will never ever be stable. He goes on to say that when one sit down to meditate on emptiness while everything is going on nicely and smoothly, one will has the experience of nothingness and vacuity. But when difficulties come, suddenly one loses the experience and there is nothing to show. So he is saying that without the foundation of remembering death and impermanence, even if one meditates on emptiness, it will not be much beneficial. However, with the understanding and remembrance of death and impermanence, then whatever other practices one does on top of that will be much more stable. Therefore, without remembering death and impermanence, whatever practices one might do will not have a proper foundation and will not become stable. However if there is a foundational practice of remembering and meditating on death and impermanence, then whatever practice one build on it, whether it is meditating on bodhicitta or emptiness, will become stable.  
In the Kadampa’s writing, the mind that remembers death and impermanence is called a bright lamp, because with bright lamp one	can eliminate the attachment, the happiness of this life. Whether one dharma practice will continue or succeed will depend on whether one has the continual remembrance of death and impermanence; without which nothing happen. However, with continual remembrance of death and impermanence, one can build other practices on it. 
Without remembering death and impermanence, then when trying to do any other thing is like building a house on the ice. That mean whatever practices it might be, those practices will never ever become solid and stable because there is no foundation at all.
There is nothing that I said that you are listening for the first time.  You know this already.  It is just that you need to remind yourself every now and then.
___________________________________________________________________________________
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway this topic already done. In case you have questions, you can ask later; not now.  Anyway this topic already covered. This is just a summary of the chart (Handout on the Chart for the Path of Performance Tantra).
Fourth, it is stated in this tantra that you are established as the knowledge bearer of the sword and so on through relying on external substances such as the sword; you establish the feats of pacification, increase, and so on through meditating on the maṇḍalas of earth, water, fire, and wind within your body; and at the end of recitation you obtain a vision of a bodhisattva such as Mañjuśrī where he strokes your head, speaks words of encouragement, and you obtain the concentration that never forgets bodhicitta. Many methods of establishing these and other siddhis are stated here and elsewhere.
Here we are talking about performance tantra. After having meditated well on the 4 external branches and the 4 internal branches then the practitioner seek to attain the common siddhis such as the knowledge bearer of the sword. When the siddhi known as the knowledge bearer of the sword is attained then it is said that one can travel to anywhere one wish by just thinking about it. 
The practitioner may also receive sign such as Mañjuśrī stroking his head and says "well done" and so forth. One also obtained the concentration that will never forget bodhicitta.
There are also many other attainments and many of those are already mentioned in the action tantra section.  In short, in the 3 lower class of tantra, after completing the repetition and then achieving the siddhis is said to be very important, because in the 3 lower classes of tantra, it is through actualizing the siddhis then one comes much closer to enlightenment.  So enlightenment is achieved quicker.
As in the action tantra section, it is mentioned that there is a siddhi call the life knowledge bearer. Through actualizing, it is kind like immortality, attainment of long life. One is able to achieve enlightenment during the long life. However, achieving enlightenment in one brief lifetime of this degeneration age, it is an uncommon feature of Highest Yoga Tantra.
In the perfection vehicle, there isn’t a practice of achieving immortality, and one achieves enlightenment with very long life.  However, in the 3 lower classes of tantra, it speak of achieving the siddhi of life knowledge bearer, basically achieving long life and during that lifetime, one achieve enlightenment. So, one achieves enlightenment in one lifetime of that very long life.  But in Highest Yoga Tantra, there is no need to accomplish the attainment of immortality and then achieve enlightenment during that very long life. Rather one can achieve enlightenment in one short life time or brief lifetime of this degeneration age.
Yoga Tantra.
How to progress on the path of yoga tantra
This has four parts:
1. How to become a suitable vessel
2. How to keep the vows and samayas purely
3. How to approximate the deity
4. How to establish the siddhis
1 How to become a suitable vessel
First, you become a vessel suitable to meditate on the path through obtaining the empowerments conferred in such maṇḍalas as the vajra sphere. Further, there is a difference between those who have received just the student empowerment and hold the bodhisattva vows, and those who have received the complete vajra-master empowerment and hold both the bodhisattva and tantric vows.
As for the yoga tantra, the root tantra is the Compendium of Reality or the Compendium of the Reality of All Tathagata. There are also other yoga tantras like the Liberating the Migrators from the Lower Realms. There is also the Tantra of the Supreme Glory and so forth.  
The root tantra, the Compendium of Reality, is divided into 4 parts: 
1st part deals primarily with accomplishing Vairocana.
2nd part deals primarily with accomplishing Akshobhya. 
3rd part deals primarily with accomplishing Amitabha
4th part deals primarily with accomplishing Amoghasiddhi and condensing Ratnasambhava into it.
First, one must become a suitable vessel to meditate on the path. That is done through obtaining the appropriate initiation in the mandala such as vajra sphere (vajradhatu) which is the first part of the root tantra Compendium of Reality, in the lineage of Vairocana. 
For the students who are only able to hold the bodhisattva vows and not able to take and hold the tantric vows, then only 5 initiations are conferred on them.  For the students who are also able to hold the tantric vows, and on top of the 5 initiations, the vajra-master initiation is conferred.
How to keep the vows and commitments purely
Second, if you are a suitable basis for prātimokṣa, you should accomplish tantra as one possessing the three vows. Therefore you should take the three vows and guard the commitments according to First Supreme Glory and Vajra Peak.
If one is really holding the prātimokṣa vows, one must live within that. On top of that, one takes the bodhisattva vows. For those who are taking the tantric vows, they have to keep these 3 types of vows.
[BP1: 
● A lay person who possesses the three vows (holder of the three vows) is someone who has taken the lay precepts and the bodhisattva and tantric vows. 
● An ordained person is a holder of the three vows if that person has taken the ordination vows either as a novice or fully ordained monk or nun and, on that basis, taken the bodhisattva and tantric vows.]
How to approximate the deity
The third has two parts:
1. Yoga with signs
2. Yoga without signs
Yoga with signs
The first has two parts:
1. Yoga focusing on the basic deity
2. Yoga focusing on subtle hand symbolsSo the third “How to approximate the deity” has two parts:
Yoga focusing on the basic deity
First, by merely obtaining the student empowerment you possess the specific yoga of the deity where the flower landed.
Those who only has the student empowerment and have not received the vajra-master initiation; they will just focus on the principal deities and engage in the repetition of that deity.  By doing that, this is the yoga of focusing on basic deity.
By obtaining the master empowerment you may engage either in:
(1) the extensive approximation that meditates with no decline in the three concentrations associated with the great yoga of self-completion, where you can confer empowerment on students and establish yourself as the deity, 
(2) the medium approximation that includes the rite for generating the supreme-conqueror maṇḍala, or 
(3) the abbreviated approximation that includes the recitation of 100,000 mantras for each of the great yoga deities.
It is saying that for those who has obtained the vajra-master initiation, there are 3 kinds of approximation - the extensive, middling and abbreviated.
In yoga tantra and Highest Yoga Tantra, if you are talking about the extensive approximation practice, the generation during the time of generating the deity is divided into 3 sections:
The concentration of the initial preparation or concentration of the initiation application
The concentration on the supreme conqueror mandala. 
The concentration of supreme conqueror activities.
The extensive approximation is that which involves meditating without missing any of the 3 concentrations:
The concentration of the initial preparation or concentration of the initiation application
The concentration of the supreme conqueror mandala. 
The concentration of supreme conqueror activities.
Then the middling approximation is meditating on:
The concentration on the initial application together with 
The concentration on the supreme conqueror mandala. 
As for the abbreviated approximation, one does not meditate on the concentration on the supreme conqueror mandala and concentration of the supreme conqueror activities. Rather one engages only on the concentration of the initial application and together with the recitation of 100,000 mantra of each of the great yoga deities. So this will constitute the shortest approximation. 
We are just stating what these 3 types of approximations are. You only become clear if you were to refer to an actual full ritual of a yoga tantra deity such as Sarvavid (Kunrig in Tibetan) You have to look at the extensive self generation in order to be able to figure out what the 1st part - the concentration on the initial application – will involves, and what the 2nd and 3rd part of the concentration will involve. Otherwise, there is no way to be clear about this. 
In the coarse practice of the generation of the deity, after you have generated both the supporting and supported mandalas, then the practitioner seeks to elicit clear appearance and divine pride. 
In the yoga that focuses on the coarse deity, the meditator seeks to elicit very clear appearance of the deity up to the point that he feels as if he is looking at the deity with the naked eyes. It is so clear as if it is almost tangible and kind of touches it. That is clear appearance. Then there is also meditating on divine pride as well. 
[BP1 In the practice of the self-generation, one generates another mandala in front of oneself in the centre of which one visualises the Yoga Tantra deity in his full aspect. For example, if the principal deity is Kunrig, one visualises him in the centre of the mandala. The practice of the self generation up to visualising the principal deity in his full aspect in the centre of the mandala is the concentration of the initial preparation. If one decides at this point to focus on reciting the mantra, this is the shortest way of performing the approximation. This is the abbreviated approximation. 
Having visualised the principal deity in the centre of the mandala in front of oneself, one then visualises emanating from the heart of the deity the other retinue deities and placing them in their respective positions in the mandala. This practice is the concentration of the supreme victorious mandala and doing this practice in addition to the concentration of the initial preparation is the medium approximation. 
There is then the practice of persuading the holy mind of the deity to work for the benefit of sentient beings. The principal deity in the mandala emanates limitless replicas of himself to do this. This practice is called the concentration of the supreme victorious activities. Adding this practice to the earlier two practices is the way to perform the extensive approximation.]
In one of Longa Lama Rinpoche’s writings, he talks about what is the very essence of a deity yoga in yoga tantra. He presents four basis of purification:
Ordinary body,
Ordinary speech, 
Ordinary mind, 
The activities of that practitioner
You have to remember these 4 bases of purification - ordinary body, ordinary speech, ordinary mind, and the activities of that practitioner. So these are the basis of purification which needs to be purified. They are purified by the 4 purifiers. Essentially is meditating the path concordant with the aspects of the body, speech, mind and the activities of the resultant state. These 4 purifiers are also called the four seals of the purifying path. 
What are the four seals of the purifying path? By meditating on the four paths seals one can achieve the four results of purification which are essentially the Buddha’s body, speech, mind and enlightened activities of the resultant stage. 
In short, they are seals of the basis of purification. 
The four basis of purification are the ordinary (impure) body, speech, mind and activities of the practitioner. 
The things that purify it are the four seals of the path. 
As the result of the purification one achieves the seals of the resultant state or basically the Buddha’s body, speech, mind and activities. 
According to Longa Lama Rinpoche, this is the very essence of the deity yoga of yoga tantra.
We talked about approximation. What does approximation really mean? What is the main meaning of approximation? 
During approximation, one generates the supporting and supported mandalas. With that one seeks to elicit very clear appearance of the mandala- supporting and supported to the point it feels so real that one can almost touch it. It is as clear as you were to look at it with your own naked eyes. With clear appearance, you also seek to develop very stable divine pride. In fact you develop uncontrived divine pride.  That is the main approximation. On top of that, there is usually a need to accumulate a certain number of repetitions of the deity’s mantra. At the end, one should conclude the approximation with the compensating burns offering rituals. If all of these are done, then it is said one has completed well the approximation. 
You can look at approximation in different ways. There is the approximation of time, approximation of number, approximation of sign or indication, approximation of mental stability.  
The approximation of time is deciding beforehand how long you are going to engage in approximation, whether it is 3 months or 6 months. After you have decided, you stick to it and finish it. 
The approximation of the number is having to accumulate a certain number of mantras of the deity. Once you have finished the numbers, that’s it.
The approximation of the signs would be doing the approximation until you receive the signs such as seeing the deity and the deity speaking to you.
The approximation of mental stability literally is like that. Basically the approximation is achieved when one acquires a stable yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity.
Khen Rinpoche: You must meditate until the deity speaks to you.
In yoga tantra the seal impression of the 4 seals is very much emphasized. When we say seal impression of the four seals means one must meditate on the 4 seals.
We say the seal impressed with the 4 seals, which means it is not correct to have these 4 seals be kept separately. Rather these 4 seals must come together i.e. you must meditate on the 4 seals. As I have mentioned earlier that there are:
4 seals of the basis of purification, 
4 seals of the purifying path and 
4 seals of the result. 
As I have mentioned earlier on that there are 4 basis of purification of body, speech, mind and activities. But there are also 4 afflictions to be purified: attachment, anger, ignorance and miserliness. Also included within the basis of purification are the 4 elements: earth, water, fire, wind. 
There are 4 seals of the purifying path.:
the great seal (mahamudra) of the body
the dharma seal (dharmamudra) of speech 
the commitment seal (samayamudra) of the mind
the action seal (karmamudra) of the activities
Khen Rinpoche: First you must get this word “the 4 seals”. 
There is the body great seal, speech dharma seal, the mind commitment seal and the activity action seal. You try to draw the correspondence of the body, speech, mind, activity to the 4 kinds of seals. So there is the body seal, speech dharma seal, the mind commitment seal and the activity action seal. 
The root tantra the Compendium of Reality which is divided into 4 parts:
In the 1st part of the root tantra Compendium of Reality, the main meditation is on the body, the great seal, and this has to do with meditating on Vairocana. That is for the purpose of purifying attachment. 
In the 2nd part of the root tantra Compendium of Reality, it talks primarily about meditating on the mind commitment seal, and this has to do with meditating on Akshobhya.  That is for the purpose of purifying anger. 
In the 3rd part of the root tantra Compendium of Reality, it talks primarily about meditation on the speech dharma seal, and this has to do with meditating on Amitabha.  That is for the purpose of purifying bewilderment or confusion or ignorance. 
In the 4th part of the root tantra Compendium of Reality, it talks about the activity action seal, and this has to do with meditating on Amoghasiddhi. And Ratnasambhava is included here. That is for the purpose of purifying miserliness. 
The 4 elements of earth, water, fire, and wind are purified by the meditation on the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th parts of Compendium of Reality respectively. 
The main purpose of engaging in the yoga tantra meditation that involves the seal impression of the 4 seals is for the purpose of purifying ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness with respect to the ordinary body, speech, mind and activity for the purpose of actualizing the body, speech, mind and activity of Buddha.
What is the measure of having accomplished the great seal of the body?
The basis of purification is the one’s ordinary body and the environment. One purifies that and in its place, you generate the supporting and the supported mandala, oneself as the deity, the abode as the mandala, and then you elicit very clear appearance of oneself as the deity and the environment as a mandala. On the basis of elicit clear appearance, and identify with that as being the actual deity and the actual mandala, you elicit divine pride. When one has the sense of stable clear appearance and divine pride then that is the measure of having meditated on the great seal of the body.
What is the measure of having accomplished the speech dharma seal? 
When the practitioner repetition of the mantra is able to bring about all the so called beneficial effect or the power that are mentioned in the root tantra then that is the measure of having accomplished the speech dharma seal.
When the natural intonation of the speech appears naturally as the sound of mantra to the practitioner, then that is also the measure of having accomplished the speech dharma seal.
What is the measure of having accomplished the mind commitment seal? 
When the practitioner achieves the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity and has achieved stability with respect and that would be the mind commitment seal.
What is the measure of accomplishing the activity action seal? 
When the meditator has reached the point whereby most of the time there is no sense of ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness with respect to the activities of his body, speech and mind, plus when he engages in the meditation on emitting and gathering back light rays. Just like that he is able to accomplish the four activities of pacification and so on and so forth, then that is the measure of having achieved the activity action seal.
Even if you can’t remember all of these but the main point of yoga tantra is this: when one meditates on the path of yoga tantra, the meditation involves the seal impression with the four seals. That means one must not be separated from the meditation on the four seals. 
With regards to the four seals,
there are four seals that are the basis of purification. There are the four things to be purified - the body, speech, mind and the activities of the practitioner. 
Likewise, there are the four afflictions - attachment, anger, ignorant and miserliness.
Likewise, with regards to the four elements there are the earth, water, fire and wind. All these are the factors or basis of purification. 
These are purified by the four seals of the purifying paths. Through that one achieve the four seals of the results. The whole purpose of purifying the four basis of purification with the four seals of the purifying path is to achieve the four seals of the result, basically to achieve the body, speech, mind and enlightened activities of the Buddha.
That is about the yoga observing the coarse deity.
Yoga focusing on specific hand symbols
 Second, while clearly visualizing yourself as the deity, you hold your mind on the small vajra hand symbol—similar in color to your special deity—at the upper opening of the central channel. When the mind attains stability in this yoga, you should then practice emanation, absorption, and so on
Now we are still talking about the yoga with signs. 
The yoga with signs involves two parts:
Meditating on the coarse
Meditating on the subtle
We have done with meditating on the coarse deity. Without losing that, one continues with the yoga focusing on the subtle hand symbols.
“Second, while clearly visualizing yourself as the deity, you hold your mind on the small vajra hand symbol” - how small is it? Sometimes it is said to be as small as a mustard seed and sometimes it is even smaller i.e. as small as the tip of the hair. 
Where are these hand symbols like the vajra meditated? 
Initially, it is done by placing small vajra hand symbols at the navel, and then pull that object of observation to the heart and finally to the point between the eyebrows.
When the small vajra hand symbols is drawn up to between eyebrow, then one focuses on it without any distraction. 
After one has drawn the small vajra hand symbols to the point between the eyebrows and has developed stability with respect to that object of observation then one does the practice of emanation and absorption. It is a very small hand symbol. If it is a vajra, it is a very small one. Then you start by emanating from one and then emanate two. With clarity and stability, then from two you emanate four, four to eight, and so on and so forth till the entire universe, the whole of existence, the three thousand fold world systems are filled with these small hand vajras. With clarity of that, you gather them back in the way you have emanated, and finally culminating in that original small vajra hand symbol at mid brow.
First, you have to concentrate on the initial small vajra hand symbol at the mid brow, and have stability before you do the practice of emanation and then absorption.
Yoga without signs
Second, you conclude that the deity in front of you together with the letters of the mantra do not inherently exist, then you develop certainty on that point, then you alternate placement and analysis within the stream of that certainty, and then you establish the union of calm abiding and insight realizing emptiness. When you obtain such insight, you progress to the path of preparation and so on as mentioned previously.
We have talked about this earlier on. When one achieves the yoga without signs one enters the Path of Preparation. When you enter the Path of Preparation one actualizes special insight observing emptiness.
In the yoga with signs there is the yoga observing the coarse deity and the yoga focusing on the subtle hand implements (hand symbols). Calm abiding is achieved during the second part, the yoga observing the subtle hand implements.
When you read the explanation of developing concentration in tantra, up to now in the three lower classes of tantra, there seems to be a real difference in accomplishing calm-abiding. I am talking about the technique for cultivating calm-abiding that is not found in sutra. In tantra, it talks about achieving calm-abiding by depending on subtle objects of observation.
In the action and performance tantra, they talk about the concentration abiding in fire and the concentration abiding in sound. So it is said that calm-abiding is only achieved when one is at the concentration abiding in sound where the object of observation is just the sound of the mantra.
Here in yoga tantra, calm-abiding is said to be accomplished when one is engaged in yoga observing the subtle hand implements. We are talking about really subtle objects of observation. If it is a vajra, it is said to be as small as a mustard seed or even as small as the tip of the hair. So you are talking about very subtle objects of observation.
So you compare the explanation for achieving calm-abiding in sutra and tantra, it seems that the explanation of tantra with respect to achieving calm abiding is more subtle.
In the writing of Kachen Yeshe Gyaltsen, he said that the techniques for developing calm abiding that are taught in sutra are not able to overcome subtle dualistic appearances. Perhaps, the justification or the point behind that statement is alluding to what we have been discussing.
What I have think is that because the object of observation presented in tantra for developing calm abiding are much more subtle then the ones that are generally taught in sutra, then the minds that take these objects of observation must also be very subtle because the mind that meditates on calm-abiding that focuses on these chosen objects of observation are more subtle, therefore they are also equally more powerful in dealing with the subtler dualistic appearances.
Student 1:  Why do you need to purify the elements of earth, water, fire and wind? And for concentration, it is always mention that if there is sinking, you visualize the object at the upper channel and if there is excitement you visualize the object at the lower opening central channel. What is the reason for that? 
Khen Rinpoche: I am not very clear about why the earth, water, fire and wind are stated as basis of purification. I guess it might have to do with the nature of our body which is a basis of purification and the physical body is the composite of the four elements.
We also need to look at the relationship between the bases of purification that are classed together. Because classed together with the body as the basis of purification, the element is earth together with the affliction of attachment.
Likewise, in the 2nd part of the root tantra, anger being the something to be purified by the path and anger is classed together with the element of water and also with the mind.
In the 3rd part of the root tantra, speech that has ignorance together with the element of fire. 
In the 4th is the activity which has the affliction of miserliness that has the element of wind. 
Within each of the basis of purification, there are three things. Are they also connected in one way another?
The four parts of the root tantra are related to the four deities - Vairocana, Akshobhya, Amitabha, and Amoghasiddhi. What are they essentially? They are essentially:
the factor of purification of the body appearing as deity, 
the factor of purification of mind appearing as deity,
the factor of purification of speech appearing as deity, and 
the factor of purification of activities appearing as deity. 
The first deity is Vairocana, the second one is Akshobhya, the third is Amitabha, and the last one Amoghasiddhi. 
There is a relation to the mood of the mind and the development of laxity and excitement. When the mind is too down, then laxity developed - too relaxed, too loose. When the mind is too high, too excited, then excitement arises. It is said that when the mind is too uptight, then excitement arises.
When laxity is present, the mind is a bit loose and feeling down. It doesn’t help if you choose an object of observation and focus on the lower part of the body. It is possible that you might make the mind even more loose, even more lax. That is why for dispelling laxity, usually they put the object of observation at higher part of the body. 
Conversely, if the mind is too excited, too uplifted and if you were to try to focus on something that is of visually higher, you might agitate it further. In that case, it will make a difference if one chooses to focus on a lower part of the body.
Student 2: What is it mean by subtle dualistic appearance? 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know. I have to think about that. 
Student 2: Because it talks about this little Vajra becomes two vajras…
Khen Rinpoche: I saw the quotation there by one of the master. I still have to think what is subtle there.
This is something to think about. In Highest Yoga Tantra, we talk about the mind of white appearance, red increase and black near attainment which are posited as subtle dualistic mind. However, these three are not discussed or taught in the three lower classes of tantra. Is there any relation between the three lower classes of tantra? I guess are mode of progression towards Highest Yoga Tantra. I am not sure and have to think about it.
I brought up that statement by Kachen Yeshe Gyaltsen where he mentioned in his writing that the techniques for attaining calm-abiding in sutra are not able to overcome subtle dualistic appearances whereas in tantra, it is possible.
You read the remaining section of this chapter. Maybe we will finish this remaining section in one session, especially the session of the debate.
If you read and then from my side I can just finish my explanation in one session.
You have to read and if you don’t understand anything from your reading, you should write in down and ask in class.
Handout