Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L27.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:14.913825
================================================================================

The Kadampa masters say: “If one meditates on death and impermanence for long time and thinks about death and impermanence often, then one will be able to give up the attachment to the affairs of this life”.
Such a person will not have any difficulty in achieving the goals and happiness of future lives. 
Those who think well about death and impermanence will naturally be able to practise dharma. So the whole point of thinking about death and impermanence is so that one can practise the dharma. When one practices the dharma then there will only be joy. For those who practise the dharma, they will not be unhappy. So the Kadampa masters are saying that those who think about death and impermanence and practise the dharma will experience mental joy and will not experience any mental displeasure. Those who think well about death and impermanence naturally will see anything that is nothing to do with dharma is completely pointless and without any purpose.
So the Kadampa masters say that these three things come together:
Think about death and impermanence
Give up this life 
With that one will be able to practise dharma
This reflection or meditation on death and impermanence is really important because this is the foundation for all the practices. Whether any dharma practice will be stable, whether it will bear fruit and whether it will be successful, it depends on whether one has this foundation or not. Without this foundation, it doesn’t matter what you do - meditate on bodhicitta, meditate on emptiness, meditate on tantra - none of those practices will be fruitful and neither will they be stable.  Without this foundation, you can even meditate on these things but when the time comes where you need to have something to show, something to use, something of practical benefit to deal with life, then there is nothing to show. 
In essence, you have to think about death and impermanence regularly and constantly. With this, then dharma practice can start. 
Khen Rinpoche: I have passed the new chart under this yoga tantra (see handout below). It is just some idea.  I have already talked about this in the last class. Whether I have to go through this again or not, go through means I have to go for the same thing of what I have talked in the last class. Or just pass the chart maybe you are not getting anything. I don’t know whether you get some idea with this chart or you need explanation again. You need to go through then I will go through this. I give 5 minutes for you to read through the chart. If you have question, ask. You want me to go through again then I will do that. The whole point is you read. Just read the first page. Behind one don’t read first. You finish the first front page. I’m not sure what is correct of not, and it is not the final. So any question there? 
This supposed to be the summary from the previous class. I made some slight change there and if you notice, then you ask question. Any question on the first page? 
Student 1: Why are there three kinds of approximation – extensive, medium, and abbreviated - for this particular tantra when doing the yoga with sign, focusing on the coarse deity? This is very different from action and the performance tantra where there is only one type. 
Khen Rinpoche: Depends on how you want to do - extensive way, middle way or very short way.
Student 1: But why must have three? Is it because due to different capacity of the trainee?
Khen Rinpoche: Could be. 
Student 1: That is the reason. In action and performance tantra, there is one way.
Khen Rinpoche: There is short, medium, long. That depend on how you want to do. Some people just do short one, some people want to do extensive one. Extensive has more details to meditate. 
Student 1: Will there be a difference in the result? For the extensive one, will the result be very different because they do like more things and more difficult? More merits? 
Khen Rinpoche: Of course extensive way you have put more effort, and have to do more meditation and need to put more time. 

 
Student 2: What is this vajra hand symbol?
Khen Rinpoche: Vajra symbol is the vajra hold on the hand. What vajra? It like the Vajrasattva holds vajra and bell on the hand. 
The hand implement symbolizes something. So in the case of the lotus lineage, many a times, the deities hold a lotus which is their hand implement. Likewise, deities of the vajra lineage hold a vajra. 
Student 3: Under yoga with signs, it says yoga focusing on the basic deity as a coarse focal object to generate clear appearance and uncontrived divine pride. As for “uncontrived divine pride”, is there a special quality to this divine pride in yoga tantra? For most of us who is trying to practise divine pride is perhaps achieved with a great deal of effort and it does not come up spontaneously. The word “uncontrived pride” which I presume is like uncontrived bodhicitta which means spontaneous and arises without effort. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. 
Student 3: Does that means the divine pride in yoga tantra is of a higher quality than what we try to do in action tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: No, same thing. 
Student 3: So it is always spontaneous and without effort? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah
Student 4: I noticed under the yoga focusing on the hand symbols, I don’t recall that you went about the vajra at the heart or navel and then going up to the forehead. In any case, when you say the hand symbol goes up from the heart or navel, travels to the point between your eyebrows, what is the process of doing that? Do you have to do it rapidly or is there a particular way of visualizing the way the vajra or whichever other implements travels up? What is the significance? 
Khen Rinpoche: It go up and go here. 
Student 4: What is the point of that?
Khen Rinpoche: This is a practice belonging to the yoga for observing the subtle. The yoga observing the subtle is done after having completed the yoga observing the coarse.
One starts with the yoga focusing on the coarse deity after generating the supported and supporting mandala. Then one elicits clear appearance and divine pride. Within that, then one visualize the subtle hand implement, either at the navel or at the heart – as it is said at one’s choosing.
Whether you choose the navel or the heart essentially you are focusing on a very subtle object which is vajra hand symbol or vajra hand implement which is supposed to be as small as the size of a mustard seed. You focus on that and achieve stability with respect to that. Then one draws the hand symbol to the point between the eyebrow and focuses on that for the purpose of achieving calm abiding.
In one text, it says after drawing the hand symbol up to the point at the mid brow, one focuses on that and meditates until calm abiding is achieved. 
By focusing on the hand symbol at the point at mid brow, one meditates until one is free of laxity and excitement and until one’s mind is conjoined with the bliss of pliancy; both physical and mental. Basically until one achieves calm abiding. 
The text says when the mind attains stability in this yoga, you should then practise emanation and absorption and so forth. When the mind attains stability means calm abiding is achieved. Only then one starts with the practice of emanation and absorption. One trains to develop a skill in concentration. One starts emanating vajras from that vajra symbol at the mid brow, then these vajras pervade the body and then they pervade your abode, then they pervade the four continents and these vajras go and pervade the entire 3,000 fold world systems. When you reabsorb, likewise you gather all these numberless vajras back into the original vajra. One does the practice of emanation and absorption without any distraction up till developing the special insight observing emptiness. When the special insight observing emptiness is achieved, then one achieves the yoga without signs.
In one text, it says after reabsorbing all the emanated vajras, the original vajra then comes to settle at your heart or the navel. 
What is the purpose of moving the vajra down to the heart? When you emanate, let’s say if you start from the heart, from the heart that vajra goes up to the mid brow and then you do the emanation and absorption. At the end you bring the vajra down to the heart. I wonder if there is a purpose for this. Perhaps maybe it is for showing the way moving the mind in the direction of Highest Yoga Tantra. In Highest Yoga Tantra, it is explained that the extremely subtle wind mind abides at the heart.
There should be also some connection between this and how all phenomena are said to be display of the mind, all phenomena are in the nature of mind, all phenomena are established by your mind.
Student 4: With respect to the particular implement, whether vajra or lotus or something, does the person who practices this have to visualize it according to the particular deity? So let’s say the deity has a pink lotus, so you have to use a pink lotus?
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah.
Student 5: Pertaining to practise of this calm abiding, when you are focusing on the vajra at the tip of your eye, you actually merge your mind together with the vajra?
Do you still have the appearance of yourself as a deity? And do you still hold that appearance and diving pride? Or you just focus just on the vajra itself and your mind being together with the vajra?
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think one meditates on the latter while forgetting the earlier. So I don’t think it is a case of losing whatever clear appearance one has as the deity while meditating on the yoga of the subtle. I don’t think that is the case.
Student 6: How does performing the emanation and absorption help one to gain special insight focusing on emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: The emanation and absorption is done after calm-abiding is achieved. For if it is done prior to achieving calm-abiding then it would be an obstacle to achieving calm-abiding. So it is to be done after calm-abiding is achieved. After calm-abiding is achieved, then one does the practice of emanation and absorption for the purpose of developing skill in concentration. 
Special insight observing emptiness from the perspective of it being a wisdom, it is a wisdom of analysis. This analysis is done not separated from calm-abiding. Rather it is done within calm-abiding. It is a mind of discernment, it is an investigation, it is an analysis on emptiness using limitless avenues of reasoning. But it is done within calm-abiding. So training in developing the skill in concentration will help in achieving special insight observing emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, completed the first chart. You can read the behind if you want to read. I don’t know whether there is any question. 
Student 7: Yoga without signs is at the Path of Preparation. Then what happens after that?
Khen Rinpoche: After that still yoga without signs. Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation are all yoga without signs. 
Student 7: Where do they draw the line? 
Khen Rinpoche: I think the text is very clear. The draw line is somewhere there in the root text. Not in the chart but in the root text. When you achieve Path of Accumulation, it become Path of Preparation, Path of Seeing, and Path of Meditation.
Student 7: This thing about vajra or hand implement multiplying one by one is actually like a mental exercise.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah. Exercise within concentration.
Student 7:  You actually explain this thing about how Samantabhadra emanate 25 Samantabhadra, and from which Samantabhadra emanate are quite similar to that. Also this thing about bones, there was one meditation about the body.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, also like that. 
Student 7: So all these originate from tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: Not originate from tantra. Sutra also has. The meditation on the whole environment being filled with skeletons is found in sutra. I guess it does happen for those who really meditate and seeing the whole environment filled with skeletons. I guess they do actually feel or see in that way.
Student 7: You have mentioned that the subtlety of the object makes the mind also subtle as in the size of the object. If I look at it the other way round, when I actually meditate on a very big object, does that make the mind gross? So this small vajra becomes many, many vajras, then it is like a mental exercise of expanding the mind to become gross and subtle?
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah.
Student 7: When it comes to meditation on emptiness, emptiness technically doesn’t have any size. Whether it is emptiness of a very big object or emptiness of a very small object, emptiness does not have any size, so does it really matter whether it is sutric way of meditating on emptiness or tantric way of meditating on emptiness? If it is just specifically only talking about size, why would the mind be any subtler based on size of the phenomena?
Khen Rinpoche: Your question is what?
Student 7: When we talk about subtlety of the mind meditating on the object, it was based on how subtle the object is. If the subtlety of the object based on just size, then when it comes to emptiness, emptiness does not have size and is a permanent phenomenon. So if it is just emptiness, what is the difference between emptiness of a house and the emptiness of a small vajra?
Khen Rinpoche: What we just discussed in the previous lesson about the mind becoming subtle when the object of observation is subtle, we are talking about subtle awareness. In this context here, we are not talking about the extremely subtle wind mind that is explained in Highest Yoga Tantra. That is a completely different thing. In Highest Yoga Tantra, end of the day, the very essence is to achieve this extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness. This extremely subtle mind being very subtle, it doesn’t mean it is only restricted to only realizing emptiness of something small. That is it is not restricted to realizing only certain things. We are talking about the extremely subtle wind mind at the time of the basis, it doesn’t realize anything. Then when one progresses on the path, when the extremely subtle mind is transformed into the entity of the path, then it realizes emptiness. This extremely subtle mind at the time of enlightenment being the dharmakaya realizes all phenomena directly.
Student 7: I wasn’t talking about Highest Yoga Tantra. I was just talking about the three lower tantra, and we haven’t talk about subtle wind mind yet.
Khen Rinpoche: In the context of Yoga Tantra, while we say the mind become subtler when the object of observation is small, we are not talking about it in terms of how it is normally talked about in Highest Yoga Tantra. In fact when the object of observation is small, and when you put your mind on that object, it is natural that the mind becomes more withdrawn. The smaller it is, the mind becomes more withdrawn inward. So it is more refine and more subtle in that sense. With that subtler state of mind, you can use it to realize many objects. It is that focus and withdrawn mind that is meditating on the absorption and emanation. 
Student 7:  Even in sutric school, it does have this thing about small skeleton become big. So it also has this feature of having a subtler mind. So it is not really unique to tantra for the three yoga tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: It is possible. In sutra you can talk about achieving calm-abiding and within that you develop skill in concentration. 
Any question on the chart behind the page? 
Student 8: In the table under Amitabha, last class I heard that one of the sign that your speech has been purified is the natural appearance of intonation of speech as sound of mantra. I do not understand this expression. Does it mean that as you speak, you hear your speech as mantra?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, the speech becomes mantra.
Student 8: Under Akshobhya, you have the mind commitment seal to purify ordinary mind, to purify anger. Then you have the corresponding one on top of it, meditating on the path accordance with the speech of the Buddha’s speech is to purify ignorance. Normally when we talk about mind, mind seems to have something to do with ignorance. Why when you meditate on the path correspondent with aspect of the Buddha’s speech is to purify ignorance and then when you meditate on path correspondent with the Buddha’s mind is to purify the ordinary mind of anger.
Khen Rinpoche: Somebody give some idea. Why. Somebody come and say something. Any idea to answer to her question? Mainly she is saying why speech relates to ignorance and why the mind relates to anger. Her question is that. Any idea? Suggestion. Suggestion. 
Student 9: The speech is related to Dharma. When you teach the Dharma, Dharma counteracts ignorance. When you attach to body, then there is attachment. 
Khen Rinpoche: Perhaps it has to do with ignorance being eliminated. Ignorance is not knowing. So you eliminate somebody’s ignorance by teaching them the Dharma and the Dharma is delivered with speech. Perhaps this is the connection. 
It is just like what is mentioned in the Praise of Dependent Origination, of the four activities of the Buddha, the supreme activity is the enlightened activity of speech. The speech is able to eliminate the misunderstanding in the sentient beings’ mind and it is the speech that is able to cause them to generate wisdom. It is the speech that delivers on the instructions on what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated. It cannot be done with the body. Neither can it be done with the mind. 
As in the previous class, in the root tantra the Compendium of Reality which is divided into four chapters.  We also talk about the factor of purification of the five aggregates appearing as deity.
The first chapter of the Compendium of Reality talks primarily on the meditation on Vairocana. 
Vairocana is the factor of purification of the aggregate of form appearing as deity
The second chapter of the Compendium of Reality talks primarily on the meditation on Akshobhya. Akshobhya is the factor of purification of the aggregate of consciousness appearing as deity.
The third chapter of the Compendium of Reality talks primarily about the meditation on Amitabha. Amitabha is the factor of the purification of the aggregate of discrimination appearing as deity. 
The fourth chapter of the Compendium of Reality talks mainly about meditation on Amoghasiddhi. Amoghasiddhi is the factor of purification of the aggregate of compositional factor appearing as deity. 
The fourth chapter is also the meditation on the path with respect to Ratnasambhava is also taught. Ratnasambhava is the factor of purification of the aggregate of feelings appearing as deity. 
In the Highest Yoga Tantra section, there will be mentioned about these five Buddha lineages again.. Anyway, the point here is that the factors of purification of the five aggregates appear as the five Buddha types or lineages. 
You remember that:
The factor of purification of the aggregate of form appearing as deity is Vairocana. The factor of purification of the aggregate of consciousness appearing as deity is Akshobhya. 
The factor of purification of the aggregate of discrimination appearing as deity is Amitabha. 
The factor of purification of the aggregate of feeling appearing as deity is Ratnasambhava. 
The factor of purification of the aggregate of compositional activities is Amoghasiddhi.
These are the five Buddha types. What are the five Buddha types or the five Buddha lineages? How do they originate? Essentially they are the factors of purification of the five aggregates appearing as deity. What you have to remember is that it is the factor of purification of the five aggregates appearing as deity, and that is how you get the five Buddha types or the five Buddha lineages. 
How to establish the siddhis
Fourth, it is said that many siddhis are accomplished through three practices: absorption, recitation, and fire pūjās*. 
*Losang Palden briefly describes these three. 
- Regarding absorption he states: “The siddhi of absorption is accomplished by the yogi on whom the wisdom beings have descended within the maṇḍala, who seeks to apply the siddhi of hidden treasures and so forth”;
- Regarding recitation: “To accomplish the siddhi of recitation you first perform approximation and then engage in recitation you engage in recitation at night and attain the siddhi of the form of your deity. Similarly through maintaining the samayamudrā, engaging in recitations in four sessions, and finally engaging in recitation at night, you attain the siddhi of the blazing seal. Through maintaining that mudrā and by its support alone, you are able to fly . . .”;
- Regarding fire pūjās: “The siddhi of fire pūjās is accomplished by meditating until the signs of accomplishing the actions of pacification, increase, power, and wrath occur.”
Here it is said that the siddhis are accomplished through these three practices:
Absorption, 
Recitation, and 
Fire pūjās
Absorption here refers to having achieved the union of calm-abiding and special insight. It is on the basis of having that kind of yoga, then on the basis of having that kind of concentration, that kind of realization, one can achieve any siddhis. If not, one depends on recitation and also burn offerings (fire puja). 
When one achieves mastery over subtle concentration and without needing to depend on recitation, just by concentration alone, one can achieve both the common and the supreme siddhis.
As I mentioned earlier on, after having achieved stability after having calm abiding, then by focusing on the yoga of the subtle and when one achieves stability then one does the practice of emanation and absorption for the purpose of developing skills in concentration. 
With that when one achieves the special insights focusing on emptiness, with that kind of concentration, one has developed the mastery over the subtle concentration then one can just achieves any of the siddhis, both common and the supreme, just by concentration alone. That kind of absorption doesn’t need to depend on recitation or burn offerings.
Does that mean that people who do not have this mastery over the concentration has no hope in getting the siddhis. It is not like that. They still can achieve some of the siddhis by depending on repetition and burn offerings.
Mantric Stages states that the best siddhis that supreme disciples of yoga tantra may first accomplish are either holding the knowledge mantra of a bodhisattva who apprehends the form of a perfect buddha or obtaining the form of the great seal of their deity’s body . . .
Khen Rinpoche: You understand what they are talking about? I don’t understand myself. That is why I am asking you. I thought maybe translation into English sometimes is easy to understand. Some Tibetans words are difficult to understand. You don’t have ideas what it is saying? I also have no ideas. 
So, it is said here “the best siddhis is that of the supreme disciples of yoga tantra may first accomplish” for example directly seeing what are the deity or accomplishing the knowledge mantra. 
I am not sure about “holding the knowledge mantra”. Perhaps it means one has the accomplishment of reciting the deity’s mantra to the point that just by doing that you can accomplish the four activities of:
Pacification
Increase
Controlling
Destruction or Wrath
“Obtaining the form of the great seal of the deity’s body” perhaps it means achieving the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity with respect to the tantra that is being practiced, and in this case is some deities of yoga tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: I am not sure exactly of these two sentences. I am not sure.
. . . and in action and performance tantras, accomplishing the siddhi of the knowledge-bearer is the great siddhi of the body. 
“the siddhi of the knowledge-bearer”  I guess it is achieving the life knowledge-bearer siddhis which is kinds of long life.
How the supreme siddhi is obtained
The Great Commentary to the Kālacakra states that practitioners of the three lower tantras accomplish the supreme siddhi in reliance on having previously accomplished worldly siddhis, but in accordance with highest yoga tantra, you may accomplish the supreme siddhi without relying on worldly siddhis by uninterruptedly meditating on the generation and completion stages.
“The supreme siddhi” is enlightenment. In order to accomplish enlightenment in the context of the three lower tantras that must be done in reliance on having previously accomplished the worldly siddhis first. But this is not the case with Highest Yoga Tantra because in Highest Yoga Tantra, enlightenment can be achieved just by uninterruptedly meditating on the generation and completion stage without relying on the worldly siddhis. This is stated in the Great Commentary to the Kalacakra.
Khen Rinpoche: Did you read this section? If you read and if you have questions, you don’t understand, ask. 
Also Mantric Stages states:
First keep purely the vows and commitments that are the source of the siddhis, then master the practice through striving in yoga with signs and without signs in four daily sessions, and then you will attain the common and uncommon siddhis. 
It is saying that in the 3 lower classes of tantra through meditating on the yoga with signs and yoga without signs you achieve the common siddhis. It is through the power of having the common siddhis that the practitioner progresses from ground to ground. 
In the 3 lower classes of tantra, the mode of progression on the grounds, means you move from the lower ground to the higher ground in dependence upon the common and uncommon siddhis.
You must understand this delineation of the path in the three lower tantras, for it is inappropriate to assert that you progress on the path by combining wind yoga, recitation yoga, empty yoga, and deity yoga in a single practice.
What it is saying is just by depending this alone, you cannot assert that the mode of progression from ground to ground. But rather, it is by depending on the common and uncommon siddhis.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay? If you read I think there is no issue.
Why this is the case? So the author cites scriptural authority. 
Why common siddhis must precede the supreme siddhi in the three lower tantras
The reason why you must establish the common siddhis before establishing the supreme siddhi in the paths of the three lower tantras is stated in the Bodhicaryāvatāra (9:1):
The Sage has proclaimed
that all these branches are for the purpose of wisdom.
So it is saying that in the Bodhicaryavatara the first 5 perfections are done for the purpose of making the wisdom realizing emptiness powerful.
Thus in both systems of the Mahāyāna, the factor of method enhances the wisdom realizing emptiness.
What it is that enhances the wisdom realizing emptiness? It is the factor of method. This is the case in both system of the Mahayana (consists both Paramitayana and Vajrayana)
According to the Perfection Vehicle, when you have trained for an incalculable period in limitless distinct forms of generosity and so on, the wisdom realizing emptiness attains the capacity to abandon obscurations to knowledge.
The wisdom directly realizing emptiness is present in Hearer, Solitary Realizer and Bodhisattvas. What is it that the wisdom directly realizing emptiness of the Hearer and Solitary Realizer cannot get them to full enlightenment? Whereas the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of the bodhisattvas get the bodhisattvas to enlightenment. So, the difference lies in the factor of method. The Hearer and Solitary Realizer do not possess the factor of method which is bodhichitta.
Why this is not necessary in the case of highest yoga tantra
According to highest yoga mantra, the comprehension of emptiness is strengthened by relying on the point of convergence1 and coabidance2 of both bodhicittas through taking desire for the union of the two sexual organs as the path
1 Emitting 
2 Withdrawing
Here they are talking about the practice of taking desire as the paths and especially in Highest Yoga Tantra. The whole point is to actualize or manifest the extremely subtle mind and using that to realize emptiness. With this extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness is so powerful and it is that which then moves to enlightenment. With that subtle mind, one gets rid of the knowledge obscurations.
Anyway, here it is just saying in the Perfection Vehicles, it is like this. Then in the Highest Yoga Tantra it is talking about the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness and that is the special feature that makes it very powerful in achieving enlightenment quickly. 
We have talked about the Perfection Vehicles, we have talked about the HYT then what about the 3 lower classes of tantras? 
In the three lower tantras it is not said that you should train for an incalculable period in limitless distinct forms of generosity and so on in accordance with the Perfection Vehicle, nor is it said that you should train in the method of generating the special awareness realizing emptiness according to highest yoga mantra. Instead you must strengthen the comprehension of emptiness through skill in such methods as attaining many common siddhis and being directly cared for and blessed by buddhas and higher bodhisattvas.
This is the answer as it is how it is done in the 3 lower classes of tantras. As mentioned earlier, as you saw in the text, in the 3 lower classes of tantras, the practitioners achieve the common siddhis. With the common siddhis then they are able to directly perceive the Buddha, hear their speech and then being directly blessed. This makes their wisdom directly realizing emptiness powerful. This is how they progress on the path to enlightenment.
At the end of the day, what it is saying is that in the 3 lower classes of tantras, the thing that makes the wisdom realizing emptiness powerful and causes the practitioners to move from ground to ground towards enlightenment is the achievement of the common siddhis, through which one is able to see the Buddha directly, hear their speech, get blessed by them.
Khen Rinpoche: The answer is that.
So, here in the 3 lower classes of tantras, they do not talk about manifesting the extremely subtle mind, transforming in the entity of the path and with that you moves to the path to enlightenment. No, there is no such talk or discussion in the lower tantras.
Khen Rinpoche: Did you read? You read then ask questions, I think there is some discussions there.. Somebody says something, somebody answers something there.
The next chapter on the Grounds and Paths is essentially the same. It is just that, there are some slight differences just because it is based on the different college’s assertions. Other than that, in essence, it is pretty much the same.
In short, in the lower classes of tantras, what accounts for the mode of progression from ground to ground and then towards enlightenment? What is it that makes it quick? What is it that makes the practitioner’s wisdom directly realizing emptiness becomes stronger and stronger to overcome the different levels of obscurations?
It is basically done on the basis of having the common siddhis. It is the achievement of the common siddhis that allows them to progress. So, this is the essential answer given by Palden Choje, the author of his particular salam, citing quotations from the Mantric Stages.
Khen Rinpoche: Hope we can start the Highest Yoga Tantra next class hopefully.
Student 10: Just to clarify about the time taken to achieve enlightenment based on the 3 lower classes of tantras and then it compared to HYT of one lifetime. So there were some comments. I think at the beginning Khen Rinpoche explained that you attain enlightenment in this tantra 7 to 16 lifetimes and then it becomes shorter and shorter. Because of these siddhis that they practice in the lower tantras, they can achieve longevity, something that like says whichever class specifically 7 to 16 lifetimes you achieve enlightenment, does that mean that it is on the basis of this longevity, the special attainment that you have a very long life then you count that as one lifetime and then becomes 7 lifetimes, 16 lifetimes. Is that how it is practice? HYT is that in this body, you do it in one lifetime. But then the lower classes of tantras, there are different lengths of lifetimes. Maybe longer. Are those kinds of lifetime the same as the normal human lifetime? Or is it with the siddhis or attainment that they suddenly have the very long life because of their practice said yoga tantra? 
Khen Rinpoche: It is clear that in the Highest Yoga Tantra that one can achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime in this degenerate age in one body - it is the human body. In the 3 lower classes of tantras, you achieve the common siddhis for example such as the great siddhis of immortality of having very long lifetime. In that one lifetime, you achieve enlightenment. So that one lifetime could be for a very long period of time. The question here: Is that such a thing as achieving enlightenment in one body in the lower classes of tantras? That is the question whether there is or not. It is something to think about. Probably, maybe who know, we might have to say that in the 3 lower classes of tantra you can achieve enlightenment in one lifetime but not in one body. That is my answer. Think about that. How that works. 
BP1
In the Yoga Tantra section of the Stages of Mantra by Lama Tsongkhapa, there is an extensive explanation of the various feats that are achievable. These feats are achieved after one has brought to culmination the practices of Yoga with Signs and Yoga without Signs. I will mention a few here: 
Feat of revealing treasure 
1. Meditate on a treasure vase at one’s heart. 
2. There is a moon inside the treasure vase. 
3. On the top of the moon, there is a five-pointed vajra. 
4. One meditates on these signs until one has a strong sense of being able to ‘see’ and touch the vajra in the treasure vase at one’s heart. 
5. Having achieved this, one then performs repetition and meditation for the whole night. Then one goes to the place where one hopes to find the treasure and makes offerings to the deities and spirits. 
6. One should then protect the treasure and the place with the mantra and seal (or mudra) of Vajraspota. 
7. When all these have been done, the treasure will be found. 
As mentioned earlier, to accomplish these feats, one has to bring to culmination the practices of Yoga with Signs and Yoga without Signs. Without the realisations of these yogas, it will be extremely difficult to achieve anything even though one tries to perform the visualisations. 
Feat of not sinking into water 
1. One goes to the bank of a spring and fills a great clay vessel with water. 
2. One meditates for four sessions daily that the water (in the vessel) has transformed into vajras until one gets the sign of seeing the body of water as vajras and, when touched, is as hard as vajras. 
3. One then draws a mandala of the appropriate lineage, performs the preliminary rites and remains in that meditative stabilisation for the entire night. 
4. Then, when one goes into the water in that state of meditative stabilisation, one will be able to walk on the water. 
These are common feats (or shared feats), so called because they are the common attainments of the four classes of Tantra. There are also specific or uncommon attainments in each class of Tantra, which are achievable only through that particular Tantra. 
Question: What is the difference between worldly and common feats? 
Answer: Worldly feats are equivalent to common feats. I am not sure whether common feats can be achieved by non-Buddhists. In reality, feats such as invisibility, flying through the sky or pacification of illnesses can also be achieved by non-Buddhists. I am not 100% sure but I would equate worldly siddhis to common siddhis and transcendental siddhis to uncommon siddhis. 
There is a reason why one must establish the common siddhis before establishing the supreme siddhi through the path of the three lower tantras because Engaging in the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life states