Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L28.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:18.816473
================================================================================

In the Perfection Vehicle, it is a method in which bodhicitta is essentially that empowers the wisdom directly realizing emptiness to act as an antidote to the knowledge obscurations. However, in Highest Yoga Tantra, the idea is to manifest the extremely subtle mind and transforms it into the entity of the path. Here it requires using desire as the path. The whole point is to induce bliss and then causing the bliss to ascertain emptiness. With that special consciousness the yogi gets to remove the knowledge obscuration.
As for the meaning of taking desire as the path, I think I have mentioned before, I don’t think it means attachment or desire itself transforms into the entity of the path, but rather taking desire as the path means to manifest the wisdom of great bliss that manifest the extremely subtle mind and causing that mind of the great bliss to ascertain emptiness.
While this is the case for Highest Yoga Tantra, the mode of progression on the grounds is not like that in the 3 lower classes of tantra as we saw in the last session in the root text.  In the 3 lower classes of tantra, it is not said that the practitioner should train for long period of time in limitless, distinct forms of generosity and so on. It is also not said that they should be trained in generating special awareness realizing emptiness in the way that is explained in Highest Yoga Tantra but rather it is through accomplishing the many common siddhis. Through that the practitioner comes under the care of the buddhas and higher bodhisattvas.  It is through this that they progress on the grounds.
You have to understand and remember what is it that makes the wisdom directly realizing emptiness as powerful enough to act as an antidote to knowledge obscuration in the Perfection Vehicle, in Highest Yoga Tantra and in the 3 lower classes of tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: OK? Clear?  Somebody ask then you must know how to answer. According to sutra why powerful? Because of this this. Accordingly to 3 lower classes of tantra, why powerful? Because of this this.  According to the Highest Yoga Tantra, because of this this. You must able to answer that.  Can answer?  
One scholar says: You cannot state that the disciples of mantra do not need to train in limitless, distinct forms of generosity and so on because training in practices from the awakening mind to the six perfections are shared paths of both Mahāyāna vehicles.
Reply: That is not logically necessary because what is shared is merely the awakening mind that is the basis of practice and the coarse body of the path training in the six perfections. But training in limitless, distinct forms of generosity and so forth is different from the path of mantra because this is stated in Condensed Stages of the Path and in Illuminating Lamp.
The reason why this qualm is raised is because in the paragraph prior to that it stated that in the Perfection Vehicle the trainee needs to train for long period of time and limitless, distinct forms of generosity and so forth.  But in the 3 lower classes of tantra, it is not necessary so. This is what the author said prior to this qualm.
The author addresses the qualm by saying “that is not logically necessary because what is shared is merely bodhicitta that is the basis of practice and the coarse body of the path training in the six perfections.  But training in limitless, distinct forms of generosity and so forth is different from the path of mantra because this is stated in Condensed Stages of the Path (or Middle Length Lamrim) and in Illuminating Lamp”.
Here the author is saying bodhicitta and the general need to train in the six perfections is a path shared with Perfection Vehicle and Mantra. 
However, the author is saying that training in the limitless, distinct forms of generosity and so on is different from the path of Mantra.  It is different from the path of Mantra means in Mantra, there is no need to engage in limitless, distinct forms of generosity and so forth because that is the feature of the Perfection Vehicle. 
In short, the answer is this, bodhicitta and having to train in six perfections in general is a shared path - it is something that is common to both the Perfection Vehicle and Secret Mantra.  Having to train for long period of time in the limitless, distinct forms of generosity and so forth is something that is peculiar feature of the Perfection Vehicle; not a feature of Secret Mantra.
Then, another qualm:
The purpose of generating blissful consciousness
One says: It cannot be asserted that the three lower classes of tantra lack the method for generating the special [blissful] awareness realizing emptiness through taking desire as the path because you take the bliss derived from observing, smiling at, holding hands with, and embracing the visualized consort as the path in the three lower classes of tantra—and this is done to generate the special awareness realizing emptiness.
The reason of this qualm is due to the earlier statement made by the author:
According to highest yoga mantra, the comprehension of emptiness is strengthened by relying on the point of convergence and coabidance of both bodhicittas through taking desire for the union of the two sexual organs as the path.
And also the statement:
Instead you must strengthen the comprehension of emptiness through skill in such methods as attaining many common siddhis and being directly cared for and blessed by buddhas and higher bodhisattvas.
Prior to this it says:
…nor is it said that you should train in the method of generating the special awareness realizing emptiness according to highest yoga mantra.
This objection is raised as below:
One says: It cannot be asserted that the three lower classes of tantra lack the method for generating the special [blissful] awareness realizing emptiness through taking desire as the path because you take the bliss derived from observing, smiling at, holding hands with, and embracing the visualized consort as the path in the three lower classes of tantra—and this is done to generate the special awareness realizing emptiness.
The author says: “It is not necessarily so”.
The essence of the author’s reply is:
In the 3 lower classes of tantra, there is the practice of taking the desire as the path but the practice of taking desire as the path in the 3 lower classes of tantra is not for the purpose of generating a special awareness realizing emptiness.
That is why he says:
Reply: The latter part of the reason is not established because taking desire as the path to generate the special awareness realizing emptiness is a feature of highest yoga tantra alone—because Illuminating Lamp states: 
Taking desire for pleasurable objects as the path to generate the special awareness realizing emptiness does not appear in systems other than highest yoga tantra.
His answer is that taking desire as the path for the purpose of generating special awareness realizing emptiness is only a feature of Highest Yoga Tantra.
The importance of studying the lower tantras
The person who raises the qualm in replying to the author's answer raises the point:
The purpose of the three types of bliss
One says: It follows that the three types of bliss derived from observing, smiling, and holding hands do not comprehend emptiness because they are not taken as the path to develop the special awareness realizing emptiness.
The author replies
Reply: This should be analyzed. Research whether this is clearly stated in the excellent explanations of the great Jé Rinpoché, even though most of his followers explain that they do function in this way.
The reason why there are four Buddhist classes of tantra is because there are four ways in which desire is taken as a path. Having said that and if you think about it, the whole point of taking desire as a path and producing the consciousness, you probably have to say those consciousnesses do comprehend emptiness. 
Probably you have to give this answer:
The point of taking desire as the path in the four classes of tantra is to produce the blissful consciousness and that bliss does comprehend emptiness.
You also have to say that in the 3 lower classes of tantra, the point of taking desire into the path is not the purpose of generating a special awareness that comprehends emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: You have to keep that in mind. Otherwise, you will confuse what I am talking.
Is there taking desire as the path in the lower classes of tantra? Yes. 
When desire is taken as the path is bliss produced? Yes. 
Is bliss comprehends emptiness? Yes. 
Then someone says: Therefore the purpose of taking desire as the path in the lower classes of tantra is to produce bliss to comprehend emptiness.  
In the 3 lower classes of tantra the purpose of taking desire as the path is to produce bliss, isn’t it? Does that bliss comprehends emptiness or not? You have to say “Yes”. 
Do the bliss that is generated as a result of taking desire as the path in the 3 lower classes of tantra comprehends emptiness and realize emptiness? You have to say “Yes”. 
Is generating a special awareness realizing emptiness the purpose of taking desire as the path in the 3 lower classes of tantra? The answer is No. 
In the analysis it boils down that the special awareness realizing emptiness. It is all determined by what you understand with that. 
In short the special awareness realizing emptiness is the extreme subtle mind transforms into the entity of the path. For that, it is something that is not taught in the 3 lower classes of tantra. Therefore, as it say that in the 3 lower classes of tantra the purpose of desire as the path is not the purpose of generating special awareness realizing emptiness.
That is why there is a quotation from Je Rinpoche’s Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages: 
Generating a special awareness realizing emptiness is a feature of Highest Yoga Tantra alone. 
If that is the case then this special awareness realizing emptiness can take to mean the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness. 
Ven Gyurme: There might be a difference in the editions of the Tibetan text for there seems to be one paragraph missing.
Khen Rinpoche: My text also doesn’t have. Might be missing or what.
Imagining that this is not a qualm and therefore is not a reply. 
[Not read in class] The difference in the speed of the path between the lower tantras and the Perfection Vehicle 
Again one says: It follows that there is no difference in the speed of the paths between the three lower classes of tantra and the Perfection Vehicle because it has not been said that there is a difference in the strength of awareness realizing emptiness depending on whether desire is taken as the path.]
[BP1: We have to analyse whether it is all right to say that the bliss derived from looking, smiling and holding hands with the visualised goddess is used to realise emptiness. I guess it is OK to say that as we are following what most masters say. But is there any fault with saying that? 
The practice of taking desire as the path does exist in the three lower classes of Tantra. If this is so, then there is no reason why that bliss derived from looking, smiling and holding hands (with the visualised goddess) cannot realise emptiness. We can say that this bliss can lead to the realisation of emptiness.
But the author states very clearly here that that bliss, in the three lower classes of Tantra, cannot realise emptiness. It is only in Highest Yoga Tantra that taking desire into the path can realise emptiness. 
I think it is better to say that the bliss derived from taking desire into the path in the three classes of lower Tantra can realise emptiness as I cannot find any good reason to say otherwise. Although we say this, the author states very clearly that taking the desire as the path in the three classes of lower Tantra is not for the purpose of developing the special object-possessor comprehending emptiness. The author substantiates his reason by quoting from the Illuminating Lamp which states: “Taking desire to pleasurable objects as the path for the purpose of generating a special object-possessor comprehending emptiness does not exist for anything other than the Highest (Yoga Tantra).” 
I think it is also all right to follow the author’s assertion that taking desire to pleasurable objects into the path in the three classes of lower Tantra is not for the purpose of generating a special object-possessor comprehending emptiness. This is because generating a special object-possessor comprehending emptiness, which refers to the fundamental innate mind of clear light, only exists in Highest Yoga Tantra. 
This is my opinion. We can discuss further whether this is correct or not.
According to Highest Yoga Tantra, this special object-possessor comprehending emptiness refers to “the fundamental innate mind of clear light,” a term which is not even mentioned in the three lower classes of tantra, where there is no explanation of the realisation of emptiness by such a mind. From this, we can decisively say that taking desire into the path in the three lower classes of tantra is not for the purpose of generating the special object possessor comprehending emptiness. That should be the conclusion.]
Next is the quotation from Mantric Stages:
Reply: That is not logically necessary because Mantric Stages states:
The relative swiftness of the three lower classes of tantra when compared to the Perfection Vehicle is due to completing enlightened actions through many skillful methods—such as attaining many common siddhis in dependence on the power of deity yoga and mantra recitation—and due to being directly cared for and blessed by buddhas and great bodhisattvas.
This quotation states that the paths of the lower tantras are quicker by means of the common siddhis and so forth, and it does not state that they are quicker due to possessing an awareness that comprehends emptiness more profoundly through taking desire as the path.
[BP1 The author says that there is no pervasion and that the path of the lower classes of tantra is faster than the Paramitayana path. However, the reason for this is not due to the practice of taking desire into as the path but rather it is due to: 
• the attainment of many common siddhis and 
• being taken care of and blessed directly by the buddhas and higher bodhisattvas.]
In the 3 lower classes of tantra the practice of taking desire as the path, and through that you generate the bliss from observing or gazing and then smiling and holding hands. This is done in relation through visualized object. It is not an actual person but visualized object, for example, a goddess.
Do we need to amass merit for three countless eons in the lower tantras?
Again one says: It follows that the paths of the three lower classes of tantra produce enlightenment without relying on accumulating merit and wisdom for three countless eons because these three are distinguished as quicker paths than the Perfection Vehicle.
Reply: That is not logically necessary because although the three lower classes of tantra are nominally quicker paths than the Perfection Vehicle, they are not said to enable enlightenment in a single lifetime or forego the need to accumulate merit and wisdom for countless eons.
Khen Rinpoche:  So what are they saying? What is the qualm? What is the answer?
The question: In order to achieve enlightenment in the 3 lower classes of tantra do you need to accumulate collections for 3 countless eons or not? 
Khen Rinpoche: Text is asking that. So what are you going to say? What is text trying to say?
By seeing what you see in front of you, is enlightenment possible in the 3 lower classes of tantra without depending on accumulating the collections for the 3 countless eons? 
Khen Rinpoche:  What text saying?
(Response from student inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: What is author saying? I am asking everyone. I am not asking one person.. What is the text saying? Possible or not possible? When you read the text, you get some idea? What is the text saying? You understand it is possible or not possible? What is it saying in the text?
Student: (inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: What does the text is saying? My question is that. When you read the text, the text saying that? So I am asking: In 3 lower classes of tantra, in order to get enlighten, whether you need 3 countless practice or not? Text is saying what? Yes or no?
(Response from student inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know how you read the text. The text is not saying that. I just want to know how you read the text. How you read the text? The point is that.
Student 1: It says that ‘they are not said to enable enlightenment in a single lifetime or forgo the need to accumulate merit and wisdom of countless eons’. That means they have to accumulate merit and wisdom for countless eons.
Khen Rinpoche: So text saying that? 
The author is saying that although in the 3 lower classes of tantra the progress towards enlightenment is faster than the Perfection Vehicle, but it is also not contradictory to say that such an enlightenment in the lower classes of tantra must depend on accumulating the collections for 3 countless eons. 
The author is saying just because the path of the 3 lower classes of tantra is quicker in achieving enlightenment than the Perfection Vehicle, this does not entail the contradiction that to achieve enlightenment in the 3 lower classes of tantra, one must depend on the accumulating the collections for 3 countless eons.
Khen Rinpoche: The text is saying that. 
The author says there is no pervasion.
Reply: That is not logically necessary because although the three lower classes of tantra are nominally quicker paths than the Perfection Vehicle, they are not said to enable enlightenment in a single lifetime or forego the need to accumulate merit and wisdom for countless eons.
The author states that in the 3 lower classes of tantra it is not said to enable enlightenment in a single lifetime. 
Then this leads to the question: Does enlightenment in one life exist in the lower classes of tantra? 
You have to remember what was said in the earlier section: that in the lower classes of tantra you will achieve the common siddhis such as the siddhi of immortality. With a long life then you achieve enlightenment. 
In the action and performance tantra sections we saw that you achieve siddhi of immortality or the life knowledge bearer that you live for many eons and through that you achieve enlightenment. There is enlightenment in one lifetime, isn’t it?
Student 2: The siddhis are achieved after one has culminated the concentration bestowing liberation of the sound. Which means that before that that yogi if it is one lifetime from entering the path to achieving concentration bestowing liberation of the  sound is also within that one body and within one life. So that means…
KR: One life, you can say that.
Student 1: So that means from entering the path to that point, he has not achieved the life knowledge bearer of longevity. If that is the case, then he must achieve the concentration bestowing liberation of sound or at least achieve the siddhis quickly within that life. 
KR: Within that life mean…?
Student 2: That means from entering the path to achieving the siddhis within that life he must do so quickly before dying because he has not achieved the knowledge bearer of longevity. 
Khen Rinpoche: Before he goes into training, he has to do that. Or else he dies quickly. Before entering the path he must practice quickly then he dies how. 
Student 2; I don’t get this.
Khen Rinpoche: Before entering the path he must achieve the siddhis, otherwise he dies quickly. I am just saying that.
Student 2: My understanding is that achieving enlightenment within one lifetime is at the point of entering the path. Start counting from there.
Khen Rinpoche: Not necessary. 
Student 2: How do we start counting the 3 countless eons then? To achieve enlightenment for the 3 lower classes of tantra is normally taking 3 countless great eons. What exact figure is that I am not very sure?
Khen Rinpoche: Basically you can say one achieve enlightenment with the basis that one has achieved the Path of Preparation onward. We start basically from the Path of Preparation.
Student 2: Not from entering the path? 
Khen Rinpoche: No. Not necessary. I don’t know. It can be debated. 
If you look at the author’s reply to this particular qualm, he is saying in the 3 lower classes of tantra there is no enlightenment in one lifetime and the enlightenment in the 3 lower classes of tantra is dependent on accumulating collections for countless eons. 
Mantric Stages states:
The feature of highest yoga tantra is that it quickly produces enlightenment without relying on accumulating merit and wisdom for countless eons. Disciples of the three lower classes of tantra rely on entering the two stages of highest yoga tantra to obtain that feature, since it cannot be obtained by their path alone. Do not assume that the speed of mantra is characterized only by attaining enlightenment in one life in this age of conflict or attaining enlightenment without relying on accumulating merit and wisdom for countless eons.
Is enlightenment possible in one life and one body?
And:
You do not accomplish buddhahood in this life by merely practicing the paths of the three lower classes, for they are not superior to the generation stage of the unique, highest path of mantra.
If somebody asks you: In fact actually there is no enlightenment in one lifetime in the 3 lower classes of tantra.’ How are you going to respond? 
This is what the author says. 
Khen Rinpoche: First you must guess. Then I give answer it makes sense. First you must get what my question is. What are you going to say?
(Response from student inaudible)
Basically you answer like this: It is said that achieving enlightenment in one life in this age of conflict is only a feature of Highest Yoga Tantra. If you take the earlier statement by the author where he said the 3 lower classes of tantra are not said to enable enlightenment in one single lifetime, then you can argue that the single lifetime here refers to one brief lifetime of the degenerate age. Then you have no problem. 
You need to look at the quotation that he cited on Mantric Stages: 
Do not assume that the speed of mantra is characterized only by attaining enlightenment in one life in this age of conflict or attaining enlightenment without relying on accumulating merit and wisdom for countless eons.
According to the respective assertions and presentation of their own path, the 3 lower classes of tantra said that the enlightenment is possible in their system. Whether this is true or not is a different matter. They respectively assert that enlightenment is possible and one’s does it in one lifetime on the basis of achieving the siddhis of immortality.
In the 3 lower classes of tantra the enlightenment got to be achieved by depending on accumulating the collections for the three countless eons? Yes! 
While that is the case, that need not to be done over many lifetimes but rather on the basis of achieving the siddhis of immortality one can live for long period of time and you achieve enlightenment in that lifetime.
Khen Rinpoche: That shows that the answer is all that. Then two sentences then all finish. 
Student 3: According to the assertion, let say the yogi achieve the life knowledge bearer of immortality on the basis of human support. And within that human support he goes on to achieve enlightenment. But that takes three countless great eons while on planet earth. But planet earth cannot survive because there will be the age of destruction.
Khen Rinpoche: Why?
Student 3: According to the Buddhist cosmology there is the age of destruction. So planet earth with all the human support on it cannot survive the eon of destruction, how do they survive the three countless great eon in one human body?
Khen Rinpoche: Somebody come and answer. Come.
(Response from student inaudible)
In the Perfection Vehicle, the body of the bodhisattva on the Path of Preparation is true suffering. It is possible to have a human being who has achieved the supreme mundane quality of the Path of Preparation who then goes on to achieve the Path of Seeing in the same body. When you achieve the Path of Seeing, you gain a special mind, and your body transform into the mental body. This comes down to whether this mental body needs to abide in an environment that we are so used to.
Khen Rinpoche: You understand what I am saying? One way is like that. Can think that way.
Student 3: So that is the explanation of one life and two bodies: achieving enlightenment within one lifetime on the basis of two bodies. Human support and after you have achieved the arya path then you somehow transform into a mental body and leaving the human support behind and go somewhere.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, the answer is something like that.
According to the sutric system, when you achieve the mental body you undergo the inconceivable transference of death.  In the sutra path, you have true suffering when you achieve the Path of Seeing you have the mental body. 
Are they two different bodies? Yes. 
Is it one life? 
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? One life different bodies or same body one life. When he has achieved the Path of Seeing he doesn’t have to die. So I am saying that within meditation he achieves Path of Seeing and his body has changed. He became sixteen years old before that he is eighty years old.  What do you think - same body or different body?
One is true suffering. One is not true suffering. So one is uncontaminated. 
Khen Rinpoche: So what do you think? Different body? If you are saying different body, then what I am saying is okay. Different body one life is okay.
In sutra, after you have achieved the mental body in the Path of Seeing, enlightenment is not achieved in their lifetime because they undergo the inconceivable transference of death on the Path of Seeing.
On the Path of Seeing, basically one achieved the superior path and one achieves the mental body. If you are talking about sutra, the mental body is subject to inconceivable transference of death which is something that is included within the twelve links of dependent origination which belongs to the knowledge obscuration. The mental body is a product of the levels of the predisposition of ignorance and uncontaminated karma.
In the 3 lower classes of tantra, you achieve the siddhi of immortality. Within that one long life, then you achieve enlightenment. That long life is not subject to the inconceivable transference of death. I remember seeing somewhere that there is enlightenment in one life but not in one body in the three lower classes of tantra. But you have to remember that one of the features of achieving enlightenment in the three lower classes of tantra is similar in manner to achieving enlightenment in the Perfection Vehicle. This means you have to assert that in the three lower classes of tantra, the place where you newly achieved enlightenment is Akanistha. 
We have to think about this: In the three lower classes of tantra, after achieving the mental body, does the individual goes to Akanistha? In that life does he achieve enlightenment or not?
So you put everything together, you have to say there is enlightenment in one lifetime in the three lower classes of tantra but not enlightenment in one body. Although there is enlightenment in one lifetime in the three lower classes of tantra but there is no enlightenment in one brief lifetime of the degenerated age.
Student 4: I remembered one student did ask question about achieving enlightenment. She was asking whether was it before or after entering the path for those who achieve enlightenment within 6 to 13 lifetimes after keeping the vows purely then dying. Khen Rinpoche reply was is better to say before entering the path.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah.
Student 4:  I got the idea that means when you enter the path, you don’t need to take 6 to 13 lifetimes to achieve enlightenment. You only take one. So for me the conclusion is that the time it take to achieve enlightenment within one lifetime starts upon entering the path and not from the Path of Preparation onwards. That was how I concluded.
Ven Gyurme:  There is no tantric vow in the 3 lower classes of tantra in the first place
Student 4: Let’s take yoga tantra
Ven Gyurme:    You have to take yoga (tantra)
Student 4: The point is to answer how you can achieve enlightenment within the 6 to 13 lifetime. When does it start? That was the reply: before entering the path.
Primarily the context here is that in the Highest Yoga Tantra, we are talking about tantric vows. Yoga tantra maybe possible. Let’s say we are talking mainly from the point of Highest Yoga Tantra. They said that once you have received the vows, from then on it is about 7 or 14 lifetimes. The point is, from the time you take the vows. It doesn’t say from the time that you enter the path. 
They said that after you have received the vows and keep the vows and samaya purely then within that stipulated time, you will achieve enlightenment; which means you don’t have to start counting only after entering the path.
Whether or not such is said for action tantra or not, that is something we can think about. If we say yes, it is possible even in the action tantra as you generate the bodhicitta that is spoken of in the action tantra. With that bodhicitta you enter the action tantra path. Prior to that you already taken the bodhisattva vows, and received the bodhisattva vows.  Then you argued that “You keep the bodhisattva vows purely and then one can achieve enlightenment in whatever lifetimes”. If we say that that is their own system, they can say whatever they like.
Whatever is asserted by the individual system is not really the reality but they do make their own presentation. It is not clear, but let’s say they say “According to the action tantra path, you take the bodhisattva vows purely and within a certain amount of lifetime, you can actually achieve enlightenment”. Will that be anything wrong?
[Bp1: It is very clear that there is no way one can achieve enlightenment without entering into Highest Yoga Tantra. It is mentioned in the text. The state of enlightenment is characterised by the body and mind of the Buddha which are one entity at the time of the result. In order to achieve such a result, at the time of the path, the cause to achieve the result must be an inseparable union of the two causes that will lead to the attainment of such a state, i.e., to achieve the truth body and the form body as one entity at the time of the result. 
The three lower classes of tantra posit the cause for the attainment of that union of method and wisdom as the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. This is the cause to achieve enlightenment. This does not exist in the Paramitayana path. When the three lower classes of tantra look at the Paramitayana path, they said that that path does not have a real cause for achieving this state of enlightenment which is the union of the two bodies. Therefore the Paramitayana path is less powerful and why the tantric path is superior to Paramitayana path. We have to analyse however whether the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity is the substantial cause for the achievement of those two bodies. 
According to the view of Highest Yoga Tantra, the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity explained in the three lower classes of tantra is not the cause for achieving the Buddha’s body and mind because this is a coarse mind and therefore it can never act as the cause for the Buddha’s body and mind. 
We have to relate this to the death process. When we die, it is the subtle mind that moves to the next life because the coarse mind will already be dissolved during the death process. At the end it is only the subtle mind that moves from life to life and it is this mind that moves toward enlightenment. The coarse mind can never move to enlightenment. 
This subtlest mind of clear light is only taught in Highest Yoga Tantra. It is not taught in the Paramitayana and the three lower classes of tantra. This is one of the reasons why one must enter into the path of Highest Yoga Tantra to achieve enlightenment.]
Grounds and Paths
How to posit the five paths and ten grounds for the three lower classes of tantra
This has three parts:
1. How to posit the five paths and ten grounds of action tantra
2. How to posit the five paths and ten grounds of performance tantra
3. How to posit the five paths and ten grounds of yoga tantra
How to posit the five paths and ten grounds of action tantra
The path of accumulation
First, the path of accumulation of action tantra is “the path that begins from obtaining a fully qualified initiation and producing the uncontrived pledge to attain buddhahood through action tantra. It extends up to but not including obtaining the insight realizing emptiness derived from meditating on the absorption bestowing freedom at the limit of sound.”
So think of the words ‘derived from meditating on’.
We read this in the next class.
The implication as it does make a difference to where the boundary is between the yoga with signs and the yoga without signs. Would the concentration bestowing liberation and end of sound be necessary becomes a yoga without signs or not? 
[BP1:
Question: What is the difference between the mind of non-dual profundity and clarity realising emptiness and the fundamental innate mind of clear light realising emptiness? 
Answer: One is a coarse mind, the other a subtle mind. The mind that is used to realise emptiness in the lower classes of tantra is necessarily a coarse mind. 
Question: What is then the purpose of generating bliss in the three lower classes of tantra? 
Answer: We can answer that question in many ways. We can say it is: 
• for the purpose of realising emptiness, 
• for the purpose of generating the Yoga with Signs, and 
• for the purpose of generating both the Yogas with Signs and without Signs. 
If we say that in the three lower classes of tantra, through the practice of taking desire into the path we generate bliss and that bliss realising emptiness is posited to be the non-dual yoga of profundity and clarity, what are you going to say? 
We must ascertain the difference between sutra and tantra. In sutra, there is no practice of taking desire into the path, but in tantra, there is such a practice even in the lower classes of tantra. When you take desire into the path, you generate bliss and then that bliss realises emptiness. In terms of subtlety, is there any difference between that blissful mind realising emptiness and the mind that realises emptiness in the Paramitayana? It is not clear in the text but this is something that we can think about. 
The blissful mind that realises emptiness in the lower classes of tantra is a coarse mind. The mind that realises emptiness in the Paramitayana is also a coarse mind. When we compare these two coarse minds, is one less coarse than the other? 
It is clear that there is a difference in the power of the mind realising emptiness in the Paramitayana and the mind realising emptiness in the lower classes of tantra. We have to say that the mind that realises emptiness in the lower classes of tantra is more powerful than the mind that realises emptiness in the Paramitayana. But why is this so? 
Geshe-la: You say that it is due to deity yoga but what makes deity yoga more powerful?
101]