Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L29.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:17.561258
================================================================================

As we have seen in the last lesson, if one is asked: Is there the practice of taking desire as the path in the 3 lower classes of tantra? Then we say yes. 
If that is the case, then the practice of taking desire as the path acts as a condition to induce bliss, and the bliss is used to ascertain emptiness. 
If one is asked: Is there a blissful consciousness that realizes emptiness in the 3 lower classes of tantra? Then you probably have to say yes.
Is the mind of great bliss realizing emptiness responsible for progression through the paths and grounds in the 3 lower classes of tantra? Then the answer will probably be no. 
What essentially is the mode of progression on the paths and grounds in the 3 lower classes of tantra? How does one proceed from path to path and ground to ground? 
Is it due to the bliss realizing emptiness? No. 
What is it due to? Essentially it is due to achieving the common siddhis. On the basis of that, then one progresses on the paths and grounds in the 3 lower classes of tantra. 
This is essentially a summary of the points that we have looked at.
Is there achievement of enlightenment in the 3 lower classes of tantra in dependence on accumulating the collections for many eons? Then the answer is yes. It is similar to the Perfection Vehicle in that you need to depend on the accumulation of the collections for very long period of time in order to achieve enlightenment. If that is the case, how is the path of the 3 lower classes of tantra is quicker than Perfection Vehicle? What are you going to answer?
Khen Rinpoche: That is question.
Qualm: To achieve enlightenment in the 3 lower classes of tantra, one needs to depend on accumulating the collections for many countless eons; up to three countless great eons, then what is the difference between the 3 lower class of tantra and the Perfection Vehicle? You take the same amount of time to achieve enlightenment, isn’t it? Then how is tantra a quicker path?
Khen Rinpoche: What are you going to say? 
Student 1: Last time one student mentioned that the accumulation of merit is not dependent on time. It is dependent on the amount of merits equivalent to the three countless great eons. Maybe in sutric vehicle, you literally have to collect the three countless great eons. As for the 3 lower classes of tantra, due to the blessing of the bodhisattvas and the buddhas and the common siddhis, you can accumulate much more than a bodhisattva in a sutric path with the same amount of time. 
Khen Rinpoche: Can you make short? Why those 3 lower classes of tantra is faster than sutra? 
Student 1: Due to the blessing of the bodhisattvas and the buddhas and the common siddhis achieved in the 3 lower classes of tantra, the mind is more powerful, therefore within shorter period of time, greater merit is accumulated. 
Khen Rinpoche: You mean the time is shorter?
Student 1: Yes, time taken is shorter. 
If that is the case, is enlightenment in Highest Yoga Tantra in dependence on accumulating the collections for three countless eons?
Since you say you can accumulate the merits in a shorter period of time, basically you say you don’t need to depend on accumulating merit for such a long period of time. If that is the case, do you need to depend on accumulating the collection for three countless eons in Highest Yoga Tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: Why?
To accumulate the collections of the three countless eons does not necessitate having to do that over a period of three countless. If we say in Highest Yoga Tantra the achievement of enlightenment is dependent on accumulating the collections of the three eons, then what problem would there be?
Khen Rinpoche: You getting what I’m saying? What are you going to say?
Student 2: Then there is no quick path to enlightenment. To depend on three countless great eons, and can’t achieve enlightenment in one lifetime.
What is your answer to the question about the speed of enlightenment in the 3 lower classes of tantra? If you need to accumulate the collections of the three countless eons in the 3 lower classes of tantra, then what is the difference between practising the three lower classes of tantra and the Perfection Vehicle? Essentially they are doing the same thing, right?
The path of the 3 lower classes of tantra is not a quick path because to achieve enlightenment in the 3 lower classes of tantra, you need to accumulate the collections of the three countless eons.
Student 2:  Then you have to say that tantra is supposed to present a faster method because it is a more subtle system and focuses on how to achieve the two bodies by depending on clear appearance and divine pride. 
Khen Rinpoche: That is correct but how that becomes faster? The time is exactly same. 
Student 3:  I think for tantra, regardless of which classes of tantra, the main practice is still the yoga of profundity and clarity. Because relying on this method, no matter in which classes of tantra, the practitioner has to meditate on emptiness. Although both sutric path and tantra path have to accumulate the three countless eons of merit, due to the difference in method, I think tantra will be faster. 
Khen Rinpoche:  We say tantra is faster because of that. Again I’m asking, in tantra, do you need to accumulate three countless eons of merit to get enlightened or not?
Student 3: Yes. The amount of merit but not…
Khen Rinpoche: Amount number of merit same but time is not same. 
Student 3: I think the time is not same. 
Khen Rinpoche: Because?
Student 3: Because of the practice of the yoga of profundity and clarity.
Khen Rinpoche:  That is the same thing as what the earlier student is saying. After that I’m asked the next question: For Highest Yoga Tantra, in order to get enlighten, do you need to create three countless eons of merit or not?
Student 3: I think in terms of amount of merit is yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: So yes? By logic you have to say yes. So you think have to say that or not? End of the day, in order to get enlighten even in Highest Yoga Tantra, you need to create three countless eons of merit. You have to say that or not? Why not?
Student 4: I’m actually citing from the root text. The Mantric Stages states:
The feature of highest yoga tantra is that it quickly produces enlightenment without relying on accumulating merit and wisdom for countless eons. Disciples of the three lower classes of tantra rely on entering the two stages of highest yoga tantra to obtain that feature, since it cannot be obtained by their path alone. Do not assume that the speed of mantra is characterized only by attaining enlightenment in one life in this age of conflict or attaining enlightenment without relying on accumulating merit and wisdom for countless eons.
So it is the words from Je Rinpoche in his Mantric Stages which says: The feature of highest yoga tantra is that it quickly produces enlightenment without relying on accumulating merit and wisdom for countless eons. 
Here it is saying that it is the feature of Highest Yoga Tantra only to be able to achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime in this degenerate age without needing such a long period of time such as the three great countless eons to achieve enlightenment.
There is a big difference between the 3 lower classes of tantra and Highest Yoga Tantra  in that in the 3 lower classes of tantra, one needs to stay for a very long period of time over many eons in order to accumulate the collections whereas in Highest Yoga Tantra it is possible to achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime of this degenerate age.
So in the 3 lower classes of tantra, it is said that by achieving the common siddhis such as the siddhis of great mortality known as the life knowledge bearer, one is able to stay for a very long period of time.  During that time, you accumulate the collections and then achieve enlightenment. So it is said that you abide for a long period of time. Whether the long period of time is as long as the three countless great eons or not, that is something to think about. The point here is that it becomes complicated when it is said that in the 3 lower classes of tantra, you need to achieve enlightenment by accumulating the collections of the three countless eons.
In the 3 lower classes of tantra, when we think about it, probably you can say that one can achieve enlightenment in one lifetime. As to whether enlightenment can be achieved in one body in the three lower classes of tantra or not, it is something to think about. 
Why do we have to think about this? Because it is said that the manner of achieving enlightenment newly in the 3 lower classes of tantra is similar to the Perfection Vehicle. This means that the basis for achieving enlightenment is the support of Akanishta.
Student 5: Can non-Buddhist with meditation and calm abiding achieve common siddhis such as flying, walking fast? How does killing people create more merits, for example, Milarepa must have achieved some kind of concentration to send out hailstorm to kill a lot of people.  
Khen Rinpoche: Why? Because he killed the people?
Student 5: That happened even before he practise Buddhist tantra i.e. before he entered Buddhism he already has a certain powers. This common siddhis is something that even a non-Buddhist can do, right? 
Also when it talks about in dependence on the power of attaining many common siddhis, this part about being directly cared for and blessed by buddhas and great bodhisattvas, in what way is it different between lower tantra and sutric school?
It is said that all of these happened after entering the tantric path. After entering the tantric path, and by depending on the concentration with and without repetition, then one elicit clear appearance and divine pride to the point that when one sees the front generation, one sees the front generation directly and clearly. One has a direct vision of buddhas and bodhisattvas and receive instructions from them. It is on this basis that one progress on the paths.
It is taught in the Perfection Vehicle that when one achieves the great Path of Accumulation, i.e. one achieve the meditative stabilization of the stream of doctrine, the bodhisattva can receives teachings from holy objects. It is also mentioned in the Stages of the Path literature that lifespan cannot be extended, i.e. one cannot add on to the lifespan as it is fixed. Lengthening the life by adding time to the lifespan is not mentioned in the Perfection Vehicle. However this is taught in tantra. In the case of the 3 lower classes of tantra, by depending on the concentration with and without repetition, then one goes on to achieve the siddhis such as the siddhis of immortality (life knowledge bearer) but as to how does this siddhis prolong life is another thing. 
The teachings say that by depending on the concentration with and without repetition, it will come a point that one is able to directly perceive the buddhas and bodhisattvas in the space in front as clearly as in the way that one meditates. With that, one progress quickly on the path. 
Student 6: In sutra, one achieves enlightenment within one lifetime at the end of a continuum of sentient being in the meditative stabilization of vajra light meditative stabilization. In the 3 lower classes of tantra, one achieves enlightenment within one lifetime after achieving the siddhis of immortality. Is there still any purpose of saying achieving enlightenment in one lifetime in 3 lower classes of tantra? Is there any meaning to this? Because in sutra, you can say the same thing, in three lower classes of tantra, you also can say. 
Khen Rinpoche: Sutra is same thing?
Student 6: You can achieve enlightenment within one lifetime at the end of the continuum..…
Now we have to look at the measure of one lifetime. In Highest Yoga Tantra, one achieves enlightenment in the same support as the one on the basis of which one receives the initiation. 
In the teaching it is commonly said that there is enlightenment in lifetime in the 3 lower classes of tantra. How is that achieved? It is on the basis of a very long life after having achieved the siddhis of immortality. What we need to think about is that in the 3 lower classes of tantra, is enlightenment possible in the lifetime during which one receives the initiation? That is something to think about. 
Can one conceive of the situation whereby the individual receives the initiation into the 3 lower classes of tantra and then in that lifetime, one achieves the Path of Preparation? Once one has achieved the Path of Preparation, then it is possible to conceive that the person achieves the siddhis of immortality. If you were to accept that, which means he is going to achieve enlightenment that lifetime, isn’t it? 
Then in this situation, this individual needs to accumulate the collections of the three countless eons or not? You have to say yes.
Does this individual needs to abide for three countless eons in order to accumulate those collections?  Not necessarily. Then you are going to have a problem.  
So there is enlightenment in one life time in the 3 lower classes of tantra. Is that the same as Highest Yoga Tantra? The answer is no. 
So in the 3 lower classes of tantra, there is no enlightenment in one brief life time of this degenerated age. But rather, it is done over a very long life after having achieved the siddhi of immortality. 
If you go back to the Perfection Vehicle, is there enlightenment in one life time or not? You have to decisively say no.
In the Perfection Vehicle, after entering the path, you don’t achieve enlightenment in the same life time. Then there is no talk of achieving the siddhi of immortality. If that is the case, then it is clear that there is no enlightenment in one life time in the Perfection Vehicle. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay? Clear? I don’t know. Also I don’t have very clear answer. In the text also there is no clear answer. Sometimes good to discuss so when some ideas come we can compare. 
Student 6: Taking the position that the collection of merit over three countless great eons literally take that actual period of time and not a shorter time with a powerful accumulation of merit, then for a person who achieve the siddhi of immortality, within that life time after taking initiation, entering the 3 lower classes of tantric path, that means the conclusion is that from entering the path to achieving the Path of Preparation is within one life time. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah.
Student 6: So that means the accumulation of collections of three countless great eons starts from Path of Preparation all the way to enlightenment. Unlike what we see in the chart in the Perfection Vehicle, where the Path of Accumulation is half of one countless great eon, for the 3 lower classes of tantra, the Path of Accumulation is within one life time. This is the conclusion. The Path of Accumulation for three lower classes of tantra takes only less than one life time. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, within one life time. 
Student 6: Within one life time. Is that the conclusion? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah. 
Student 6: From then on, he will have that long life over three countless great eons, from the Path of Preparation onwards until enlightenment and have to collect three countless great eons of merit. 
Ven Gyurme: You are saying the accumulation of merit doesn’t happen on the Path of Accumulation? 
Student 6: Of course it is very very short. Because we are talking about the collection of three countless great eons.
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, accumulating the collections of the three countless eons do not necessarily translate into having to do that over a long period of time, right? 
Student 6: Because the collection of merit over the Path of Accumulation is within the one life time. That is the conclusion as well. 
Khen Rinpoche: Then? 
Student 6: That means you can accumulate the three countless great eons of merit within a much shorter period of time but you accumulate the same amount of merit equivalent to three countless great eons loads of merit. I don’t know how to describe it.
Khen Rinpoche: What do you mean?
Student 6: There are two differences between the times that you spend to collect the equivalent of that merit that you accumulate with a shorter time. Both are the same in the sense of having accumulate three countless great eons of merit. One is actually taking that exact period of time and another possibility is it takes much shorter. Since the Path of Accumulation for 3 lower classes of tantra is within one life time, then can we say the time needed to accumulate the three countless great eons of merit is at least by half a countless great eon if you go by sutra.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t understand. Think about it. I didn’t get exactly. 
Grounds and Paths
How to posit the five paths and ten grounds for the three lower classes of tantra
This has three parts:
1. How to posit the five paths and ten grounds of action tantra
2. How to posit the five paths and ten grounds of performance tantra
3. How to posit the five paths and ten grounds of yoga tantra
How to posit the five paths and ten grounds of action tantra
The path of accumulation
First, the path of accumulation of action tantra is “the path that begins from obtaining a fully qualified initiation and producing the uncontrived pledge to attain buddhahood through action tantra. It extends up to but not including obtaining the insight realizing emptiness derived from meditating on the absorption bestowing freedom at the limit of sound.”
After obtaining a pure initiation of action tantra, in this case one enters into tantra, then through practice, then come the day one produces the uncontrived thought thinking “I will achieve enlightenment by depending on action tantra”. When one produces this uncontrived bodhicitta (the special bodhicitta of tantra that we talked about in the earlier lessons) one enters the Path of Accumulation of action tantra. 
When one produces the uncontrived thought to achieve enlightenment by depending on action tantra (this special bodhicitta of action tantra), one enters into the Path of Accumulation of action tantra; one enters the tantric path. 
The entry into the tantric path, entry into the path of action tantra, in this context here is producing this uncontrived bodhicitta. 
“Uncontrived” means without effort - just by bringing it to mind, the realization manifest without depending on any effort. Without much effort, it is just through thinking. 
Without a stable mind, can that be possible or not? That is something to think about. Without calm-abiding, is it possible to have an uncontrived bodhicitta manifesting? 
Whether calm-abiding is a necessary pre-requisite for entering the tantric path or not is something that we can think about. 
“It extends up to but not including obtaining the special insight realizing emptiness derived from meditating on the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound” - this seems to be saying the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound exists on the Path of Accumulation.
Khen Rinpoche: It is saying that or not? When you read that sentence, you understand that?
In the path of action tantra, we talk about the concentration with and without repetition. Under the concentration without repetition, there are three
Concentration abiding in fire, 
Concentration abiding in sound,
Concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound.
It is said that calm-abiding is achieved during the concentration abiding in sound. 
I think that it would be ok to say that after achieving calm-abiding in action tantra, there could also be the practice of improving one’s dexterity in concentration or improving one’s skill in concentration. It is kind like what it is done in yoga tantra as there is a practice of improving the dexterity or the skill in concentration. I would think that there is also the practice involving in increasing the dexterity or the skill in concentration in action tantra after achieving calm-abiding for the purpose of special insight. 
After that one achieve special insight focusing on emptiness.
Based on the definition here on the Path of Accumulation, there are two things to think about: 
1) Is the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound necessarily yoga without signs? 
2) Does the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound exists on the Path of Accumulation or not?
These are two questions to think about.  With regards to the second question, by looking at the definition of the Path of Accumulation given here, the answer seems to be yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, if you get that idea okay. You don’t get doesn’t matter. 
[BP1: If we look at Action Tantra, how does one initially enter the path of Action Tantra? 
In the beginning, one needs to receive the pure empowerment in Action Tantra. When one develops the uncontrived thought, “I will achieve enlightenment by depending on the path of Action Tantra,” one enters the path of Action Tantra. You have to know the boundary of when you enter the path of Action Tantra. When you have the uncontrived mind generation (bodhicitta) specific to Action Tantra that is when you enter the path of Action Tantra. From the time you enter the path of Action Tantra up to just prior to the attainment of the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound, that is the Action Tantra Path of Accumulation.]
The path of preparation
The path of preparation of action tantra is “the path that extends from that insight up to but not including the perceptual realization of emptiness due to cultivating that absorption.” 
[Absorption is translated as concentration]
Though there is no debate here, it is quite clear that when one achieves special insight focusing on emptiness, one achieves the yoga without signs. When the yoga without signs is achieved, one achieves the Path of Preparation. The Path of Preparation extends to the point just before the direct perception of emptiness. 
The path of seeing
The path of seeing of action tantra is “the path that extends from the perceptual comprehension of emptiness through that absorption up to but not including the generation of the direct antidote to the coarsest of the coarse afflictive objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation.”
The path of meditation 
The path of meditation of action tantra is “the path that extends from the absorption [bestowing freedom] at the limit of sound that is the direct antidote to the coarsest of the coarse afflictive objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation up to the point preceding enlightenment attained through the path of action tantra.”
The path of no-more learning
The path of no-more learning of action tantra is the path establishing buddhahood through this tantric path.
[BP1: The boundary of the Action Tantra Path of Preparation starts from the attainment of the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound up to just before the attainment of the direct realisation of emptiness. 
Question: By depending on the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound, one achieves the union of calm abiding and special insight. If that is the case, then the way you posit the Path of Accumulation should be different. 
Answer: The concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound is the union of calm abiding and special insight which is when you achieve the Path of Preparation. Prior to actualising the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound, the union of calm abiding and special insight has not yet been achieved. 
The preparation starts when you are meditating on calm abiding, that is, before achieving calm abiding. The purpose of achieving calm abiding is to actualise special insight. You seem to be asking whether there is a gap between calm abiding and special insight. If there is a gap between these two, then we have to say that there is a gap between the Path of Accumulation and the Path of Preparation. 
When you achieve the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound which is the union of calm abiding and special insight, you have already achieved calm abiding. But you need some time to achieve special insight. So that is the gap. That whole period of time, which is the concentration abiding in sound, is the Path of Accumulation. 
The Action Tantra Path of Seeing is the path (ranging) from the perceptual comprehension of emptiness through that absorption, up to (but not including) the generation of the direct antidote to the great of the great afflictive meditation abandonment. 
The Action Tantra Path of Meditation is the path (ranging) from the absorption at the limit of sound, which is the direct antidote to the great of the great afflictive meditation abandonment, up to the point preceding the enlightenment attained through the path of Action Tantra.]
What it says about the Path of Seeing is kind of similar to what we know in the Perfection Vehicle in that in the Path of Seeing, after the direct realization of emptiness is generated, that acts as antidote to the Path of Seeing abandonments because the definition says: Up to but not including generation of the direct antidote to the coarsest of the coarse afflictive objects to be abandoned by the Path of Meditation”. 
[Not read in class:
Positing the paths of action tantra in ten grounds
The first ground is the path of seeing. The second ground exists once you attain the direct antidote to the coarsest of the coarse afflictive objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation. The third ground exists once you attain the direct antidote to the moderately coarse afflictions. 
The fourth ground exists once you attain the direct antidote to the subtlest of the coarse afflictions.
The fifth, sixth, and seventh grounds are established respectively by the attainment of the direct antidotes to the three levels of medium affliction. The eighth ground is established by the simultaneous attainment of the direct antidotes to all three levels of subtle affliction. You also abandon the coarsest knowledge obscurations on the eighth ground.
The ninth ground is established by the attainment of the direct antidote to the intermediate level of knowledge obscurations. The tenth ground is established by the attainment of the direct antidote to the subtle level of knowledge obscurations. The direct antidote to the subtlest-subtle level of knowledge obscurations is posited as the pristine wisdom of the final continuum and so on.
I don’t think we need to go through everything. What you see here is a bit different from what we are used to because it is a different college assertion. According to this text:
The 1st ground exists only at the Path of Seeing. 
The 2nd ground starts with generating the uninterrupted path which is the direct antidote to the coarsest of the coarse Path of Meditation abandonments. The 2nd ground starts only on the Path of Meditation. 
If you follow this assertion here and extend the reasoning to account for how the afflictions are abandoned, when are the three small afflictive obscurations abandoned? 
It would be the uninterrupted path of the 8th ground. That means the uninterrupted path of the 8th ground acts as the direct antidote. 
According to this assertion in the root text, when the bodhisattva is at the beginning of the 8th ground, he still has not abandoned the afflictive obscurations because the uninterrupted path which is the direct antidote to the smallest of the afflictive obscurations is only generated on the 8th ground. This is different from what we are used to the Sera Je College’s assertion. According to our assertion, when you achieve the 8th ground, you enter the 8th ground via the path of release which is basically a state of abandonment of having abandoned all the afflictive obscurations.
All the differences come in because in Sera Je College’s assertion there is a part of the 1st ground which is a Path of Meditation. Basically, at the end of the 1st ground, there is an uninterrupted path which is the direct antidote to the 1st level of afflictive obscurations. That uninterrupted path does not belong to the Path of Seeing but it belongs to the Path of Meditation. 
According to this root text assertion, the 1st ground is solely Path of Seeing. That is why we have a different starting point. 
The reason why we have this assertion of Sera Je College is this: 
Gyaltsab Je mentioned in one of his commentary to the Prajnaparamita??? that in the Path of Seeing there are the 16 moments of knowledge and forbearance. As one needs to accumulate the collections over many eons on the 1st ground, therefore there is a part of the 1st ground that is Path of Meditation. This is said by Gyaltsab Je clearly in one of his writings. Based on that, we have this particular assertion that there is a part of the 1st ground that is the Path of Meditation.
Our college assertion is that when you achieved the 8th ground, you enter the 8th ground through the path of release (liberated path) of having abandoned all the afflictive obscurations. But according to this assertion, you enter the 8th ground with uninterrupted path which is a direct antidote to the smallest of the afflictive obscurations, which means you enter the 8th ground without having abandoned the afflictive obscurations. There is a statement in Je Rinpoche’s Stages of the Path which says that during the 8th ground, the afflictions are eliminated or exhausted. 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know whether you are getting something there. I’m not sure. Anyway, of course this one, because we must compare, why they said, why he said. 
In Je Rinpoche’s commentary on emptiness, which is called Illuminating the Intent, he said that the great and middling innate afflictive obscurations are abandoned from the 2nd to the 7th ground. When do you start abandoning the innate afflictive obscurations? Are they abandoned by the Path of Seeing or not? If they are not abandoned on the Path of Seeing, then when do you start the 2nd ground? Because of this, you posit the start of the Path of Meditation only from the 2nd ground. 
[BP1: This text explains that at the beginning of the eighth ground, the afflictive obstructions are not abandoned. This is different from the sutric paths and grounds where the afflictive obstructions are abandoned upon attainment of the eighth ground. This is an example of the difference in the assertions which happens because different scholars have different views regarding how one progresses along the paths and grounds. 
The reason for the different explanations is because it is unclear in the texts of the great Indian masters. There are no explicit explanations in the texts. For example, in Engaging in the Middle Way by Chandrakirti, it states that the afflictive obstructions are abandoned “from the eighth ground” but how are we to interpret this? We can interpret this to mean that the afflictive obstructions are abandoned upon attainment of the eighth ground but it can also mean that the afflictive obstructions are abandoned after one has achieved the eighth ground. 
Lama TsongKhapa also states in his Illuminating the Intent, which is a commentary on Chandrakirti’s text, that the big and medium of the path of meditation abandonments are abandoned from the second to the seventh grounds. Again, this statement does not explicitly mention when the afflictive obstructions are abandoned – are they abandoned at the beginning of the eighth ground or on the eighth ground? 
We should understand that there are different ways of explaining this topic. It is not that this scholar is right and that scholar is wrong. These scholars are all experts but this happens due to the lack of explicit explanations in the texts of the great Indian masters. 
According to this text, the grounds are attained by the uninterrupted paths. This is another point of difference from the sutric paths and grounds which states that only when one achieves the path of thorough release does one achieve that particular ground. In the sutric path, the second ground is achieved after one has achieved the path of thorough release of the second ground but here in the text, one achieves the second ground when one achieves the uninterrupted path of the second ground: “The second ground is posited from the attainment of the direct antidote to the great of the great afflictive meditation-abandonment.” 
We should compare some of these differences from what we have studied earlier in the sutric path. Whether or not you understand what is being said in this particular text depends on whether you have a good understanding of what we have covered earlier. You can then compare the differences between the two systems. 
“It is necessary to accept these assertions in accordance with the Sutra Consequence system because the method of abandoning both obscurations in the three lower classes of tantra is not explained in any source to be different from the Perfection Vehicle. Nor is that established by logic” means that the way of abandoning the obstructions to liberation and the obstructions to omniscience is the same in both the Perfection Vehicle and in the three lower classes of tantra.]
Student 7: Did you just now say something like the 1st ground, the Path of Seeing and the uninterrupted Path of Meditation is a great length of time?
Khen Rinpoche: No.
Student 7: No?
Khen Rinpoche: The point of that statement is that the 1st ground is not a short time. The 1st ground exists for a very long time. The 16 moments of knowledge and forbearance is part of the Path of Seeing. If that is the case, then you have to accumulate merits for a long time during the 1st ground. So on the 1st ground part of it has to be Path of Meditation, as cannot everything be on Path of Seeing.
Student 7: Yes, I understand but I think in another module, it was said that the Path of Seeing is very short, that is why it is the same body. It is the same basis for Path of Seeing. It will be the same basis for Path of Meditation. That was what I want to clarify.
Khen Rinpoche: Good. That qualm basically arisen because of the assertion that support for newly realizing the Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation has to be a desire realm support. 
One enters the Path of Seeing through the uninterrupted path. 
When the Path of Seeing abandonments are abandoned one achieves the path of release of the Path of Seeing. 
Then one enters into the subsequent attainment by accumulate the collections. 
Come the time when one generates the direct antidote to the innate afflictions one achieves the uninterrupted path of Path of Meditation.
In the past, we said that the support for newly generating the Path of Meditation has to be a desire realm support because the support for newly generating the Path of Seeing has to be a desire realm support. We say that there is a person who has achieved the Path of Seeing and who is in subsequent attainment.
Why that individual cannot be in the form realm? Can that individual who has achieved the subsequent attainment of the Path of Seeing get a form realm support or not? Can take rebirth in the form realm or not?
In the past, we said that because the time was so short, there is no opportunity to take rebirth. But here, Gyaltsab Je’s quotation seems to be saying that the 1st ground is very long. So, basically the person who is in subsequent attainment on the 1st ground will die or not? Can he take rebirth in the form realm or not?
If you say he won’t die then how are you going to account for him not dying? If we say that he will die then there is nothing to stop him to go to the form realm. 
If you say he can take rebirth in the form realm then you have no choice but to say that he will have to come back here again in order to newly generate the Path of Meditation, because he has not generate the Path of Meditation yet. So what is the point of going there in the first place?
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know. Anyway never mind. I think not easy. You must know how to play the chess, otherwise you will confuse. Anyway, never mind.
This must be asserted in accordance to the sutra system of the Prasangika school because the Buddha has not explained in any scriptural source that the method of abandoning both obscurations in the three lower classes of tantra is different from the Perfection Vehicle, and neither is that established by logic.    
Anyway, what you see in the root text here and with regards to the presentation of the paths and grounds is slightly different from what we are used to. If we stick with what we are used to then it is clear. There is just some slight differences. Otherwise, you have to know:
how are the Path of Seeing abandonments are abandoned, 
how are the Path of Meditation’s abandonments are abandoned 
how there are different ways of positing the numbers of uninterrupted path and so forth on the 8th ground and on the 10th  ground.
Khen Rinpoche: You remember or not?
There is one additional uninterrupted path on the pure ground. So where is it? On the 8th or the 10th ground?
(Student response inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: The 8th?
Ven Gyurme: That means the big is divided into coarse and subtle basically?
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, anyway, that one goes back.
[Not read in class:
The paths of accumulation of performance and yoga tantra
How to posit the five paths and ten grounds of performance tantra and yoga tantra.
The paths of accumulation of each of these two tantras are the paths extending from [first] producing the uncontrived pledge to attain enlightenment through either path up to but not including obtaining insight realizing emptiness due to meditating on the yoga without signs of either tantra.
In short, the manner of positing 5 paths and 10 grounds in Performance and Yoga Tantra is similar.
[BP1: Entry into the path is similar for both Performance and Yoga Tantras: 
• We enter into the path of Performance Tantra: 
o when we have received pure initiation and 
o when we develop the uncontrived bodhicitta with the thought, “I will achieve enlightenment by depending on the path of Performance Tantra.” 
• We enter into the path of Yoga Tantra: 
o when we have received pure initiation and 
o when we develop the uncontrived bodhicitta with the thought, “I will achieve enlightenment by depending on the path of Yoga Tantra.” 
This is when one enters the Path of Accumulation.]
[Not read in class:
The four remaining paths of performance and yoga tantra
The paths of preparation of each of these two tantras are the paths extending from the yoga without signs that is insight realizing emptiness of each tantra up to but not including the perceptual comprehension of emptiness. You can deduce the remaining paths by adapting the preceding definitions of similar type.]
Points of debate
Shared and exclusive tantric paths 
One says: Take the paths explained in the Perfection Vehicle—such as love, compassion, and bodhicitta—that exist in the mental continuum of someone on the path of accumulation of the lower tantras: it follows that they are paths of lower tantra because you [Ngawang Palden] assert this method of positing the five paths and the ten grounds of these tantras.
That is unacceptable because these are not paths of mantra —because they are not paths exclusive to mantra.
Reply: That is not logically necessary.
Khen Rinpoche: What does that means, no pervasion? Explain the meaning. What it means?
If it is the Path of Accumulation of action tantra, it is necessarily a tantric path.
If that is the case, the question here is: the love, compassion and bodhicitta in such a person a tantric path or not?
If that is the case, is the tantric path necessarily an unshared tantric path? Then the answer is no. Just because it is a tantric path doesn’t mean it is necessarily an unshared path. 
Are the love, compassion and bodhicitta in the continuum of someone on the action tantra Path of Accumulation shared Perfection Vehicle path or not? Then the answer is yes. 
Paths shared with the Perfection Vehicle
Again this scholar says: Taking that same subject, it follows that they are Perfection Vehicle paths because they are shared Perfection Vehicle paths.
Then the question again is: Are the love, compassion and bodhicitta in the continuum of such a person on the action tantra Path of Accumulation Perfection Vehicle path or not?  The author says: No, they are not Perfection Vehicle path.
Then somebody objects his answer by saying: It is a Perfection Vehicle Path because it is shared Perfection Vehicle Path. 
The author then again replies: No pervasion.
Reply: That is not logically necessary because pristine awareness comprehending the sixteen aspects of impermanence and so forth in the mental continuum of a bodhisattva is a shared intermediate-scope path but not an intermediate-scope path and this is similar 
[Pristine awareness is translated as exalted knower]
All the knowers, exalted knowers or the paths in the continuum of somebody who has achieved the action tantra Path of Accumulation are those paths tantric path or not? Answer is yes, they all tantric path.
Are love, compassion and bodhicitta in the continuum of such a person who has achieved the action tantra Path of Accumulation tantric path or not? The answer is decisively yes.
Is this Perfection Vehicle path or not? The answer is no, they are not Perfection Vehicle path.
The author is essentially saying that the tantric path and the Perfection Vehicle path are mutually exclusive; based on the text.
If we say that the love, compassion and bodhicitta in the continuum of someone who has achieved the Path of Accumulation of action tantra are tantric path and also Perfection Vehicle Path, what will be the problem?
Student 8: During the module on Ornament, if this realization of renunciation in the Mahayana bodhisattva is actually the Hinayana Path. By that, wouldn’t it we are saying that this love, compassion in the Path of Accumulation of action tantra is also the Perfection Vehicle path?
Khen Rinpoche: Based on some colleges’ assertion then we says that in the continuum of bodhisattva, there is also Hinayana Path. But there are people who do not agree with that.
Student 8: So, it is okay to actually says there are love, compassion in a person of the Path of Accumulation of the action tantra, the practitioner of the tantric path is a Perfection Vehicle path? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, you can say that. I am not sure whether it is exactly same or not. If you says that whether any problem there or not, I don’t know. I will think about. I don’t know. I am just saying the text saying is they are not the same but are different. I think I give some questions for the next Sunday class discussion questions because that time, there are people who say give the questions before 2 weeks. They must have some reasons to request. So, make sure you do something within 2 weeks. Think about the questions.
[BP1: Question: Why is the bodhicitta in the continuum of a practitioner on the Path of Accumulation of the lower tantras a tantric path? 
Answer: Bodhicitta exists in both the sutric and tantric paths. Here, the text says the bodhicitta in the continuum of a practitioner on the Path of Accumulation of the lower tantras is the path that is shared with both sutric and tantric paths. But this bodhicitta is not a sutric path. 
Is the shared Paramitayana path and the Paramitayana path the same? Is the direct realisation of the 16 aspects of the Four Noble Truths in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior a path of the person of intermediate capacity? 
Is there a common locus between the paths of the three lower classes of tantra and the path of Highest Yoga Tantra? 
Question: What is the uninterrupted path? What helps the practitioner to accumulate merit that enables him to move from one ground to the next? 
Answer: In the Paramitayana path, one accumulates the collection of wisdom during meditative equipoise. One then arises from that and enters the post-meditative session to collect merit. One then alternates between meditative equipoise and the post meditative (equipoise) sessions. 
During meditative equipoise, the bodhisattva superior focuses on emptiness and can only accumulate the collection of wisdom. He cannot accumulate the collection of merit. He has to arise from that meditative equipoise and enter the post-meditative equipoise session to accumulate the collection of merit. 
We need to analyse whether we need to do that in the tantric path. In the tantric path, the tantric practitioner on the grounds accumulates the collection of wisdom and the collection of merit simultaneously. That being the case, there is no reason for that person to arise from meditative equipoise. 
In the sutric path, method and wisdom are conjoined but are not conjoined inseparably. In the tantric path, method and wisdom are conjoined in one inseparable entity. I have not seen any explicit mention in the text of the need for the tantric practitioner on the grounds to arise from meditative equipoise. My personal opinion is there is no need to do so because both the collection of wisdom and the collection of merit are accumulated together at the same time.] 110
QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION ON SUNDAY, 30 JULY 2017
(a) It’s said that the four classes of Buddhist tantra are differentiated by the manner in which desire is taken as the path. How is that so?
(b) What’s the meaning of “taking desire as the path”? 
How does one meditate on the path that is concordant with the aspect of the four complete purities of the results?
Please describe the process of the absorption with recitation and the absorption not reliant on recitation. 
What are the four external branches of recitation and the four internal branches of recitation in Performance Tantra?
(a) Please provide the citations from Mantric Stages that explain the importance and need for method and wisdom to be found in one consciousness.  
(b)  How does this mind which has both method and wisdom fused in one entity, a substantial cause for the dharmakaya and the rupakaya? 
(a) In tantra, is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness a yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity? 
      (b) If yes, how does this mind act as the substantial cause for the form body? 
In Yoga Tantra, what are:
the four seals that are the bases of purification 
the four seals of the purifying path
the four seals of the result  
What is the yoga of the subtle hand implement or hand symbols in Yoga Tantra?
When is calm abiding achieved in Yoga Tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: The purpose of some of the questions here are for discussion but also for the purpose of getting you to revise materials. So as such, please describe the whole process of meditating on the concentration with repetition and concentration without repetition. This is a big area. The question is for you to develop familiarity with the different meditation that is involved in these two concentrations.
Now there are 2 weeks. You look at the questions as the basis and then look at the materials to develop familiarity. Whatever you don’t understand from your learning or study and if you have any qualms, you should write it down and that becomes the basis of discussion. Without which there is no basis for discussion. Discussion is only viable if you have something to discuss. First, you must have something to work with. Therefore you must prepare beforehand. You must read and then if anything you don’t understand or you have qualms then these are the things that you bring to discussion, and then it would be fruitful.