Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L3.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:20.163582
================================================================================

Over the last two lessons, I have talked about how we can persuade our mind to practice the Dharma. That is important. What can we do to persuade ourselves to really take the Dharma seriously? You can find the methods for this in the Lamrim (Stages of the Path to Enlightenment). At the beginning, we have to reflect on the human life of freedom and endowments. Also in the Lama Tsongkhapa’s The Three Principal Aspects of the Path, he says:
Freedom and endowments are difficult to find
And life has no time to spare.
“Freedom and endowment are difficult to find and life has no time to spare” - we first have to realize how precious this human life of freedom and endowments are and how after attaining such a life there is so many wonderful things that we can accomplished on the basis of it. 
We are not merely talking about knowing the words such as the lines that we have read out. It is not about merely knowing it, but rather on the basis of these words “Freedom and endowment are difficult to find and life has no time to spare”, we can recite the words slowly and mindfully and reflect on it and to see whether we agree with it or not, and whether we feel it or not. If we do find conviction after having thought about it and we do agree “That is really the case,” then that ascertainment is the thing that can persuade us to practice the Dharma. If we don’t feel convince of what these two lines said then it is extremely difficult for us to take any real substantial interest in Dharma. There has to be something that really drives us wanting to know the Dharma and practicing it. There has to be something to ignite and sustain that interest. What is it? When we see the point, then we will gladly take on the Dharma and gladly pursue and practice it. Here, just thinking about the human life of freedom and endowments and death and impermanence seems to be the only way to ignite the enthusiasm and then sustain it. Otherwise, I don’t think there is any other thing that can really persuade us to take the Dharma to heart.
We have to continually think about the precious human rebirth and death and impermanence all the time, and the more we bring it to mind, the more we can persuade ourselves to practice the Dharma. As much as possible, we need to persuade ourselves to take the Dharma to mind all the time. If we don’t think about how life has no time to spare and if we don’t think about our impending death and impermanence, I don’t think there is anything else that can move the mind. If we are able to see that there is something beyond this life and here we are talking about many future lives and our existence are for very long period of time compare to what we have in this life, then it would be easier to take the dharma really to heart. Also it is easier to see that there is nothing else except Dharma that is really matters. 
Meditating on the human life of freedom and endowments, on how difficult and how meaningful it is, on how they will not last forever and death will definitely happen is not just important in the beginning. If we think well about this, we will begin to take the Dharma to heart. But taking the dharma to heart is one thing, and being able to continue to practice is another different matter. Many a times, when we think about these for a short period of time then we kind of feel “Yeah, yeah, yeah.” and we start to take some interest. But we hardly are able to sustain it as our interest doesn’t last. So that is why thinking about the human life of freedom and endowments and impermanence is not something that is just done at the beginning or doing it little bit here and there. It has to be done continually all the time. If we don’t remember these two topics and bring it to heart all the time, we may take the interest and start our practice, but we may not be able to sustain it. In the middle, when our enthusiasm and interests in the Dharma does not sustain, it starts to degenerates. The problem comes again because of not continually meditating the human life of freedom and endowments and death and impermanence.
As we have to enter the teachings, we have to adopt the teachings into our life i.e. once we have entered into the teaching and practice it. However, practicing itself is not enough. We have to bring it to culmination to complete the practice. It is not just about entering into the teaching; it is about doing it and completing it. What is it that enable successful culmination? It is from the continual reflection of the human life of freedom and endowments and death and impermanence. So entering, sustaining and bringing the practice to completion is the contingent on persuading our mind to so. There is no other way! Really, there is no other way. The only way is meditating on death and impermanence. 
So by recollecting and meditating on the verse from The Three Principles of the Path: “Freedom and endowments are difficult to find and life has no time to spare”, we are able to turn away whatever attachment we have for the happiness of this life. So through gaining familiarity with this, then the attraction to the appearances of this life is reversed. When we are able to reverse our appearances or attraction to the happiness of this life, then Dharma practice starts. That is when we are able to persuade ourselves to take on the Dharma seriously.
The extremely important point is that we really have to understand and to think well and then implement it. It is only when we are able to loosen our grip to the attachment and to the happiness of this life, and turn away from whatever interest we have for this life and focus on the future lives then we will engage in the Dharma practice. If we don’t do that then there is no Dharma practice. When we say we want to engage in Dharma practice, what is the first practice? The first practice is turning away and giving up the attachment of this life. If that doesn’t happen, we might say we are practicing the Dharma, or we think we are practicing the Dharma, but it doesn’t necessarily mean that we are practicing the Dharma. Yes, we may be engaging the Dharma or we may think that we are engaging in Dharma practice. But as to whether our practice becomes Dharma or not is another big question. As I have mentioned before, what is the demarcation between something that has become Dharma or not Dharma? It all comes down to whether we have given up the attachment of this life or not. If we do nothing about it, then nothing become Dharma; not even the first Dharma.
When we hear the phrase “Give up on this life”, we cannot take it literally. It doesn’t mean kill yourself or end this life as we don’t want anything to do with this life. Then what does it mean? It means to give up our attachment of this life. This is what it means.
Giving up attachment on this life can manifest in the form of a lifestyle that was adopted by Jetsun Milarepa. He completely gave up wealth, power, loved ones, entourage, possessions and so forth.  He led a life in solitude and isolation. What did he achieve? He achieved enlightenment in that lifetime. That is the real meaning of giving up this life and is the best lifestyle. The essence is giving up attachment to this life happiness, possession, wealth, property and relationships; basically giving up attachment to these things in whatever form. Even if one cannot give up completely, first one has to reduce it. There is really no mental space for real, substantial, and significant Dharma practice if we have very strong grasping on these things such as family, friends and relationships, power, properties, possession and wealth. It is impossible to want those things and at the same time expect to practice the Dharma.
If you examine the teachings of the great Kadampa masters, the teachings are short and blunt. People may not find it poetic and pleasing to the ears. It just blunt and hard truth right to the face. Actually, it delivers short and sweet truth. The Kadampa masters basically summarized: If you cannot give up attachment to this life, nothing you do will become dharma. It sound so unpleasant and we don’t like it. But it is the truth.
So thinking about our impending death and impermanence is very important. It is only when we really taking the advice on death and impermanence to heart and remembering it all the time, then our mind get persuaded to practice the Dharma. So the first step to practice the Dharma is from there. These are the practices of a person of small capacity, and that is where we should start from. If we don’t take death and impermanence to heart and think about it strongly all the time, then we live our life like what we are doing now. We will just cruising along and everything seems to be very nice. Then come a day when we have to die, we may end up having very strong regrets at the time of our death.
The first dharma practice is practicing to completely give up the attachment of this life. That is the first practice now. We have to see for ourselves how our attachment to this life is the source of all our problems. This is not really difficult if we are honest to ourselves. Whatever problems and difficulties we meet in life on the daily basis, all comes down to our grasping at the happiness of this life. Whatever problems and difficulties that we encounter in our daily lives, and if we analyze them, we will be able to see that our attachment to this life is the root of the problems and difficulties.
We have to see for ourselves whether this true or not. We have to think whether all our problems and difficulties are due to our attachment to this life or not. As to whether we agree or not, we have to see for ourselves. If it is true, and our attachment to the happiness of this life is the source of all our problems, and in order to solve the problem we have to get rid of the attachment of this life. When we are able to reduce our attachment to this life and get rid of it, then the problems will go away. At least mentally we feel relief over whatever is there earlier on. Just by taking away the attachment then suddenly our problem is gone. And that is dharma; dharma is the thing that takes away our unhappiness.
I think all of you know this already. You have heard this in the teachings many times. From this, it is clear that just knowing it does not benefit. It is only when we use the information by sitting down and thinking about it until we have taste the Dharma. Through that experience, then we see the validity for ourselves and our mind will feel relief. The benefit comes when we see the mind transformed. So just knowing the Dharma alone doesn’t benefit.
As I have mentioned before, there is a way to think when we receive teachings.  When we hear or receive teachings, we should regard whatever instructions or teachings we have received during the session as something that is directly tailored for myself. We should not look at it as a generic teaching or a general teaching, but rather we should regard whatever teachings we hear as something that is tailored for me, for myself and not for someone else. From our own side, we should have some sense of devotion and trust on the person that we receive the teachings. This will make a big difference and impact to our own mind. 
In the last lesson, we looked at the different views as to who Guru Shakyamuni was and how he achieved enlightenment. 
According to the GES, a Hinayana tenet, while the person who was to be Shakyamuni Buddha was on the path, he accumulated the collections for very long period of time and finally, at the end of his last life, he was born as Prince Siddhartha. In that life he newly achieved the state of enlightenment. This is the summary of what we had said in the last lesson.
The Mahayana has different view on this. According to the Mahayana, before the person who was to be Shakyamuni Buddha has to accumulate the collections for a very long period of time and achieved enlightenment in Akanishta Pure Land. He achieved enlightenment in the form of complete enjoyment body. With that complete enjoyment body as basis of emanation, the supreme emanation body is emanated and descended into Southern Continent, this world of ours, and engaged in the 12 deeds; starting from conception all the way to the passing of parinirvana. According to the Mahayana, the person who performed the 12 deeds is not a sentient being, but already a Buddha. Those deeds are not performed by an ordinary sentient being. All manifestations or displays or aspects of it are performed by the supreme emanation body which is Buddha.
In essence, the assertion as to how Guru Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment is the same in the Paramitayana (Causal Perfection Vehicle) and the Mantra Vehicle. After achieving full enlightenment, it is said that the Buddha did not teach for 49 days. It is only on the 49th day in Sarnath, near Varanasi, India, the Buddha met the first five fortunate disciples, and turned the wheel of Dharma for the first time.
When the Buddha first approached the five former companions to give the first teaching, initially they were not that keen and a bit apprehensive. Why? Before the Buddha achieved enlightenment, they were once companions practicing austerities together but after a couple of years, Prince Siddhartha discontinued the practice of austerities as he decided that was not the way to practice. As such, these five individuals, who were his companions, felt that Prince Siddhartha was kind of weak as he gave up the austerities practice. When Shakyamuni Buddha approached them, they had a discussion and decided that they will just set up a seat for him and there is no need to raise and pay respect to the Buddha. But as the Buddha come closer and closer, due to the power of the Buddha’s magnificent, his five former companions naturally stood up, paid respect and invited the Buddha to take his seat. They were taken aback in a positive manner by the power of the Buddha’s magnificent. They got very curious and said to Buddha; “You really look different now. You are magnificent.” Then they asked the Buddha: “Are you enlightened? What happened?” 
The Buddha said “Yes, I have become the Buddha. I am fully omniscient.”
It is said that when the Buddha declared this in that setting, his five former companions automatically were ordained.
There is also a historical account of how the gods Indra and Brahma requested the Buddha to turn the wheel of Dharma. When they made the request, they gave a thousand spokes golden Dharma chakra as offering. After that the Buddha took a stroll and went to rest. Then the Buddha examined, “Where the dharma should be given? Where did the Buddhas of the past turned the wheel of Dharma?” In the Buddha’s vision, he had the vision of a thousand jeweled thrones in Sarnath, and saw that he was on the fourth. He went around the first three thrones three times and then he took his place on the fourth throne. On the fourth throne, he taught the Dharma for the first time to the five fortunate disciples.
In that first sermon, the Buddha talked about the Four Noble Truths. First he made a statement about what the truths were. For example;
This is True Suffering, recognized it. 
This is True Origin, abandoned them. 
This is True Cessation, this is to be actualized. 
This is True Path; this is to be cultivated. 
It is said that as the result of hearing the first teachings from the Buddha, these five fortunate disciples achieved Path of Seeing, out of the five paths. 
So in the 1st turning the wheel of Dharma, besides the teaching on the Four Noble Truths, Buddha also explained about karma, the Four Close Placement of Mindfulness, and so forth.
The 2nd turning of the wheel of Dharma was performed at Vulture’s Peak at Rajagriha. Historically it was said that the first five fortunate disciples accompanied the Buddha to Vulture’s Peak. There the Buddha taught primarily the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra and the intended disciples of that 2nd turning the wheel of dharma was primarily the bodhisattvas. It was said there were numberless bodhisattvas present at that turning of the wheel of dharma.
The 3rd turning of the wheel of dharma was performed at the Vaishali and was for both for the Hinayana and Mahayana disciples. In that turning of the wheel of dharma there is one major sutra called The Sutra Unraveling the Intent; sometimes called The Sutra Unraveling the Thought. Then there are also sutras such as Tathagata-garba (Tathagata Essence) that were included under the 3rd turning of the wheel of dharma. Generally, in the 3rd turning of the wheel of dharma, the subject matter was directed at those people who are predisposed to the Mind Only School (MOS) view. 
In terms of yanas, the Hinayana and Mahayana, the 1st turning of the wheel of dharma at Sarnath, near Varanasi was intended primarily for the followers of the Hinayana. In terms of tenets, then in the 1st turning of the wheel of dharma,  the view of reality primarily espoused by the GES and the SS was taught. 
The 2nd and 3rd turning of the wheel of dharma were intended for the followers of Mahayana. 
In the 2nd turning of the wheel of dharma, the view that was taught was mainly meant for those who are inclined towards the Middle Way School (MWS).
In the 3rd turning of the wheel of dharma, the view that was taught was adhered by the followers of the Mind Only School (MOS). 
It is said that the Buddha established the presentation of the basis, the path and the result during the 1st turning of the wheel of dharma. So during the 1st turning of the wheel of dharma, the Buddha basically established the foundation for the entire Buddhism. As for Buddhist, what constitute the reality is - what the basis is, what the path is and what the result is - of cultivating that path. After having laid the foundation for the entire Buddhadharma during the 1st turning of the wheel of dharma, then during the 2nd turning of the wheel of dharma, the Buddha worked on what he had already established by going into detail on what the basis of the two truths in greater clarity and in greater depth i.e. more profundity.  On the basis of the presentation of the basis, the Buddha then gave an extensive explanation as what constitutes the path, method and wisdom. As such, when there are path, method and wisdom, the Buddha explained that the results of the path are the two bodies (kayas). 
So in the 3rd turning of the wheel of dharma, in the sutra of the Tathagata-garba sutras (the Sutra of the Tathagata Essence), the Buddha explained how all sentient beings have the potential suitable to be transformed into the two bodies (kayas) - the truth body and the form body. As for the factor of luminosity and awareness, the Buddha said that if one works hard to develop the mind that directly perceives the luminosity and awareness of the mind, that potential that have already existed within them will be transformed into both the truth body and the form body. 
In the Tathagata-garba sutras (the Sutra of the Tathagata Essence), the Buddha explained that all sentient beings possess in them the potential that is suitable to be transformed into the two bodies of the Buddha. The Buddha said that if one works hard to develop the mind that directly perceives the suchness of that factor of luminosity and awareness, i.e. to see the emptiness of the mind, the factor of luminosity and awareness, and develops and bring it to culmination, then all obscurations can be removed. 
In the Sublime Continuum (Uttaratantra Śāstra), Maitreya explains how the mind is clear light, and how the defilements are adventitious through employing nine analogies, and then using those nine analogies to explain the nine meanings. 
On the basis of these three turning of the wheel of dharma culminating and with the explanation of the Tathagata-garba sutras, on top of that, the Secret Mantra (Vajrayana) teachings was added. In some ways, it is an extension of the teachings that the mind is clear light during the 3rd turning of the wheel of dharma. Here the Buddha had already established the path which is the method and wisdom resulting in the two bodies. In the Secret Mantra (Vajrayana), there is a more profound explanation as what constitutes the method, and what constitutes wisdom. So there are more detailed, clearer, and more profound explanation of what constitutes in this factor of method in tantra. As with regard to the Perfection of Wisdom, in Tantra, especially in the Highest Yoga Tantra, there is more profound explanation as to the mind that understands and realizes emptiness. In a way the Secret Mantra (Vajrayana) teachings are built upon what the Buddha had earlier established. Especially in Highest Yoga Tantra, there is an explanation of the path and the result in relation to what all sentient beings have already possessed. The extremely subtle wind that all sentient beings possess by nature has always been inseparable entity. Based on that, there is a profound explanation of how method and wisdom are inseparable entity on the path and then culminating in the result which is also inseparable union of both the form and truth bodies. 
Next, try to pay attention to the brief description of the Sutric Paths and Grounds. 
With reference to the chart, it is clear that we are talking about the Mahayana Sutric Paths and Grounds. In order to achieve enlightenment one has to accumulate the collections of the three countless great eons. In order to achieve enlightenment one has to actualize the five paths: 
Mahayana Path of Accumulation, 
Mahayana Path of Preparation, 
Mahayana Path of Seeing 
Mahayana Path of Meditation 
Mahayana Path of No-more-learning. 
When does a path rise in the mind? It rises when there is renunciation. In order to have this renunciation, first we must completely give up attachment in this life. On that basis, renounce the entire samsara, and then thought that comes day and night effortlessly in the heart thinking “I have to achieve liberation. I have to free myself from cyclic existence”. So with this renunciation in the heart, day and night, that is when the path arises. The very first path that arises is called the Path of Accumulation. It is so called because day and night one is thinking on how to achieve this liberation when one is working hard to accumulate the causes for this liberation. 
The Path of Accumulation is divided into: 
1.Small	
2. Middling	
3. Great. 
In the last module with regards to the 37 Harmonies of Enlightenment, we relate those to the path:
On the small Path of Accumulation, the practice is primarily the Four Close Placements of Mindfulness. 
On the middling Path of Accumulation, the main practice is the Four Thorough Abandonments 
On the great Path of Accumulation, the main practice is the Four Legs of Magical Emanation. 
In the context of the 37Harmonies of Enlightenment, the Four Close Placements of Mindfulness is correlated to the path, and in this case it is correlated to the small Path of Accumulation. Nevertheless, we should think about it and practise it as it is very useful. This is just to remind ourselves what was covered in the previous module. Essentially, the meditation on the Four Close Placements of Mindfulness is to counteract the four erroneous conceptions i.e. the four wrong views:
Conceiving of that impure to be pure, 
Conceiving that which is impermanent to be permanent, 
Conceiving that which is in the nature of suffering to be happiness, pleasure,
Conceiving that which is no-self to as self. 
Here we are talking about the Mahayana Path. When renunciation is generated, a path arises in our minds and the thought seeking liberation. Here we are talking about the non-abiding nirvana. When we talk about liberation, it is not just necessarily mean lower nirvana. As we are discussing in the context of the Mahayana, on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation, the bodhisattva has the great courage and determination and interest in accumulating the collections. 
As in the last module, remember there is a practice achieving through amour which refers to the determination, great interest and resolve to want to practice the six Perfections. Not just the six perfections, but rather, in the practice of each perfection, all the other practices of perfections are included in it. It is said that the bodhisattva on this level has amazing determination and resolve wanting to practice all the perfections together. For example, when the bodhisattva is practicing the perfection of generosity, the bodhisattva has great interest and resolves wanting to integrate the practices of the other perfections into his practice of perfect of generosity.  
Here we are talking about the Mahayana path. One doesn’t enter the Mahayana path with renunciation alone. On the basis of renunciation, if one has not generated bodhicitta then there is no Mahayana path to start with. So on the basis of renunciation, bodhicitta has to be generated. So when the uncontrived bodhicitta arises then the Mahayana path starts. 
Question for those who have been around for a while: When one enters the Mahayana path, is renunciation and bodhicitta are generated together? Are these two generated together at the same time or they are generated serially?
Student 1: Conjoined 
Khen Rinpoche: That is not the question. My question is not about that. My question is whether those two are generated simultaneously in one moment.
Khen Rinpoche: You understand the question or no? I better ask question. When I talk too much I am not sure whether you are sleeping or no I don’t know. This one is not so difficult. 
Student 2:  Both don’t happen together. Renunciation means you are willing to give up the things you are attached to. But once I have given that up, it doesn’t mean that I will automatically have the heart to want to work for all sentient beings. I think it goes step by step. I need to be able to renunciate first, and then generate bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: So she is saying renunciation first then bodhicitta. Correct? 
Now another question: If renunciation first, in order to generate bodhicitta you need to go seven steps such as recognizing all sentient beings as my mothers and so forth. Which part you have renunciation.
[The Seven-Point Cause and Effect Instruction
1. Recognising all sentient beings as one's mother
2. Recognising the kindness of mother sentient beings
3. Repaying their kindness
4. Affectionate love
5. Great compassion
6. The extraordinary intention
7. Bodhicitta ]
This is our last topic in Basic Program and you should know all these things. This is nothing new. Now you are already in Tantra module. Nobody wants to say anything. How to graduate? Hup Cheng has a lot of good answers. He doesn’t come to class but he follows.
Student 3: My take is that cultivation of renunciation comes first before cultivation of bodhicitta. Lama Tsongkhapa’s The Three Principal Aspects of the Path talks about the cultivation of renunciation first and after that he goes on to talk about cultivation of bodhicitta. These two have quite different causes to achieve. There are certain mind trainings to cultivate bodhicitta and in renunciation. The Four Mindfulness is one of those causes as well. If you have deeper unmistaken realization of renunciation then dharma practice become pure dharma practice. Otherwise, bodhicitta can also become corrupted and not pure bodhicitta. So my understanding is that it should renunciation first then serially follows by bodhicitta. 
Khen Rinpoche: Lama Tsongkhapa says what in The Three Principal Aspects of the Path? This is the order he gives. So that means understanding emptiness after the bodhicitta. Before that is not possible? Before bodhicitta you don’t have emptiness.
Student 3: Emptiness is supposed to be presented last in The Three Principal Aspects of the Path. They are quite separate causes for bodhicitta and emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: Is there a possibility to understand emptiness before bodhicitta. 
Student 3: Logically you can realize emptiness before you realize bodhicitta. These are two separate causes
Khen Rinpoche: Lama Tsongkhapa said renunciation, bodhicitta, emptiness. How can it before? 
Your reason is because Lama Tsongkhapa says that. You said that renunciation first. In order to generate bodhicitta there are seven steps. At which step  does renunciation happens? After or before the seven steps? 
Student 3: I would say before the seven steps. It should be cultivated separately. 
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t it the case when renunciation occurs, then the path arises simultaneously? Anybody who develop renunciation is somebody who has entered the path, isn’t it?
Student 3: Yes, you just defined that just now. With renunciation then you entered the path. Without renunciation it doesn’t become the path. 
Ven Gyurme: If you extend to the Mahayana path, how you enter Mahayana path.
Student 3: If you extend to the Mahayana path then you conjoin with altruistic motivation to achieve enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings to enter the Mahayana path
Khen Rinpoche: So when one generates uncontrived bodhicitta you enter the path or not?
Student 3: Yes, you enter the path
Khen Rinpoche: Of the five paths, which path you enter from?
Student 3: Path of Accumulation 
Khen Rinpoche:  The five paths is either five Mahayana Paths or five Hinayana paths. If you say it is not the Mahayana Path, then its only left with the Hinayana path. 
Student 3: Yes, you enter the Hinayana path first
Khen Rinpoche: So in order to enter the Mahayana path, you have to enter Hinayana path, isn’t it? No choice. 
Student 3: Yes. If you argue like that, then logically you have to enter the Hinayana path first
Khen Rinpoche:  So you enter Hinayana Path of Accumulation and then you reach the Hinayana Path of No-more-learning. After that you start meditating on how others are your mothers, is it? 
Student 3: Good question. I am not very sure. 
Ven Gyurme: Think about the definition of path.
Student 3: If you say you need renunciation, then you are considered to enter the path. Otherwise, it doesn’t qualify as a path. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Three Turnings of the Wheel of the Dharma (extracted from fpmt Mandala magazines Oct 2008)
T he "three turnings of the wheel of the dharma" mark three historical points at which new developments in Buddhist thought emerged in India. "Turning the Wheel" is a metaphor for the setting in motion of new teachings. Though the teachings of all three turnings are said to have been spoken by the historical Buddha, the second and third turnings, those characterized as Mahayana, were not publicly known until centuries after the passing of Shakyamuni Buddha. 
The language of the three turnings was first found in the most famous sutra from the third turning, The Sutra Unraveling the Thought. In that sutra, a disciple respectfully asks the omniscient Buddha about what appears to his limited mind to be a contradiction in the Buddha's teachings. He asks the Buddha to explain why he explained that things do exist in the teachings from the first turning of the wheel and that they are empty of true existence in the second turning of the wheel. The Buddha's response to this question forms the basis of the third turning of the wheel. 
Tibetans traditionally frame the new developments, which formed the basis of new philosophical schools such as the Middle Way school (second turning) and the Mind-Only school (third turning), in this way to help make sense of the different presentations on the nature of reality found in the Buddhist canon. It is traditionally explained that the Buddha taught the different turnings to different disciples according to their propensities and capacities for understanding. 
The first turning includes those teachings given by the Buddha in the earliest historical period of Buddhism in general, and Buddha Shakyamuni's teaching career in particular. Many of these teachings are fundamental to all schools of Buddhism such as the four noble truths, the eightfold path, selflessness (anatman), dependent-arising, impermanence, the five aggregates, etc. Perhaps the most famous of the many discourses (Pali: sutta, Sanskrit: sutra) of the Buddha from the first turning is the one that records the Buddha's very first teaching at Deer Park to the first five disciples entitled The Turning of the Wheel of the Dhamma Sutta. In actuality, virtually all of the contents of the Pali version of the Buddhist canon, that version utilized by Theravada Buddhists of Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia today, are considered by Tibetans to be teachings from the first turning of the wheel. Tibetans mark the beginning of the second turning of the wheel with the public emergence of The Perfection of Wisdom Sutras. Traditionally, this corpus of sutras' are said to have been retrieved by Nagarjuna (c. 1st C.E.) from the nagas (mythical serpent-like beings) who had been entrusted to preserve the most profound of the Buddha's teachings until the prophesized Nagarjuna appeared to retrieve and teach them. Unlike the first turning teachings, where the Buddha taught selflessness of persons, but also taught that entities do exist in the way that they appear, the Buddha introduced a new and more profound philosophical description of reality in The Perfection ofWisdom Sutras. In these texts, the Buddha taught that all persons and phenomena are characterized, not merely by selflessness, but by the more subtle and profound term, emptiness (shunyata). In other words, everything is utterly empty of, or lacking, any independent, unchanging essence, absolute nature, or any own way of being in and of itself. Nagarjuna systematized the insights of The Perfection of Wisdom Sutras into a philosophical view known as the Middle Way school (Madhyamaka), which Tibetans generally describe as the highest philosophical presentation of reality. The third turning of the wheel derives from a group of sutras that became publicly known around the fourth century and were utilized by the great master, Asanga (300-390 C.E.) in his systematization of the Mind-Only school (Chittamatra/ Yogachara). The Mind-Only school is also a Mahayana philosophical school in that it asserts the emptiness of persons and phenomena. However, the specific description of emptiness in the Mind-Only school differs from that of the Middle Way school. The Middle Way school defines emptiness as an object's lack of any independent, permanent essence or nature in and of itself. The Mind-Only school defines an object's emptiness as a lack of an essence that is utterly distinct or separate from that of the consciousness perceiving it. For the Middle Way school, phenomena are empty of their own unchanging nature. For the Mind-Only school, phenomena are empty of subject-object duality. They do not have a nature that is different from the nature of the consciousness that perceives them. The most famous sutra sources, among many, for this school of thought are The Sutra Unraveling the Thought and The Descent into Lanka Sutra. 