Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L30.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:16.334453
================================================================================

Student 1: The tantra is classified according to the types of desire that the trainees generates from such as gazing, smiling, holding hands and so forth and then experience the bliss and then transforms that bliss into the path. Which part of the sadhana or meditation practice that specifies the method of transforming the desire into the path?
Khen Rinpoche: Anybody know which part of sadhana is the time to smile?  No idea? Which part of sadhana to smile?  Anybody has idea?
In Highest Yoga tantra, it is very clear in the self-generation practice where there is a section called taking on the wisdom mother. It is quite clear for Highest Yoga tantra, but in the case of action tantra, for example, if you look at the sadhana on Chenrezig practice, it is not clear as to where you put the practice of taking desire into path such as gazing. 
In the action tantra there is concentration with repetition and concentration without repetition. You engage in concentration with repetition. After which you move on to concentration without repetition. When come to the concentration abiding in sound that is when you achieve the calm abiding. With further practice, one achieves the yoga without sign and that is when you have the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity.  Profundity here has to be a mind or bliss ascertaining emptiness.  
In term of action tantra, the practice of taking desire as the path where you take the bliss derived from gazing or looking, whether it comes during the point in time or not, I am not sure.
In the 3 lower classes of tantra the practice of taking desire as the path in term of gazing, smiling and holding hands is done only with a visualized goddess.  It is not done with an actual karma mudra. Even in the lower classes of tantra, it is said that even looking at actual karma mudra is not encouraged at all.  So the practice is all done in relation to visualized goddess.
As for when is the actual time where the practice such as taking desire to path in the 3 classes of lower tantra is done, it is not clear at all.  If you look at the self-generation rites of the lower classes of tantra, you don't see it being mentioned in the sadhana such as “This is the place where you should do the practice”.  It is not clear in the action tantra and performance tantra. In yoga tantra I am not sure as I didn’t get to look at the self-generation rite in detail.
Revisiting of what we have looked at in the last lesson, in the text somebody raised the qualm as to whether the mind of compassion, love and so forth in the continuum of an individual who is on the action tantra tantric Path of Accumulation is the Perfection Vehicle path or not? The answer is no, they are not Perfection Vehicle path.
The type of body you need to obtain enlightenment
As to the method for attaining enlightenment in dependence on those paths, a being who newly attains enlightenment through the paths of the Perfection Vehicle and the paths of the three lower tantras must abide in Akaniṣṭha, because this is the system of the Perfection Vehicle. 
The way to attain enlightenment in action and performance tantra is similar to the Perfection Vehicle, and this was explained previously.
The paragraph that was just read out basically saying that in the 3 lower classes of tantra, the basis for newly attaining enlightenment must be the support in Akanistha. This begets 2 questions:
Why is that so?  
Why is that one cannot achieve enlightenment with the desire realm support in the 3 lower classes of tantra.  
Khen Rinpoche: Question. What do you think? Any answer for that?
Why is that the support for newly achieving enlightenment in the Perfection Vehicle has got to be a support in Akanistha?
Student 2:  Akanistha is the only place where one can attain the complete enjoyment body, not any other Buddha pure land.  
Khen Rinpoche: Any other answer or not?  If you have any answer or you have any idea, say now whether it is correct or not.  If somebody asks you: Why? What do you say? You say you don’t know?
Student 3: The body in the desire realm is very coarse so you need to be in Akanistha.
Khen Rinpoche: OK.  She says desire body is very coarse. So we need a better body to get enlighten.  That is why you need to go Akanistha to get enlightened?  Correct, you can say like that. Anything you can say.  Anything else?
If you think about this, the 4 bodies are actualized simultaneously. One of which is the complete enjoyment body. One of the certain features of the complete enjoyment body is that in term of abode, it resides only in Akanishta.  Since it resides only in Akanistha then when it is manifested or actualized i.e. when it comes into existent, it has to be in Akanistha. If that is the case, the support that exists prior to that achievement must also be Akanistha support.
This is just my idea. If you have any other different idea, maybe it is good to share.
Khen Rinpoche: There are 5 (characteristics of enjoyment body): place, time, retinue, body, doctrine. OK
[BP12 Tathagata Essence:  The enjoyment body possesses five certainties:
1. Certainty of abode – the complete enjoyment body only abides only in Akanishtha.
2. Certainty of entourage - the entourage of the complete enjoyment body is necessarily made up only of Mahayana superiors.
3. Certainty of dharma – the complete enjoyment body teaches only Mahayana dharma.
4. Certainty of time – the complete enjoyment body exists as long as samsara remains.
5. Certainty of body - possesses the thirty-two signs and eighty exemplifications.
The complete enjoyment body remains as long as samsara exist which means that the complete enjoyment body does not show the aspect of passing away into the sorrowless state.]
I think we have looked at this before.  
The complete enjoyment body possesses the five definite characteristics. 
In terms of time, it abides until the end of samsara
In terms of the body, it possesses the 32 major signs and 80 exemplifications. 
In term of dharma, it teaches only the Mahayana dharma
In term of retinue, it is surrounded only by bodhisattva superiors, 
In term of abode, it resides only in Akanistha.  
We need to think whether it is alright to say that the support for achieving enlightenment in the Perfection Vehicle has to be a support in Akanistha because one of the 5 definite characteristic of the complete enjoyment body is that it only resides in Akanistha.
If somebody ask: Does the complete enjoyment body teaches the Hinayana dharma or not? What are you going to say? 
Doesn’t the complete enjoyment body work for the welfare of the trainee of the 3 lineages?  What are you going to say?  
Khen Rinpoche: Very easy but some time you don’t know what to say. If somebody asks, what are you going to say?
Student 4: There is no Hinayana disciple there?
Khen Rinpoche: So, you don’t teach, and you can’t benefit all sentient beings.  You only benefit this bunch of arya beings and you cannot benefit all sentient beings.  Is that?
Student: 4: Maybe manifest into other forms to teach the Hinayanist. 
Khen Rinpoche: So, that means the enjoyment body can teach all sentient being. You manifest and teach the Hinayana teaching also?
Student 4: Not in enjoyment body
There are three masters of yoga tantra.  Of the three masters, two of them share this position.  What is this?
The positions of Śākyamitra and Buddhaguhya
In accordance with yoga tantra, both Śākyamitra and Buddhaguhya explain that when Prince Siddhārtha entered equipoise on the supreme limit of the fourth absorption near the Nirañjana River, all the buddhas of the ten directions awoke him by snapping their fingers, inspired him, and escorted him to Akaniṣṭha. There, after bestowing the crown empowerment, they encouraged him to meditate serially on the five stages of enlightenment, and at the completion of that process, he attained enlightenment as an enjoyment body. 
. 
According to the position of Śākyamitra and Buddhaguhya, when Prince Siddhārtha is in equipoise on the supreme limit of the 4th absorption all the buddhas of the ten directions awoke him by snapping their fingers, and escorted him to Akaniṣṭha.  After receiving the crown empowerment, he achieved enlightenment.
The author replies by saying: “This is unacceptable.” 
Reply: However, we cannot accept this in our system since it is incompatible with the general system of the Mahāyāna. 
The author cites the Mantric Stages to show why that position is incompatible.
Mantric Stages states:
The Uncommon Secret Tantra as well as Stainless Light specifically state that our Master attained enlightenment before this, and in this world he merely demonstrated the way of attaining enlightenment. Many other mantras also assert that he manifested as an emanation and did not newly attain enlightenment, and the Mantra and the Perfection Vehicles both hold similar positions.
 Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand the conclusion of what they are trying to say? Who can understand make 2 or 3 sentences for the conclusion? I just want to know after you read whether what you really understand.
Student 5: Their position is unacceptable because the Mahayana vehicles assert that Buddha Shakyamuni has achieved enlightenment long before this.
Khen Rinpoche: Correct. I mean simple as that. The conclusion for the whole 2 to 3 half a page is that. What I want to know is you read like that. The text is available, commentary is there, and root text is there. What you get after you read. Just now, just give an example, 2-3 sentences you get the point. You know. So that is important.
This position is unacceptable because it contradicts the general presentation of the Mahayana. According to the Mahayana, Prince Siddhartha did not newly achieve enlightenment. All that was just a display. According to the Hinayana tenets, like the Great Exposition School and the Sutra School, Prince Siddhartha was a sentient being and he newly achieved enlightenment. All those 12 deeds were actually the 12 things done by that individual and it was not a display or a show. It was real. According to the Hinayana tenet, he newly achieved enlightenment which is not the position of the Mahayana. 
[The twelve deeds are: 
1. Abiding in the abode of Tushita 
2. Transferring from Tushita 
3. Entering the womb of the mother 
4. Being born 
5. The sports of a youth 
6. The deeds of a prince, enjoying the company of a princess 
7. Renunciation 
8. Undergoing austerities 
9. Conquering the maras 
10. Becoming enlightened 
11. Turning the wheel of Dharma 
12. Entering parinirvana ]
According to the Great Exposition School, after Buddha achieved enlightenment his physical body is not Buddha but is true suffering. The Sutra School has a slightly better explanation but essentially it is pretty much the same. When comes to the Mahayana tenet which talk about the 4 bodies, it is very different from what is presented in the Hinayana tenets. When come to tantra, it becomes more profound in that it talk about inseparability of the Buddha’s exalted body and exalted mind and how these two are in union. 
Even within tantra itself, there are 4 classes of tantra. Although they all talk about achieving the Buddha’s exalted body and exalted mind, but if you look at the presentation of the 3 lower classes of tantra, somehow it is not entirely satisfactory. It doesn’t really hit the mark and is not able to answer all the qualms. Whereas if you look at the Highest Yoga tantra, or the unsurpassed yoga tantra system, the way of explaining the method of achieving the Buddha’s body and mind, the way of achieving the union of the two, no matter how you think about it or from whatever angles, it is unassailable; so to speak. You will not be able to find any fault or any fallacies. As such it is unsurpassed yoga tantra. 
[BP1: We do not accept their assertions and our position can be substantiated with the quotation from Lama Tsongkhapa’s Stages of Mantra. According to our system, Prince Siddhartha was already enlightened even before he performed the twelve deeds, i.e., even before he was born. The common Mahayana explanation of Shakyamuni Buddha was that he was already a buddha even before coming to this world and performing the twelve deeds. 
The Hinayanists assert that Prince Siddhartha was an ordinary being, not a buddha, before his birth. He achieved enlightenment only after meditating on and progressing along the paths. We tend to accept the Hinayanist assertion because this is what many people have seen. But this is incorrect.]
What is our system? 
The position of Ānandagarbha
We must accept the position of Master Ānandagarbha, who explains that the Master accumulated merit for three countless eons and in his final existence entered equipoise on the supreme limit of the fourth absorption in Akaniṣṭha and was awakened by all the buddhas of the ten directions snapping their fingers and so forth.
According in the lower classes of tantra, in order to achieve enlightenment one needs to accumulate the collections for 3 countless great eons. In his final existence, with the support in Akanistha, he entered into equipoise on the supreme limit of the 4th concentrations and then he was awakened by all the buddhas who then conferred on him the crown initiation and after which he achieved enlightenment. 
Illuminating Lamp states:
Now the Compendium merely states that when the bodhisattva Siddhārtha was seated near the Bodhi Tree, the tathāgatas inspired him; it does not clearly refer to Akaniṣṭha or the desire realm. Vajra Peak explains this to be the Akaniṣṭha field called Ghanavyūha.
According to the tantras and the Compendium, it is not stated clearly whether Siddhartha was in Akanishta or desire realm support. But in Vajra Peak, it explains to be Akanishta field. 
According to yoga tantra the Buddha achieved enlightenment with Akanishta support. So in his final existence it was in Akanishta. With that kind of support he was awakened from his concentration by all the buddhas with the sound of the fingers snapping. Then he was conferred the crown initiation and through that he achieved enlightenment.
Can the path of yoga tantra be added to the end of the Perfection Vehicle?
One says: This mode of explanation teaches the method of attaining enlightenment that adds the path of yoga tantra only after completing the Perfection Vehicle path.
Reply: This is unacceptable because although highest yoga tantra clearly explains two different ways of attaining enlightenment through differentiating this path from other paths, it is not explained this way in yoga tantra. Illuminating Lamp states:
The system of highest yoga tantra explains two systems, namely that of jewel-like disciples who enter this path from the beginning and attain enlightenment in one life, and that of disciples who add the mantric path at the end of the Perfection Vehicle path.
Someone says: That explanation that you just cited is an explanation of how after the bodhisattva Siddhartha reached the end of the Perfection Vehicle, and then the path of yoga tantra was added on to his practice. Through that he achieved enlightenment. 
The author said this is unacceptable. What explanation is this that he reached the end of Perfection Vehicle path and then he took a support in Akanishta? With that support he took initiation and then practiced the path of yoga tantra. Through that he achieved enlightenment. This position is not acceptable. 
The system of yoga tantra does not appear to state that you append the previously explained path of yoga on to the path of the Perfection Vehicle, making a distinction between this path and other paths; it also does not clearly identify a method for attaining enlightenment that is separate from the Perfection Vehicle. I wonder, therefore, whether the explanation that enlightenment is attained through being inspired by the buddhas after completing the ground previously explained, and so on, is the system of this path. This should be well examined.
The author is saying he wonders whether it is alright to say that according to yoga tantra own system the bodhisattva Prince Siddhartha entered the yoga tantra path from the onset and completed all the way to the end of path of yoga tantra. In his final existence with Akanishta support, he then achieved enlightenment. He wonders if this explanation is alright. 
This is the citation from Je Rinpoche’s Mantric Stages where Je Rinpoche is saying that he thinks that according to the yoga tantra own system of explaining, one enters the yoga tantra path on the onset, and goes all the way to the end of yoga tantra. In the final existence with Akanishta support, one achieves enlightenment. So Lama Tsongkhapa says: ‘I wonder’ i.e. he thinks maybe that is the case. It is of the position of the latest scholars after Je Rinpoche that whenever Lama Tsongkhapa says: “I wonder”, then you take it that is the case. When he says “I think maybe that is not the case”, then you take it that is definitely not the case.
But Lama Tsongkhapa himself said that ‘This should be well examined.’ I mean it is one thing to say “to investigate” but if Lama Tsongkhapa after investigation and says “Perhaps you should also investigate”, how is it really possible for the rest of us to investigate of what he has already investigated. 
[BP1: Summary of the correct explanation given by master Anandagarbha 
At the end of accumulating the collections for three countless great eons, Shakyamuni Buddha was already at the tenth bodhisattva ground. In Akanishta, he entered into the meditative absorption called the supreme limit of the four concentrations. 
At that time, the buddhas of the ten directions gathered and roused him from that meditative stabilisation through the sound of snapping their fingers. They told him, "You cannot become completely and perfectly purified through this meditative stabilisation." 
He asked, "Then, how is it done?" 
Thereupon, all the buddhas of the ten directions conferred upon him the crown initiation, after which they caused him to cultivate serially the five manifest enlightenments. 
Upon completing them, he achieved enlightenment in the nature of Vairochana. He then proceeded to the peak of Mount Meru, where he taught the Yoga Tantras. He then descended into this world and was born as Prince Siddhartha and subsequently performed the twelve deeds. 
Here you can see that there is a difference between the assertion of Anandagarbha and those of the previous two masters Shakyamitra and Buddhaguhya. 
There are five manifest enlightenments which can be considered: 
• from the perspective of the manner in which the Buddha achieved enlightenment by looking at his life story and 
• from the perspective of what the trainees should practise. 
1. Prince Siddhartha was conferred the crown initiation by all the buddhas of the ten directions who imparted to him the mantra, citta-prativedham karomi and made him meditate on its meaning. By doing so, he directly realised the suchness (or the factor of natural purity) of his own mind in meditative equipoise. 
Arising from that meditative equipoise, in the post meditative equipoise, his realisation of the suchness of his own mind took the aspect of a moon disc at his heart and he gained the mirror-like exalted wisdom, the entity of Akshobhya. 
Of the five enlightenments, the name of this first manifest enlightenment is called the manifest enlightenment from the individual clear realisation of the mind. 
Trainees should also reflect on the meaning of the mantra, citta-prativedham karomi and through such reflection, they will come to realise the factor of natural purity of their minds. That realisation will likewise transform into the aspect of moon discs (at their hearts).
2. Next, Prince Siddhartha was told to meditate on the meaning of the mantra om bodhicittam utpadayami. By doing so, in meditative equipoise, he directly realised the suchness of his mind as devoid of adventitious defilements. Arising from that meditative equipoise, in the post meditative equipoise, his realisation of the suchness of his mind took the aspect of a second moon disc at his heart and he gained the exalted wisdom of equality, the entity of Ratnasambhava. This second manifest enlightenment is called the manifest enlightenment from generating the mind of supreme enlightenment. 
Likewise, trainees utter the mantra, om bodhicittam utpadayami and meditate to realise the emptiness of their minds as devoid of adventitious defilements. That realisation transforms into the aspect of a second moon discs at their hearts which rest on top of the first moon discs. 
3. The buddhas then made Prince Siddhartha meditate on the meaning of the mantra, tistha-vajra. By doing so, Prince Siddhartha vividly saw the previous all-good mind of enlightenment in the aspect of a white five-pointed vajra standing upright on the moon disc at his heart and he attained the exalted wisdom of individual analysis, the entity of Amitabha. This manifest enlightenment is called the enlightenment from the stable vajra. 
When applied to the practice to be done by trainees, the trainees utter tistha-vajra and meditate on the white five-pointed vajra at their hearts. 
I am not sure whether this white five-pointed vajra is on the second moon disc or the second moon disc transforms into the white five-pointed vajra. It is not clear here. My guess is that by meditating on the second moon disc, that completely transforms into the white five-pointed vajra. 
4. All the buddhas of the ten directions then conferred the name initiation on Prince Siddhartha after which he was designated as Bodhisattva Vajradhatu. They then caused him to meditate on the meaning of the mantra, vajra-atmako ham. By meditating on that, the vajra-elements of the exalted body, exalted speech and the exalted mind of all the buddhas entirely and manifestly entered into the white five-pointed vajra at his heart, and he directly saw that vajra as established from the minute vajra particles of all the Ones-Gone-Thus. He gained the exalted wisdom of achieving activities, the entity of Amoghasiddhi. This manifest enlightenment is called the manifest enlightenment from the vajra essence. 
When this is applied to the practice of the trainees, they utter vajra-atmako ham and meditate on the white five-pointed vajra at their hearts emitting rays of light in the ten directions, through which the vajra-elements of exalted body, the vajra-elements of exalted speech, and the vajra-elements of exalted mind of all the Ones-Gone-Thus entirely enter into the white five-pointed vajra at their hearts. 
5. All the buddhas of the ten directions caused Bodhisattva Vajradhatu to meditate on the meaning of the mantra om yatha sarva-tathagatas tatha 'ham. Through that meditation, the vajra and moons at his heart were thoroughly transformed and manifest as the Complete Enjoyment Body, Mahavairochana, adorned with the thirty-two major marks and eighty signs, becoming completely and perfectly buddhafied. He attains the exalted wisdom of the sphere of reality, the entity of Vairochana. This manifest enlightenment is called the manifest enlightenment from the equality of all the Ones-Gone-Thus. 
With regards to the trainees, they utter om yatha sarva-tathagatas tatha 'ham and the vajras as well as the moons at their hearts transform into the exalted body of Vairochana. The trainees meditate on this. 
According to the system of Yoga Tantra, this is how the Buddha achieved enlightenment. Within Yoga Tantra, we follow the assertion of Anandagarbha. The Buddha achieved enlightenment in Akanishta where he meditated and serially cultivated the five manifest enlightenments in the manner I have just explained.]
Student 6: Does that mean that according to yoga tantra, there is no Causal Perfection Vehicle system because one attains enlightenment directly by entering through yoga tantra just like what Shakyamuni Buddha did. So according to them, there is no Causal Perfection Vehicle because you attain enlightenment by directly entering yoga tantra path. According to yoga tantra, that means every bodhisattva is of definite yoga tantra lineage. 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think probably it is not saying that in the perspective of yoga tantra, Perfection Vehicle does not exist. I don’t think so. Probably it is not the case. 
This is an explanation of how our founder Guru Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment. According to the perspective of yoga tantra, Buddha Shakyamuni did not achieve enlightenment through entering the Perfection Vehicle and then travelling all the way to the end of Perfection Vehicle path and at the end he entered of yoga tantra through which he achieved enlightenment. No, that is not the perspective of yoga tantra. Rather Buddha Shakyamuni entered the path of yoga tantra from the onset, and reached all the way to the 10th ground and with the support in Akanishta, he achieved enlightenment.
It could be the case that the action tantra and performance tantra will also say the same thing. From their own perspective Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment through entering the path of action tantra from the onset or the path of performance tantra from the onset and travels to the end of the path and achieves enlightenment. 
So bear in mind this is a discussion of how Guru Shakyamuni Buddha himself achieved enlightenment from the perspective of yoga tantra. Probably we cannot say that from the perspective of yoga tantra you definitely have to enter the yoga tantra path from the onset. I don’t think you can say that from the perspective of yoga tantra somebody who enters the Perfection Vehicle and at the end, for whatever reason, enter the path of yoga tantra. That is a problem. I don’t think you can say that. This means that there could be people who enter the Perfection Vehicle and somewhere along the line, they enter into the path of yoga tantra. 
Student 9: The root text that says: “This system of yoga tantra does not appear to state append the previously explained yoga on the path of Perfection Vehicle” is applying only in the case of Shakyamuni Buddha. It says that this system of yoga tantra does not add to the Causal Perfection Vehicle.  
Khen Rinpoche: If you apply this to mean Guru Shakyamuni Buddha way of achieving enlightenment because the quotation says: The system of Highest Yoga tantra explain two systems either you enter the tantric path from the onset or you enter the Perfection Vehicle path and then you add on Highest Yoga tantra path at the end of the Perfection Vehicle path, however this is not the case for yoga tantra. 
Student 6: In this case it would seem that other than Shakyamuni Buddha, other bodhisattvas would seem to be able to go what the Highest Yoga tantra explains. That means you have two systems. Except for Shakyamuni if we take this position.
Khen Rinpoche: The reason why there is this discussion in the first place is because it all comes down from an earlier discussion how Shakyamuni Buddha himself achieves enlightenment. It is from the yoga tantra perspective. What we can think about is that from the perspective of yoga tantra, can one achieve enlightenment just by depending on the Perfection Vehicle or not? From the perspective of yoga tantra even if you enter the Perfection Vehicle path, does the individual need to enter the path of yoga tantra in order to achieve enlightenment? This is what we can think about. It is likely that from the perspective yoga tantra itself. Since every class of tantra considers themselves to be supreme and that their own paths can lead to enlightenment, it is likely that they will say you need to depend on this path to achieve enlightenment. In this case you need to receive the crown initiation to achieve enlightenment. 
Probably they are not going to say every trainee is somebody who definitely of the yoga tantra lineage. That means they are not going to say everybody on the onset will enter the yoga tantra.
They are not going to say that they do not accept the Perfection Vehicle a path.  
Since you put all these together probably from the yoga tantra perspective, they would say that there could be people who enter the Perfection Vehicle path, after that enter yoga tantra path and through that achieve enlightenment. They might have to say that. 
Therefore, if we take this particular citation from the Illuminating Lamp with regards to the ways to achieving enlightenment in yoga tantra, is it alright to take that only apply to Shakyamuni Buddha?
Student 6: From the perspective of yoga tantra, those 10th ground bodhisattvas whether are from Causal Perfection Vehicle, action tantra, performance tantra, will eventually enter to yoga tantra. Do they enter to the yoga tantra Path of Seeing? Or which path of yoga tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: If we say that they only enter the path of yoga tantra at their final existent, because there is no difference in their presentation in the objects of abandonment, there is no difference in their presentation of the manner of abandoning the objects of abandonment; in terms of the two obscurations. If that is the case then if we posit entering at the final existence, maybe…
Khen Rinpoche: If we said that any problem?
Student 6: According to yoga tantra, what is missing for the bodhisattva of the sutra, action tantra and the performance tantra on the tenth ground? What is missing that they need to enter the 10th ground yoga tantra to achieve enlightenment?
Ven Gyurme:  Rather what practice is missing? 
Student 6:  What obscuration they need to abandon? With what practice?
Khen Rinpoche: What practice is missing? I don’t know. Need to think.
If you said that it is possible to enter the yoga tantra path after enter the Perfection Vehicle path, then what is the point of entry? Which of the path? Either you say there is a point of entry or you say there is no such thing. Are you going to say that is not possible? 
Khen Rinpoche: Whether you are able to say not possible. Can say or not?
If you say Yes, you can enter the yoga tantra path after entering the Perfection Vehicle path, of the five points, where is the point of entry?  (Yoga tantra Path of Accumulation, Path of Preparation, Path of Seeing, Path of Meditation, Path of No-more-learning)
Let’s see whether it is alright to say that they enter in their final existent on the 10th ground.
Student 7: So the person actually abandoned some knowledge obscuration on the 8th or 9th ground in the Perfection Vehicle. On the 10th ground there is certain knowledge obscuration that the Perfection Vehicle, action and performance tantra cannot abandon. So what will be the knowledge obscuration that is? The action and performance tantra will also say that the bodhisattva also enter their path on the 10th ground. Then there would have a certain knowledge obscuration that cannot be abandoned by the previous path that we talked about.
Khen Rinpoche: Got desire or not?  Hold hand.
Student 7: They would also have to propound for those people like arhats and solitary realizer who will have to enter their path. So for the whole of their lives they have been abstaining from attachment, desire and suddenly got to switch path …
Khen Rinpoche: Suddenly hold hand? 
Student 7: Yeah, hold hand.  Highest yoga tantra is the real karma yoga it is a bit…very tough. A hundred eons of abstaining
There is nothing definitive that we can kind of hold on to or say. There are two things think about, from the perspective of yoga tantra:
Can a practitioner of the Perfection Vehicle enter the yoga tantra path? 
If yes, is it okay to say that they enter during the final existence of the 10th ground? 
It is not clear in the yoga tantra but it is something that we can look at. Whereas in the Highest Yoga Tantra, there are these qualms and these qualms are settled. It is clear in Highest Yoga Tantra. 
So if we take it that they enter the yoga tantra path and enter in their final existence, even then in their final existence when in meditative equipoise, they have to be awakened by the buddhas and the buddhas confer on them the initiation and meditate on the five manifest enlightenment. Only through that they achieve enlightenment. Even if we take the position that they do enter the yoga tantra path during their final existence. This would have to be the case right? They have to receive initiation and so forth.
It is not clear in the text. Discuss and think about it whether this work if we take this as our position.
So then the author states;
Therefore, I wonder whether it shouldn’t be asserted—within the system of yoga tantra—that our Master attained enlightenment through entering that path of yoga tantra from the beginning and that to attain enlightenment by the Perfection Vehicle, it is not necessary to add the path of yoga tantra.
Explanation of the Two Investigations explains that the mantric path is added at the end of the Perfection Vehicle.
[Extract from Prinicples of Buddhist Tantra: Explanation of the Two Investigations is an explanatory text on the root tantra of Hevajra composed by Khedrup Rinpoché. In this work Khedrup Jé states that supplementing the sūtra paths with mantra paths does exist. Still, this possibility is not mentioned within the texts of yoga tantra, according to which Buddha Śākyamuni attained enlightenment by entering the path of yoga tantra from the beginning.]
There seems to be two positions given by the views expressed by the quotations from the two texts are different. There is one citation from Illuminating Lamp and then Explanation of the Two Investigations.
Student 6: Adding on that the query about the ability of taking desire, it was explained in the Causal Perfection Vehicle that desire is taken as an aid to enlightenment on the impure grounds. On the pure grounds, that practice is no longer done. The reason given was the bodhisattva has abandoned all the afflictions. So the bodhisattva is unable to utilize desire as an aid on the path on the pure ground because the afflictions are abandoned. Yet when someone enters into tantra is again able to take desire as a path. From the sutric perspective, the bodhisattva is able take desire as an aid on the path to enlightenment on the impure ground. On the pure ground, he is no longer able to do that. Reason was he has abandoned all the afflictions. Therefore he is unable to use desire as an aid to enlightenment on the pure ground. Yet when the bodhisattva eventually enters tantra, he is again able to use desire as a path to enlightenment. Isn’t it the case he already abandoned all the afflictions? How he is able to use that when he enters tantra from the pure ground?
Khen Rinpoche: You understand the question? Answer.
Student 8: That time when he asked this question, your answer was not necessary to utilize. I understand desire is always associated with afflictive obscuration. If we think about even the arhats and solitary realizers and 10th ground bodhisattva they will not have any afflictive obscuration and yet can enter the tantric path for all the four tantras. So the desire that we understand is not necessarily as afflictive obscuration?
Khen Rinpoche: What?
Student 8: The desire, you know, that we understand it may not be what we understand as necessarily about afflictive obscuration.
Khen Rinpoche: Then?
Student 6: Could it be the imprints of desire? Or that, in the future will produce similar appearances? Because the function of imprints for as a knowledge obscuration that will produce similar appearances in the future. Could that be appearances of desire? I don’t know. Appearances rather than having generating the afflictive mind of desire there is the appearance of desire.
Khen Rinpoche: Appearance of desire?
Student 6: Yeah. Due to not the seeds but the imprints which are knowledge obscuration that still exists on the pure grounds.
Khen Rinpoche: From the perspective of Perfection Vehicle, on the three pure grounds, desire and attachments have already been abandoned together with the seeds. If you said taking that there is the imprint or predisposition of attachment that produces some pleasant appearances.
Having said that, if you looked at what is posited as the knowledge obscuration, there are two:
One being the factor that which is manifest, which is basically the appearance of true existence. They do not posit any other appearances. 
The other is the predisposition of ignorance.
This is something to think about how desire is taken as the path when it is already abandoned.
Student 9: I remembered you did mention something in Ornament of Clear Realization that the main object of abandonment of the bodhisattva is not necessarily attachment. The main abandonment is mainly ignorance, view of transitory collections and pride because attachment does not harm them in the practice. In fact, they can use it to utilize to benefit sentient beings. That was taught in the Ornament of Clear Realization. I think it is lesson 7.
Khen Rinpoche: That is not a problem if you are talking about the first seven impure grounds, because on the first seven impure grounds, they do not specifically target going about mainly to overcome attachment. Also they have not abandoned the afflictive obscuration yet on the seven impure grounds. So then to say that attachment is utilized for whatever purpose, you can say that attachment can be utilized. But now we are talking about the three pure grounds. How are you going to explain the three pure grounds? That is our discussion here.
Student 10: Perhaps the word “taking desire into the path” is the interpretative meaning and not the definitive meaning. The definitive meaning could be taking bliss into the path because in the three lower classes of tantra it is mentioned primarily the bliss that is derived from looking, holding hands, embracing or in sexual union, they didn’t specifically mentioned the desire that derived from….the word primarily centered on the word ‘bliss’. In fact the arhats do experience the bliss of nirvana. In fact, Buddha, Sugata, the meaning is one gone to bliss. So bliss is not an afflictive obstruction and it is also not knowledge obstruction. That is how I see it. My question is “What is the boundary for the attainment of the common siddhis in the three lower classes of tantra?” I am not so sure with regard to the starting point: Is it when calm-abiding is achieved or after calm-abiding is achieved?
Khen Rinpoche: I think for the small attainment, you don’t need to depend on the concentration because there are other ways of accomplishing them. To achieve those common siddhis like the immortality and so forth, and the many siddhis, I think you will need to have the union of calm-abiding and special insight.
Student 11: Is there a difference between worldly, trans-worldly siddhis, common and supreme siddhis? Because these are used so interchangeably it is very confusing.
Worldly, trans-worldly which I think is what Khen Rinpoche is talking about. Common and supreme: I understand supreme to be enlightenment. Common to be like life-bearing knowledge. So is there a difference between worldly, trans-worldly, common and supreme siddhis?
So for the common siddhis, you can have the worldly and the transcendental.
Khen Rinpoche: When we talk about common and supreme siddhis, the supreme siddhis refer to actual enlightenment.
Perhaps transcendental siddhis are those that are obtained upon achieving the superior path.
So just like the superior and ordinary path, the ordinary paths are the worldly people. As for the transcendental when one achieves the supreme path.
[BP1: Answer to student’s query: According to the Autonomy Middle Way School and the schools below it, the emptiness of the mind is not a true cessation and is not an ultimate truth. It is a conventional truth. 
According to the Consequence Middle Way School, however, true cessation is none other than the emptiness of the mind. When the emptiness (suchness) of the mind is purified of the adventitious defilements, that mind is true cessation. 
I am telling you this based on my personal observation. This is not based on any text. Looking at the above process, the emptiness of the mind and the emptiness of the mind devoid of the adventitious defilements are strongly connected. The first and second emptinesses of the mind are closely related and both become moon discs. If the first is a moon disc and the second a sun disc, there seem to be no connection between the two. True cessation is not something that is separated from the mind. 
The five manifest enlightenments also occur in Highest Yoga Tantra but their meaning is totally different from what we have discussed here. For example, restraining life-force exertion occurs in both lower Tantra and Highest Yoga Tantra but their meanings are totally different. 
Question: If Prince Siddhartha was already a Buddha and his spiritual journey was a display for our benefit, then how about the story of how the Buddha first generated compassion as a hell being? Was that also a display?
Answer: At that time, he was a truly qualified hell being and wasn’t a buddha then. This account shows how much hardship was endured and how hard he practised to become a buddha, the effort put into generating bodhicitta. 
If we were to assert that everything is a display, then that means that right from the very beginning, he was a buddha already. What is the problem with such an assertion? If that was so, then there is no need for practice because he is already a buddha. 