Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L31.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:14.572430
================================================================================

We have finished with the 3 lower classes of tantra. Quite a few people have asked me to relate the material learned in class to a specific self-generation practice. Since we do Nyung-na here I thought maybe I can try to do that explanation in relation to the self-generation practice of Avalokiteshvara. In the process we will see all the different sections of the practice. 
Unless you have memorized the Nyung-na sadhana, otherwise please look at the text at the same time as I explain. 
Khen Rinpoche: On the Sunday, some of you said that we talk so much but we do not know how to practice. So if you want to practice, today is the practice. Make sure you understand everything in this sadhana. What we have talked so far is inside here. 
Reference text: A Nyung Nä Ritual Sadhana of the Eleven-Faced Great Compassionate One in the Pälmo Tradition
(Page 41) Requests of the Lineage Gurus
The heavens of the dharmakiya are supreme yet, out of warmth, 
A hundred thousand moisture-bearing clouds of non-referential compassion gather. 
I make requests to Padmapani, skilled in sending a rainfall
Of attainments of benefit and bliss to limitless migrators. 
Excellent Bhikshuni Lakshmi, gone to the stage of supreme liberation
Chandra Kumara, who favored the five sciences; 
Jnanabhadra, sublimely strong in patience, effort, and faith; 
I make requests to you three friends of migrators. 
Penyawa of Nepal, best of scholars;
Excellent Dawa Gyaltsan, emanation of the Supreme Arya;
Nyiphug Chokyidrag, lord of practice; 
I make requests to you three great beings. 
Tupa Dorje Gyal, descendent of the conquerors’ children; 
Excellent Zhangton Drajig, great in learning and morality; 
Thugje Jangchub Pal, endowed with morality’s fragrance; 
I make requests to you three who clarified the path to liberation. 
Dewa Chan, with control over countless concentrations; 
Jangchub Bar, with visions of hosts of meditational deities; 
Yeshe Burn, who possessed a treasury of precious qualities; 
I make requests to you three who fulfilled the hopes of migrators. 
Thogme Zangpo, who attained mastery over bodhichitta;
Sherab Pal, emanation of the invincible conqueror, Maitreya; 
Tsultrim Tsan, who constantly protected all migrators with compassion; 
I make requests to you three who spontaneously achieved the welfare of others.
Yontan Rinchen. holy guide of migrators, 
Sangya Gyatso, lord over an ocean of Buddha’s doctrine; 
Kyabchog Pal, who showed the path to infinite embodied beings; 
I make requests to you three who embodied scripture and realization. 
(Gy'alwa) Ensapa, hero who accomplished righteous conduct; 
Sangya Yeshe, who fulfilled the hopes of the fortunate; 
Excellent (Panchen) Losang Chbgyan, seeing all to be known; 
I make requests to you three holy guides. 
Damtsig Dorje (Konchog Gyaltsan), who acquired the supreme accomplishment; 
Excellent (Panchen) Losang Yeshe, lord of all the families; 
Venerable Donyo Khadrub, clarifier of the excellent path; 
I make requests to you three lamps of the doctrine. 
I make requests to Ngawang Chogdan, embodiment of the glorious, 
Who partook of the supreme wisdom of the five-knotted lord of speech, Manjushri , 
And to Kalsang Gyatso, (the seventh Dalai Lama), 
Who clarified the doctrines of scripture and realization of the good eon’s fourth guide (Shakyamuni Buddha). 
I make requests to the ocean of varieties of emanations of the Supreme Krya, 
Universally appearing as environments and inhabitants, 
Apparitions of analytic wisdom and compassion 
Unified with an all-pervading nature, pure from the very beginning. 
The above is the actual request to the individual lineage gurus. 
If possible when reciting the Requests to the Lineage Lamas, visualize them in the space in front you. As you recite the verses, first you are making requests.  With that you do the visualizations of receiving the blessings and purification through the descent of light and nectar. 
Please bless me that I might be cared for closely like an only child 
By Padmapani who enjoys the Potala 
And by drinking the essence of the nectar of the Mahayana. 
Accomplish solely what is pleasing with my three doors. 
You then make request to the direct and the lineage gurus by focusing on one’s direct guru to practice inseparable from Chenrezig and make request that “one might be cared for closely like an only child’ by Chenrezig all the time and one may always be able to enjoy the drink of ‘the nectar of the Mahayana.’ Also whatever one does with body, speech and mind may it be only pleasing to the guru Chenrezig. That is the first request. 
This is a very important point. We are requesting that whatever we do with our body, speech and mind will only be pleasing to the guru Chenrezig. I guess you can relate it to the practice of correctly devoting to the virtuous friends. 
Next verse (Page 43):
Please bless me to renounce all the perfections of cyclic existence
To be unattached to the bliss of my own peace 
And to generate the supreme mind desiring to liberate mothers, 
Equal to space, from the ocean of suffering. 
“Please bless me to renounce all the perfections of cyclic existence” - it does not matter what kind of enjoyments of all the pleasant objects or enjoyments of perfections of samsara or whatever it is, we request to be able to renounce or give up all of that. Yet at the same time not to be attracted to one’s own liberation only, but rather make request to be able to generate the mind of enlightenment with the desires to free all the sentient beings from samsara. 
Please bless me to eliminate ordinary appearance and grasping 
With the clear appearance and (divine) pride of the six deities: 
The deity of thusness, the tone of the mantra’s empty resonance, the seed syllable, 
The form complete with marks and exemplifications, the commitment mudra, and sign. 
We saw how the path of action tantra can be subsumed under the 3 mudras:
Meditating on the mind is the suchness
Meditating on the speech is mantras, 
Meditating on the body is the Mahamudra
Anyway, through meditating the entire path of action tantra is subsumed under the 3 mudras. Through the practice of 6 deities, here we are making requests that one will be able to generate clear appearance and divine pride. Through that, may we be able to cut ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. 
On the basis of correctly devoting to the virtuous friend, one generates renunciation. With this renunciation as a condition, one generates the mind of enlightenment. With that, one enters the path of action tantra. After entering the path of action tantra, one engages in the yoga with signs to develop clear appearance and divine pride. Through that one cuts the ordinary appearance and adherence of ordinariness. 
Please bless me to accomplish each and every (common) attainment 
Through dependence on the concentration with four-branched repetition 
And to complete perfect concentration 
With the yogas of absorption in fire and sound. 
‘Please bless me to accomplish each and every (common) attainment through dependence on the concentration with four-branched repetition’ - you remember the four-branched repetition?
There is the concentration with repetition. From that we go on to the concentration without repetition. Through dependence on the concentration with four-branched repetition and to complete perfect concentration with the yogas of concentration of fire and concentration of sound. 
On the basis of clear appearance and divine pride, one engages in the four-branched repetition. When one reaches the end of the concentration abiding in sound then one achieves uncommon calm abiding. From there, one goes on to the yoga without signs. 
The uncommon calm abiding is a perfect concentration. If we phrase it as uncommon calm abiding, is it ok or not? 
When one reaches the end of the concentration abiding in sound, one achieves the perfect concentration. With that, one reaches the end of yoga with signs. 
Please bless me to uproot the two obscurations 
With the great space-like concentration 
Bestowing immaculate liberation that destroys all trust in grasping at signs, 
And by being endowed with a mass of merits of skill-in-means. 
“Please bless me to uproot the two obscurations with the great space-like concentration’ – just by depending on the yoga with signs one would not be able to overcome the two obscurations. One must generate the yoga without signs. 
The ‘great space-like concentration’ is essentially the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound. 
‘And by being endowed with a mass of merits of skill-in-means’ - when we talk about the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity:
 “profundity” refers to the meditation of realizing emptiness and
 “clarity” refers to the clear appearance of the deity
I wonder if it is ok if we take ‘skill-in-means’ to mean the practice of clear appearance of deity. 
Please bless me to attain soon the complete direct exalted wisdom regarding all phenomena, 
The wish-fulfilling form bodies with their nets of light, 
And to spontaneously achieve the enlightened activities,
Ripening and liberating migrators included in the five families
 “ripening and liberating migrators included in the five families’ - after achieving enlightenment may one is able to place all sentient beings in full enlightenment 
This is essentially making request to the lineage gurus. Since this is the practice of action tantra, this request is connected to the path and the practice of action tantra. 
Instantaneous Generation (Page 53)
I instantaneously arise as the holy body of the Great Compassionate One
The reason why one arises as the deity instantaneously is for the purpose of being able to consecrate or bless the offerings. 
The actual body of the self-generation practice comes later on in “the means of accomplishment” which we call the sadhana. Here the instantaneous self-generation as a deity is for the purpose of blessing the offerings at the beginning. 
Blessing the Action Vase (Page 53)
If you have an action vase to be used during the purification of the offerings, it can be blessed at this point. Visualize as is done in the subsequent blessing of the actual offerings. 
Om Padmantakrit Hum Phat. 
Om svabhava shuddhah sarva dharmah, svabhava shuddho ham. 

The action vase becomes just empty. From the sphere of emptiness the syllable Bam appears which transforms into a precious white vase complete in all characteristics: a long neck, a large belly, and a lip overhanging the mouth. 
Recite the following action mantra 108 times: 
Om Padmantakrit Hum Phat. 
If the action vase is used, it is not blessing the action vase but is blessing the water in the action vase when we say it is accomplishing the action vase. With the water that is blessed (transformed) one uses that to dispel interferers abiding in the offerings.  
Blessing the Offerings (Page 55) 
Then, recite the following action mantra and visualize that as an immeasurable host of wrathful (one-faced, two-armed Hayagrivas, dark red in color, and crowned with a green horse’s head) are emitted, the assembly of interfering (spirits) dwelling on the offering substances are expelled to the opposite shore of the ocean. (If you have an action vase, use the stern of a pure plant to sprinkle water from it while reciting the mantra). Hereafter, (the visualization) is the same on all occasions of reciting the action mantra: 
Om Padmantakrit Hum Phat.
When we are blessing the offerings, at the beginning we need to dispel any interference that may be abiding within the offerings. So for the purpose, one dispels the interferences. In this practice here we recite the mantra 
Om Padmantakrit Hum Phat.
When one dispels the interferers abiding in the offerings one recite the action mantra and simultaneously one sprinkles the dispelling water from the vase. At the same time imagine emanating a host of wrathful ones from one’s hearts as the deity. This forces the wrathful ones to dispel all the interferences that may be abiding in the offerings. One must think that all of them are chased away. 
Whenever we are blessing offerings, usually the practice is divided into 4 outlines:
Dispelling
Purification
Generation
Blessing.
The first outline is dispelling is to dispel interferers that may be abiding in the offerings. We do that with the recitation of the action mantra and sprinkling of the vase water, if there is. At the same time, do the visualization of emitting host of the wrathful ones to dispel the interferences. So that is the first step of dispelling.
Khen Rinpoche: Those who have been to Nepal, when you go to the stupa to make the light offering, there is one vase there. After you light they ask you to sprinkle the water. That is not blessing the light. What you think when you do that? The idea is that to chase away the interference. 
Just by me explaining and you listening to the explanation by itself is not going to be beneficial. It does not mean just because I explain and you listen mean you get it. You get the idea and you must know the stuff. Then you must read and familiarize yourself with the practice. For example, you get use to the sadhana and then you do the visualization. Once when you have some idea because of having thought about it, then you think “Maybe we have something in the practice and there is really something there”, because you have done it. 
Khen Rinpoche: We have not started. Many things to talk. Sometimes many people say “You talk, talk, no action”. What you mean is true - talk no action- is true. We learn so much, still so much there. 
The second step is purification or purifying. This is extremely important. That goes with the mantra 
Om savbhava shuddhah sarva dharmah svabhava shuddho ham
(The offering substances) become just empty. 
One brings to mind and meditates on the empty nature of the offering substances. Whatever offering substances in question or whatever you are blessing, one brings to mind the empty nature. This is important because the offering substances themselves are contaminated phenomena. You have to bring mind onto the empty nature of those offerings, only then you can purify them. Once you have purified them, they are generated from within the understanding or realization of emptiness. 
If the offerings we make are not generated from within the empty nature and if that is offered, put aside the practice of being reducing attachment, there is a danger that it might lead to more attachment. If it is not purified by bringing to mind the empty nature of the offerings, then whatever offerings is just an ordinary offerings because it remains appearing as it is which is ordinary. 
So meditation on emptiness is extremely important. So in this context here, bring to mind the empty nature of the offerings. For if the offerings are generated from within an empty state and offer, then the practice will exhaust attachment because the practice of making offerings are generated with an understanding of emptiness will be able to harm the grasping at true existence. This is what I think is the purpose of meditating on the emptiness of the offering substances before generating them.
From the sphere of emptiness, from (eight) Bhrum (syllables), eight vast and extensive precious vessels arise. Within each (the syllable) Om melts into light from which arise drinking water, water for (bathing) the feet, flowers, incense, lamps, perfume, food, and music. Empty in nature, they have the aspect of the individual types (of offerings) and function to bestow special uncontaminated bliss. 
From the state of emptiness, imagine the syllables Bhrum arises offering vessels. The offering vessels themselves are vast and precious. Within each of those offering vessels are the syllables Om which melts into light and transform into libation. It is not necessary water. We should call it libation or you can say drink, then the water for the feet, flower, incense, lamp, perfume, food, and music.
When we generate the offerings from within an understanding of emptiness, the offerings often generated from syllables. Of the different practices, different syllables, whatever it is, the syllables themselves become the offering vessels. Inside of which are also other syllables which transform into the respective offerings. The point I think of visualizing the offerings arising from syllables after meditation of emptiness is that is to bring to mind signify that how things exist only in mere name, how things are merely imputed by conceptuality. So they exist in mere name only. 
The offerings that are generated should be visualized to be as the best quality, and if possible, the most pleasant:
- If it is flower, the most beautiful flowers. 
- If it is incense, the sweetest smelling incenses.
- If it is light, butter lamps which are extremely bright. 
- If it is scent, extremely nice. 
- If it is food, extremely delicious. 
- If it is music, extremely soothing, pleasant. 
The point is to be the best quality.
What are the characteristics of the offerings that are generated? 
What is their entity (nature)? They are empty by nature. They exist in mere name. They are imputed by thought. 
The aspect is the individual offering substances. 
What about the function of the offerings? They bestow special uncontaminated bliss in the exalted minds of those who partake of the offerings. 
Up to this point, we have finished dispelling, purifying and generating. 
Khen Rinpoche:  When you read you understand the sadhana? Which part is this which part is that?  When you read the sadhana you must understand. It is ok, yeah? Not difficult.
Om argham Ah Hum
Om padyam Ah Hum
Om pushpe Ah Hum
Om dhupe Ah Hum
Om aloke Ah Hum
Om gandhe Ah Hum
Om naividya Ah Hum
Om shapta Ah Hum
So you recite Om argham Ah Hum till Om shapta Ah Hum to bless the offerings. The names of the individual offerings are mentioned and interspersed with the syllables Om Ah and Hum for the purpose of blessings. 
To reiterate the point that generating the offerings within the understanding and realization of emptiness is extremely important. Otherwise, we make offerings as they are ordinary offerings. Then there is always opportunity and danger of miserliness to arise in relation to what you are offering; danger for attachment to arise from those. Without purifying the offerings by bringing to mind meditating on emptiness, then the offerings that are made will be ordinary offerings. How is it possible to cause the guests who partake the offerings to generate the special uncontaminated bliss when something ordinary is offered? 
The function of the offering is that they are supposed to bring about special uncontaminated bliss in the mind of those who partake of the offerings. This arises because the offerings that are presented are pleasant and of good quality. As such they are supposed to cause joy and bliss to arise in those who partake of it. This is something to think about. Just because the bliss is experienced through partaking the offerings does not necessarily lead to the arising of attachment, if that is the case, why? 
The idea is the offerings is supposed to generate special uncontaminated bliss in those who partake the offerings. It does not mean that those who experience this bliss through partaking the offering must necessarily have attachment. They can have bliss without attachment. 
Why am I saying this is? This is because this is in relation to the discussion about the meaning of taking desire into the path?
Khen Rinpoche: If you understand, my answer is there. 
This is the procedure for blessing the offerings: dispelling, purifying, generating and blessing. It does not matter whether you are blessing the offerings to the self-generation, front generation or the merit field, the procedure of blessing the offerings is these four general steps. If you know the general steps, you basically know how to bless the offerings. It does not matter the offerings are for who in this practice. 
Next is Refuge and Bodhicitta (Page 57)
There is no need to go into that here. 
The offerings for the merit field have already been blessed earlier on. Now before one offers to them, one invites the merit field.
Invocation of the Merit Field (Page 57)
The manner of the inviting or invoking the merit field is evident in the ritual as it is quite clear in all rituals. 
Invoke the field of collecting (merit) as follows, thinking: 
Rays of light emanate from the white (syllable) Hrih that rests on the moon disc at the heart of oneself visualized as the Great Compassionate One, invoking from the natural abode the Guru Arya Great Compassionate One having the aspect of eleven faces, surrounded by the root and lineage gurus, the assembly of deities of the Great Compassionate One, and an assembly of meditational 
deities, buddhas, bodhisattvas, dakas and dakinis, Dharma protectors, and guardians. 
All abiding in the space before me on a wide stem thousand petalled lotus.
In this case here, visualize at the heart of yourself as Chenrezig. There is a moon disc. On top of which is a white syllable Hrih.
The invocations of light from the white syllable Hrih at the heart of yourself as the Great Compassionate One invoke from the natural abode the Guru Arya Great Compassionate. 
The merit fields are invited from their natural abode. There are different ways of invocation with regards to what a natural abode here means. There is an invocation that is related to the complete enjoyment body. So if you are doing invocation in relation to that then you imagine you are invoking or inviting Avalokiteshvara the complete enjoyment body who is obviously abiding in the pure land and invoking that aspect to the space in front of you and abide as an object of worship. 
This is one way of inviting Avalokiteshvara (Chenrezig) from the pure land and together with the host of gurus, buddhas, bodhisattvas, dakas, dakinis, dharma protectors.  They all come to the space of in front of you and sit happily abiding on a very big lotus with 1,000 petals. 
Another take on the natural abode is the dharmakaya from within the state of emptiness. This way of invocation does not involve calling the merit field to come from another place, but rather it just appear instantaneously in the space in front of you; that is just by thinking of them and they are there. 
Those of you who say: “What is the relationship or the theory that we have learned in relation to the actual practice? If we were to look at the actual practice itself it is clearly evident.  It is quite clear that, generally speaking, everything is in the text. All you have to do is read it, familiarize yourself with it and do the visualization and think about it. It is all there and is straightforward.
After inviting the merit field, one engages in the practice of the seven branch worship. This is extremely important for the accumulating merit and purifying the negativities and obscurations. It is said whether the experiences of tasting the dharma, experiencing the dharma, or generating the realization depends on the accumulating merits and purifying. It is said that the highest field of merit is one root guru. 
Limb of Prostration (page 59)
First there is the branch of obeisance or homage and it goes all the way till page 67. There is no need to talk about it. If this is done well one can accumulates great amount of merit. The way to pay homage and the way to think and so forth has already been explained in the Stages of Path to Enlightenment literature. There is no need to go into that again.
Limb of Offering (page 67)
Imagine: 
Offering goddesses arise from the (syllable) Hrih at one’s heart and make offerings. 
Having emanated (from one’s heart) offering goddesses filling the sphere of space, youthful in form and holding the specific offering substances, offer the following: drinking water to the heads or in front (of the merit field deities), foot bath to the feet, flowers in the mode of adorning the heads, etc., incense to the noses, lamps in front, perfume to the hearts, food to the mouths, and the sound of music to the ears. Thereby, imagine the entire merit field is satisfied with great uncontaminated bliss. 
Oneself has already clarified as the deity. From the syllable Hrih at the heart of oneself as the deity then you emanate host of offering goddesses who present the offerings to the merit field.
In the note on the ritual it says visualize offering goddesses that are beautiful and youthful. Just as the offerings that are presented are pleasant and of the best quality, likewise, the goddesses who are presenting the offerings are also visualized to be pleasant, beautiful, attractive and youthful.
The reason why we need to visualize the offering goddesses being beautiful and youthful and offering substances are being pleasant and good quality so that the level of joy or bliss that is generated in the mind in those who partake the offering commensurate with how pleasant and how beautiful one visualizes the offerings. So the better the quality and the more beautiful you visualized then that much more bliss is able to induce in those who partake of the offerings.
Visualizing the offering goddesses and the offering substances having those attributes is for the purpose of inducing joy or bliss in the mind of those who partake of the offerings. I would think that bliss or the joy that is experienced in those who partake of the offerings has to be different from the kind of ordinary joy that we experience. The ordinary joy or bliss that we experience is tied in with attachment and desire. There must be a difference.
The kind of bliss or joy that we like in our experience is tied in with attachment. It is contaminated and is tainted with attachment. Such a kind of joy and bliss is an object of abandonment. It is not something to be adopted. It is not something to be practiced. It is not something to be generated. 
This practice is done by people who have renunciation and bodhicitta. If we are talking about renunciation, that mean not interested and already given up on that kind of joy and happiness that we ourselves like as they are tainted with desire and attachment. If they are given up, how can it be this kind of bliss that is generated?
Khen Rinpoche: Are you confused? Or clear? Make sense? No?
You guys are so interested in taking the desire as the path, you all want to what is it?
Khen Rinpoche: That is all. What else?
We have to think about this. The real practitioner who does this kind of practice is someone who has generated renunciation and already developed. So someone who has generated renunciation will not go about manifesting that which they have already renounced.
Khen Rinpoche: I think about. I don’t know. Okay.
The practitioner is supposed to emanate these offering goddesses holding the individual offering substances. You emanate the goddesses equal in number to the limitless space. For example, for those goddesses who are offering flowers, they are pleasant and holding beautiful flowers and then offer.
Whatever offerings are presented you must think as that a result of partaking of the offerings, the guests, or the ones who are enjoying or partaking the offerings generate the special uncontaminated great bliss. You must think that. This is an essential point. With this thinking one accumulates the collection.
Whether accumulates lots of merit or not depends on what you think, how you think and what you visualize. That is important. Even if you have a lot of actual offering substances set out in mountains of them, but if your way of thinking is very limited, then the merit that you accumulate is just limited. Even in the case when the amount of offerings is not substantial but if you really know how to think, what do think and if you think big, then you will be able to amass easily a great collection of merit. That is why they say everything comes down to how you think, how you visualize, and what you think.
Limb of Confession (Page 75)
Rejoicing (Page 85)
Urging (Page 85)
Requesting (Page 85)
Dedicating (Page 85)
Then the rest of the seven branch of worship, continue with the branch of confession branch of rejoicing, branch of imploring and urging them to turn the wheel of Dharma, the branch of requesting the merit field to not to pass away to parinirvana, and finally dedicating the merits towards enlightenment.
The Dharani of Immaculate Morality (Page 87) 
Then one recites the dharani of immaculate immorality and then finishing off with a prayer of pure morality. 
Then follow by meditation on the four immeasurable.
I think that the meditation on the four immeasurable here constitutes an offering of practice.
The means of achievement or the sadhana can be easily divided into three sections:
Preliminary
Actual body 
Conclusion
After the meditation on four immeasurable, then one contemplates and imagines that the merit field returns to their own abode. Up to there, is the preliminary section of the practice.
Khen Rinpoche: Is the appetizer, then main course. Then last is what? Dessert. 
The Actual Ceremony (page 89)
The actual (ceremony can be divided into) two: 
A. How to meditate on the self-generation (i.e. meditation on the Six Deities), 
B. How to meditate on the front generation.
Next is the actual practice on the main body. We talked about the four branches of the repetition. We talked about the self basis, other basis, mind basis and sound basis.
HOW TO MEDITATE ON THE SELF-GENERATION 
Here the self-basis is referred to the practice of self-generation.
The practice of the self-generation here in the action tantra is done by way of generating the 6 Deities. The 6 Deities are also referred to as the 6 Enlightened Ones as mentioned in the end note of this particular section (Page 99). 
The self-generation is done through generating the 6 Deities:
Empty Deity (Ultimate Deity)
1. The Ultimate Deity (Page 89)
Contemplating as follows is (the meditation on) the Ultimate Deity: 
Om svabhava shuddhah sarva dharmah, svabhava shuddho ham. 
The natures of myself, of the deity to be meditated upon and of all phenomena are in essence of one taste in emptiness. 
The first one is the Empty Deity (Ultimate Deity). 
Here it says “The nature of myself, of the deity to be meditated upon” – deity that is meditating on is Chenrezig. 
“All other phenomena are in essence of one taste in emptiness” - this is the time we have to meditate on emptiness and to generate an ascertainment of it. Ideally, we have to generate a valid cognition of emptiness. Such a reflection here is called the empty deity (ultimate deity).
2. The Deity of Sound (Page 89)
Contemplating as follows is (the meditation on) the Deity of Sound:
From the sphere of emptiness, the aspect of the tone of the mantra, ‘Om mani padme Hum” resounds, pervading the realm of space. 
Contemplating in such a way is the Deity of Sound.
Visualize within this sphere of emptiness arises the tone of the mantra “Om mani padme Hum” resounding. It is in the aspect of the sound but in reality it is Chenrezig appearing as sound.
3. The Deity of Syllables  (Page 89)
Contemplating as follows is (the meditation on) the Deity of Syllables: 
My mind, in the aspect of the undifferentiable suchness of myself and the deity, becomes a moon mandala, upon which the very aspect of the tone of the mantra resounding in space is set down having the form of written syllables (the sounds and the written letters mixing), like very pure mercury adhering to grains of gold. 
Reflecting in such a way is the Deity of Syllables.
“My mind” is the mind that has ascertained emptiness. That mind that ascertains emptiness appears in the aspect of moon mandala. It is on the very moon mandala upon which the sound of the mantra, “Om mani padme Hum” resounding in space comes down and settles on that moon disc in the form of the syllables of the mantra.
4. The Deity of Form (Page 91)
The (syllables) transform into a thousand-petalled lotus, as brilliant as refined gold, marked at the center by the mantra, Om mani padme Hum. From the tips of multicolored light rays emitted from the moon, lotus, and mantra, innumerable holy bodies of the Arya (Avalokiteshvara) spread out, pervading all the realms of space. Great clouds of miraculously emanated offerings are beautifully offered to the buddhas and their children. From yet another great emanated cloud, a continuous rain of nectar descends, extinguishing the fires of suffering of all migrators of the hells and other (realms). They are satisfied with bliss (and become Avalokiteshvara). Then, the light rays, along with the bodies of the deity, return and enter into one’s own mind (in the aspect of) the moon mandala, lotus, and mantra garland. 
These transform into a multicolored lotus and moon seat, upon which oneself arises as Arya Avalokiteshvara with a white-colored body in the prime of youth and radiating rays of light. Of the eleven faces, the root face is white; the right, green; and the left, red. Above that, the central face is green; the right, red; and the left, white. Above that, the central face is red; the right, white; and the left, green. They also have long narrow eyes and smiling expressions. Above these is a wrathful black face with bared fangs and wrathful wrinkles, a third eye, and orange hair standing upright. On the crown is a peaceful red face with a crown protrusion, having a chaste aspect, devoid of ornaments, and with (its own) neck. 
The first two hands are folded at the heart (and hold a jewel). The second right hand holds a rosary; the third eliminates the hunger and thirst of the hungry ghosts by sending down a stream 
of nectar from (the mudra of) granting sublime (realizations); and the fourth holds a wheel. The second left hand holds a golden lotus with a stem, the third holds a water vessel, and the fourth 
holds a bow and arrow. 
The remaining nine hundred ninety-two hands, as soft as lotus petals, are (in the mudra of) granting sublime realizations. In the palm of every hand is an eye. The hands do not extend above the crown protrusion nor below the knees. 
An antelope skin covers the left breast, and there is a lower garment of fine cloth. (The waist is) endowed with a golden belt adorned with jewels; (the head of the wrathful face) is beautified with a garland of orange hair. He has a jeweled crown, earrings, necklace. armlets, bracelets, and anklets, wears garments of various (-colored) silks, and radiates rays of white light. 

There is no need to read everything for the Deity of Form. In Tibetan, we always use “dela” (??) as “this” or “that”, and we always have to figure out what the this or that refers to. 
Prior to this section, what has been generated? It is the moon disc and the syllables of the mantra “Om mani padme Hum” settles on the moon disc. In Tibetan, when we say “that” completely transform into  a thousand petals of lotus and the brilliance of the refined gold … So “that” I think refers to both the moon disc and the syllables.
Through the complete transformation, we have a thousand-petalled lotus which is marked by the mantra Om mani padme Hum.
After the complete transformation, we have the lotus and the mantra. Now you look at the next line, do   you see any seeming contradiction?
Khen Rinpoche: I am just reading from the sadhana.
Here the syllable in the bracket is sometimes put in by the translator to clarify things. However, sometimes it is not clarifying but it is confusing. In Tibetan, “Deyongsu gyurpala” ‘they’ or ‘that’ completely transformed. 
The first thing is how do you read “that” transformed? What is the “that” referring to? Anyway, whatever the “that” is referring to, what does it transformed into? 
It transform into thousand-petalled lotus as brilliance as refined gold, marked at the center by the mantra Om mani padme Hum. 
In the next sentence it says”From the tip of the multicolored light rays emitted from the moon, lotus and mantra”, where does the moon comes from? 
Whatever it is, earlier on we generated the moon disc with the mantra, and that completely transforms into the lotus, and put the moon and the om mani padme Hum on it, then it would be easy.
There is a moon, lotus and the mantra here. From that, light rays go out and perform the two purposes.
With the lotus, moon and mantra, light emanates and goes on to fulfill the two purposes. The manner of fulfilling the two purposes is quite standard. It always involve going out making offerings to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas and most of the light rays going out to all the six types of sentient beings and purifying the individual sufferings and place them in the state of enlightenment. At the end of performing the two purposes, the light rays are withdrawn or gathered back.
The lights are gathered back and “that” completely transform into ….
Again what is the “that” refers to? Just the moon? The moon disc and the mantra? Or just the mantra?  Anyway, whatever “that” is that transform yourself as eleven-faced thousand armed Chenrezig standing on lotus and moon.
It makes some sense to think that the moon and the mantra are transformed into Chenrezig. Because the moon essentially is our own mind - the mind realizing emptiness. Earlier on, you imagined the sound of the mantra which is the actual deity but in the aspect of sound, and that settles on the moon disc and transforms into the letters of the mantra. So it makes a sense to think of oneself arising as Chenrezig from the moon and the letters.
It is completely transformed and you arise as the eleven-faced thousand armed Chenrezig. Here it has a detail description of the visualization. The description is there so that as one reads, one is supposed to meditate and does the visualization.
So completely transformed oneself into the Deity of Form. 
5. The Deity of Mudra (Page 93)
At the crown of the (central) head is a white Om, at the throat. a red Ah, and at the heart, a blue Hum. Upon a moon disc at the heart is a white (syllable) Hrih, with a long vowel (i) and subsequent aspiration (h).
Then, say the following (mantra five times while) touching and blessing the heart. brow, throat, and the tops of the (right and left) shoulders with (one's hands in) the commitment mudra of the lotus family, which was demonstrated before. This is the Deity of Mudra. 
Om padma udbhavaye svaha. (5x)
Visualize three letters Om Ah Hum respectively at the body at your crown, throat and heart. On the moon disc at the heart, there is a white Hrih, with a long vowel and subsequent aspiration.
Through reciting the mantra of the lotus lineage and performing the hand gesture of the lotus lineage touching your heart, mid brow, throat, and top of the right and left shoulders. This is the deity of mudra.
Up to here the deity of the mudra one has generated the commitment being (samayasattva).
6. The Deity of Sign (Page 95)
Then, invoke the wisdom beings saying:
Light rays radiate from the Hrih at the heart, invoking from the natural abode Arya Avalokiteshvara surrounded by the entire assembly of buddhas and bodhisartvas. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara saparivira vajra samaya Jah Jah. Jah, Hum, Bam, Hoh. 
Contemplate: They become non-dual with (oneself), the commitment being. 
The light rays radiate from the Hrih at the heart invite from the natural abode Arya Avalokiteshvara together with all the buddhas and bodhisattvas and absorb and dissolve into yourself which is the commitment being. Through that they become non-dual. That means the wisdom being become non-dual with yourself the commitment being.
While most of the ritual do have these invocation of wisdom being and dissolving into the commitment being, but there are some rituals that do not contain it. It is not absolutely necessarily. Nevertheless, when done, it is helpful later on for the practitioner to develop divine pride, divine identity and clear appearance for the purpose of invitation and absorption of wisdom being is done.
You will see in some text it says that even if the wisdom being are not invited and absorbed that is no fault of omission.
I guess the point is that when we invite the wisdom being and got them absorbed into yourself generated as the committed being give the kind of divine identity “Now I am the actual deity. I am Chenrezig” and help in moving towards the divine pride.
After the absorption of the wisdom being and there is the practice of conferring initiation and the practice of the seal impression. First, one invites the empowering deity and then one makes offering to them.
Khen Rinpoche: Is useful to go through or not? 
Empowerment (Page 95)
Again, light rays radiate from the Hrih at one’s heart, invoking the empowering deities: the five (buddha) families with Amitabha as their principal, together with their retinues. 
Present oEerings while saying: 
Om Pancha kula saparivara-argham, padyam, pushpe, dhupe, aloke, gandhe, naividya, shapta-praticcha svaha. 
“All Tathagatas, please bestow empowerment upon me.’ 
Requested thus, the Goddess Dressed in White and the other who are emitted from the (tathagatas’) hearts hold aloft vase filled with nectar and say: 
Just as at the very time of birth, 
The devas offered ablution (to the Buddha). 
So do I, with pure divine water,
Offer ablution to the holy body. 
Om sarva tathigatha abhisheltata samaya shri ye Ham. 
and bestow the empowerment. Thereby, the entire body is filled and all defilements are purified. From a transformation of the excess water remaining on the crown, the head becomes adorned with Amitabha-the very nature of one’s guru-on the crown, Akshobhya on the forehead, Ratnasambhava behind the right ear, Vairochana at the back, and Amoghasiddhi behind the left ear. 
Contemplate that: 
On a moon cushion at one’s heart is the exalted wisdom being, Arya Avalokiteshvara, with a white-colored holy body, one face and two hands. The right (hand is in the mudra of) bestowing sublime (realizations) and the left holds a lotus (at his heart). 
The moon cushion at his heart is marked by the concentration being, a white (syllable) Hrih with a long vowel (i) and subsequent aspiration (h). 
Having focused upon oneself clearly visualized as the holy body of the deity, to then meditate undistractedly upon it is called meditation on the Deity of Sign. 
There are always these terminologies that you just have to put up with it. You just have to know and know that they exist. When you hear things like “commitment being”, “wisdom being” and concentration being”, you just have to know that they exist.
After inviting the initiating deity, one makes offering and request them to confer the empowerment. Here gokarmo is not just Goddess Dressed in White. It is supposed to be a translation of the name of a goddess gokarmo.  
The goddesses gokarmo and others are emitted from the heart of the buddhas and hold vases filled with nectar with which they confer initiation.
The initiating goddesses confer initiation with the nectar from the vase in their hands. Then one entire body is filled and the stains are purified. From the transformation of the excess water remaining on the crown, then one is adorned with Amitabha on the crown, Akshobhya on the forehead, Ratnasambhava behind the right ear, Vairocana at the back and Amoghasiddhi is behind the left ear.
After doing the initiation and they seal an impression, then you visualize at your heart there is a moon disc upon which stands the wisdom being, Avalokiteshvara, who is white and has one face and two hands; right hand in the mudra of bestowing realization and the left holding a lotus at the heart. In his heart there is a moon disc. On top of which is the white syllable Hrih. This is the visualizing the three tiered being.
Focusing on this visualization, whatever it is generated, with this three tiered being and so forth without being distracted, one meditates in order to elicit clear appearance and divine pride. So meditating like this undistractedly to develop divine pride and clear appearance is called the Deity of Sign. 
So generating yourself as the deity through these 6 deities is the self-basis.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay I thought I would finish today, but I don’t think I can finish.
We will continue in the next lesson with the rest of the four branches. Will also see how the meditation on the aspects, their concordant with the four complete purities at the time of the result is done in the sadhana.
You will need to read the ritual and try to figure out the boundaries; where is the self basis, where is the other basis and when is the repetition done? Also the mind and the sound basis. After reading the whole sadhana, you try to figure out which part of the sadhana accords with which aspect of the complete purity of the time of the result.