Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L32.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:19.183640
================================================================================

Last lesson we looked at the practice of generating as the deity through the 6 deities or the 6 Enlightened Ones. That has finished. 
At the end of generating oneself as Chenrezig with the practice of oneself as the commitment being and at the heart is the wisdom being. Chenrezig is having one face and two arms. In the heart of the wisdom being is the concentration being in the form of a white syllable Hrih.
Ideally when one recites the words of the ritual, one has to meditate well on the meaning of the words. In the practice of self-generation here, we start with the ultimate deity (empty deity) which is essentially enlightenment by way of emptiness or enlightenment in emptiness. One reflects well thoroughly. When that is done, one then move on to the next one - enlightenment by way of sound and so on and so forth. 
The word here for enlightenment is jang chub which basically has the meaning of being proficient, being skilled or being good at it; just like one is proficient in cooking.
Khen Rinpoche: Professional in cooking, professional in swimming. You say that?  Proficient in swimming, anyone?  Professional in swimming means swim like a fish. Up and down underwater and 100 meters. The idea is that.
Here, of the 6 enlightenments, the first one is enlightenment in emptiness. What it means here is that one is proficient in the meaning and the meditation on emptiness. The way of practice is that as one goes through the words of the ritual mindfully, one is supposed to meditate on it and become good at it before one moves on to the next section. This is the way of the practitioner. This is how it must be done. One has to practise as one goes through the words mindfully. However, here, people are busy with all kinds of things and don’t have time and always rushing for time. Even just going through the words of the ritual takes so long. Even just going through the ritual makes people tired and need to finish it in a short time. If one needs to finish in a short time and quickly, then there is no time to meditate.
Khen Rinpoche: So what can be done? Sometimes wonder because read the sadhana, one and a half hour finish. Either you read or you don’t read. You read one and a half hour, and if you want to meditate then when you are going to finish the sadhana? 
For us, to do a real practice meditation is difficult. Maybe for us we just going through the words to develop some idea of what is in the practice “Oh, the practice involves this and when reach this section, this is this, that is that. It is kind of an overview review and that’s about it.
Since one can do meditation review on the Lam Rim by just causing the topics to arise in the mind, likewise, one can also just do a brief review as one goes through the words of the sadhana. One need to remind oneself this is this and that is that. If one can think a little bit about those points then it would be good and by the way one develops some familiarity with the practice. At least one knows that there is such a practice and it has those elements. Anyway, we can develop some familiarity with the ritual and some understanding of what is the essential points of the practice and an understanding where one has some kind of conviction “This practice involves this and this. These are the important points. These have to be done.” It might inspire some people to do serious practice in the future.
Khen Rinpoche: Go to the mountain.
After arising as the deity, one seeks to develop concentration without being affected by mental sinking or laxity and excitement for the purpose of eliciting clear appearance and divine pride. This section is the yoga with signs. 
After arising as the deity, in this case, the Great Compassionate One, one identifies oneself as being the actual Great Compassionate One. The idea is that you are not looking at a deity outside but rather it is a practice of self-generation. The essential point here is the self-generation practice that is of clear appearance and divine pride. 
You identify yourself as being the actual Compassionate One. On the basis of appearing as the deity, whatever appearance, in this case the deity’s body appearing to the mind that is meditating, appears as truly existent. It is said that it is extremely important to remember to bring to mind to meditate that appearance is empty of existing in the way it appears. Although it appears as truly existent, it doesn’t exist as truly existent. The meditation involves meditating on the side of the appearance, and also on the side of emptiness. In fact, both the side of emptiness and the side of appearance must come together in one mind. That is why the practice of cultivating the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity is an essential point.
When we reach the 6th deity, the Deity of Signs, after having arisen as the deity, then training in clear appearance and divine pride is extremely important. Clear appearance here is training to elicit a very clear appearance of the deity’s body.
Since the sutra and tantra are differentiated by whether there is the meditation on the aspects that is concordant with the four complete purities of the time of the result, therefore here, in the practice of self- generation in the process of arising as the deity and then training in clear appearance and so forth is the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the complete purity of the body. So out of the four complete purities of the body, environment, abode or enjoyments and activities, here this is the meditation that is concordant with the aspect of the complete purity of the body. 
In this case, the pure body here refers to the pure body of Chenrezig that is adorned with the 32 major marks and 80 exemplifications. Here, the practice of arising as the deity is a meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the complete purity of the body. Although that is not the reality, we don’t have that body but in tantra, there is the practice of meditating on the aspects that are concordant with those complete purities, and in this case the complete purity of the body. That’s what makes it tantra because such a practice is not found in sutra.
Those of you who have been around for a while probably should know this. For those of you who are relatively new to the topic, I am just repeating things again and again so that maybe it will help you to remember. The idea here is that you must also listen and try to understand. Here we say the practice of self-generation arising as the deity is a meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the pure body, you have to understand what does that mean. Why it is so? But if you think about it in general, it is not difficult as it is very straight forward.
Khen Rinpoche: I heard people are lost in tantra. They don’t understand anything. Some of the people said they don’t understand. That’s why I try to make simple. Again if simple, many of you may be bored. I have mentioned before that one of my teacher repeat 20 times until we get bored. I know myself very clearly. He teach, teach, teach like until understand and he repeat again. Sometimes we don’t want to listen like “Don’t tell anymore.” Maybe some of you the same thing here. But for me is very helpful. I still remember some of the topics because of his kindness. Repeat hundred times. I still remember until now. If you are very intelligent, good memory then one time you are okay. Like me, I need hundred times. Some of you maybe same thing like that.
If you are asked: In relation to this means of accomplishment the sadhana for the Great Compassionate One, where is the practice or where is the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the pure body? It is essentially what we have said from the beginning up to here - the practice of self-generation and here is done via the 6 deities. So this is it.
The practice is divided into:
-  Preliminary,
-  Actual body
-  Conclusion
We have finished with the preliminary. We have started on the actual body of the practice.  In the actual body of the practice, it starts with self-generation. Here, the self-generation through the 6 deities. So this section is the practice or the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the pure body.
Next is the practice of making offerings to the self-generation.  Before that we have to bless the offerings for the self-generation. The blessing is exactly what I have said in the last lesson. The procedure is the same. Essentially there are four outlines:
Dispelling, 
Purification, 
Generation 
Blessing.
Dispelling means dispelling interferers. If we think about it, we can expand the idea of interferers to include afflictions. The conventional kind of interferers that we talk about maybe adheres or sticks to the individual offerings in which we call the outer interferers. I think the real interferers are the inner afflictions. So we can perceive or look at them as the inner interferers.
Next is the purification or purifying the offering substances in emptiness and we generate the offerings from within emptiness. The purpose is to stop ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness.
Offerings to the Self-Generation (Page 101)
Blessing the Offerings (Page 101)
Then, (perform) the offerings to the self-generation. Cleanse (the offering substances of) hindrances by means of the (action) mantra along with visualization: 
Om Padmantakrit Hum Phat
Om svabhava-shuddhah sarva-dharmah, svabhava-shuddho ham. 
(The offering substances) become just empty. 
From the sphere of emptiness, from (eight) Bhrum (syllables), eight vast and extensive precious vessels arise. Within each (the syllable) Om melts into light from which arise drinking water, water for (bathing) the feet, flowers, incense, lamps, perfume, food and music. They are empty in nature, have the aspect of the individual types (of offerings) and function to bestow special uncontaminated bliss. 
Om argham Ah Hum
Om padyam Ah Hum
Om pusphe Ah Hum
Om dhupe Ah Hum
Om aloke Ah Hum
Om gandhe Ah Hum
Om naividya Ah Hum
Om shapta Ah Hum
As we saw in the last lesson, the offerings possess three characteristics. 
What is the nature of the offerings? They are by nature empty.
What are their aspects? They are in the aspect of the individual offering substances.
What is their function? Their function is to confer special uncontaminated bliss in the continuum of those who partake of the offerings. 
When it is time to present the offerings, instead of interspersing the name of the offering with the syllables Om Ah and Hum, you say Om so and so argham praticcha svaha, instead of saying Ah Hum. 
Present the offerings by (reciting the following while making the appropriate mudras): 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivara argham praticcha svaha. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivara padyam praticcha svaha. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivara pushpe praticcha svaha.
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivara dhupe praticcha svaha.
 Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivara aloke praticcha svaha. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivara gandhe praticcha svaha.
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivira naividya praticcha svaha. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivara shapta praticcha svaha. 
Here is the practice of making offerings to oneself as the deity. You are making offering so the self-generation deity. As such, when you emanate the offering goddesses, and once they are emanated, they have to face you and present the offerings to you as the deity. The offering goddesses make offerings to the self-generation deity and also they offer the praise to the self-generation deity. 
Here the practice of making offerings to the self-generation deity and making praises is the practice or the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with pure enjoyments. 
Praise (Page 102)
Praise by saying: 
Highly venerated by all the buddhas, 
You accumulated all holy qualities and 
Were conferred the name Avalokiteshvara: 
I prostrate to the always merciful one.
We have already gone through the topic of the four complete purities. At least in relation to the practice of the Great Compassionate One here, you should have an idea “This section of the practice, for example, in the self-generation section, goes with the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the pure body. Now here the practice of making offerings to the self-generation and praise is the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the pure enjoyments”. 
Khen Rinpoche: You got the sadhana. Must read the sadhana.
Next is the practice of repetition. Before that one blesses the rosary. The way of blessing the rosary starts with first paying homage to the guru and deity. 
Blessing the Rosary (Page 102)
Then, with regard to doing the (mantra) recitation, bless the counting rosary. With palms joined at one’s heart, pay homage to the guru and deity saying: 
Om guru sarva tathagata kaya vak chitta vajra pranamena sarva tathagata vajra pada bandhanam karomi. 
Then, put a properly assembled rosary that conforms with the activity to be done (i.e. a crystal or bodhiseed rosary for peaceful actions) between your cupped hands and bless it by reciting (the following mantra) seven times: 
Om vasumati shriye svaha. [7x] 
In this particular self-generation ritual or at least the section on the self-generation, there is no explicit indication of visualizing the mandala. This mean that there is no indication of the practice or meditating on the aspect that is concordant with the pure abode. What I think is that at the time of blessing the offerings and consecrating the offerings for the self-generation, we can consider the environment as the pureland. 
So I would think that at the time of consecrating the offerings and  blessing the offerings for the self-generation, you also think that you are transforming the environment into pureland. Perhaps it might be considered to be a practice on meditating on the aspect that is concordant with the pure abode or environment. 
In the Highest Yoga Tantra, it is straightforward in that it is very clear because in the beginning of the self-generation practice, you generate the four elemental mandalas and upon which you generate the protection wheel. Inside the protection wheel, you generate the celestial mansion. That is straightforward. What I am talking about here is in the context of just doing the self-generation ritual of the practice without talking about the front generation. We are just talking about the self generation ritual here. In this context where does the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the pure abode or pure environment fit in?
After you have blessed the rosary one then engages in repetition. At this point you have arisen as the deity. In the very centre of your heart is the concentration being. On the moon disc, there is a concentration being, the syllable Hrih, which is surrounded by the mantra garland.
In the context of just the self-generation practice, ourselves as the deity is the self basis. 
Then visualizing at your heart there is the moon disc would be the mind basis.
The mantra garland on the moon disc would be the sound basis. 
Out of the four branches, now we have three: the self, the mind and the sound basis. 
Mantra Recitation (Page 105)
Contemplate as follows:
On a moon disc at one’s heart is the concentration being, (the syllable Hrih), surrounded by garlands of the mantras to be recited, white in color and standing clockwise. Light rays radiate from them filling all the inside of one’s body and purifying all negativities and obscurations. 
Light rays radiate outwards from which an incalculable assembly of deities of the Great Compassionate One are emitted, purifying the negativities and obscurations of all sentient beings and setting them in the state of the Arya (Avalokiteshvara). (These then)  collect back and dissolve into the Hrih at one’s heart. 
After placing the moon disc and the concentration being at the heart of yourself, the means of accomplishment says that light rays radiate from them filling all the inside of one’s body and purify all negativities and obscurations. The light rays radiate outwards on which an incalculable assembly of the Great Compassionate Ones are emitted, purifying the negativities and obscurations of all sentient beings and setting them in the state of the Arya Avalokiteshvara. Light rays are collected back and dissolved into the Hrih at one’s heart. So this is the practice of emanating and recollecting. 
Led by reciting the long dharani one time, recite the essence (mantra) 107 (times, for a total of) 108
Long Dharani [1x] 

Namo ratna trayaya. Namah arya jnana sagara, Vairochana, vyuha rajaya, tathagataya, arhate, samyaksam buddhaya. 
Namah sarva tathagatebhyah, arhadbhyah, samyaksam buddhebhyah. 
Namah Arya Avalokiteshvaraya, bodhisattvaya mahasattvaya mahakarunikaya. 
Tadyatha, Om, dhara dhara, dhiri dhiri, dhuru dhuru, itti vatte, chale chale, prachale prachale, kusume, kusume vare, 
ili mili, citi jvalam, apanaye svaha. 
Essence Mantra [107x] 
(Tadyatha) Om, dhara dhara, dhiri dhiri, dhuru dhuru, 
itti vatte, chale chale, prachale prachale, kusume, kusume vare, 
ili mili, chiti jvalam, apanaye svaha. 
One of the frequently asked questions about mantra recitation is: What should I think? What should I visualize?” This is what we should visualize and this is the general idea. Here it says: After you place the mantra garland, light rays radiate from that and it fills your entire body and purifies all the negativities and obscurations. The light rays radiate from the mantra garland and fills your entire body and it dispels or eliminates all the physical difficulties, sickness, diseases and whatever mental challenges, unhappiness, and problems. The more concentration you apply while you are reciting the mantra, the greater the benefit. Since mental unhappiness and mental problems are essentially created by the mind, if you are able to engage in mantra recitation single-pointedly, then it will help to dispel those difficulties. Many a times the mind is kind of like the broken record just reviewing the same unhappy event over and over again. When we are unhappy or angry over something, we just think about it over and over again, and it does nothing but just increases the anger. If we have some resentment or grudge, if you think about it over and over again, then you get more and more unhappy as it is created by the mind. If you are doing the mantra recitation and place our mind with concentration while doing it, and decide from the heart “I am not going to follow after that. I just have to get rid of the thought and not follow after it”, then it is gone. At the end of the practice, commensurate with how strongly we think “The problem has been eliminated. The problem has been solved”, then the greater the benefit we receive. 
Next is you emanating light rays going out and from which the light rays comes many Chenrezigs. They go to all sentient beings and purify all sentient beings of all their negativities and obscurations. Then imagine that finally all the sentient beings are placed in the state of Arya Avalokiteshvara enlightenment.At the end of the practice, you collect back whatever is emanated. These light rays dissolve into the Hrih at the heart. 
In the practice of emanating and collecting during the mantra recitation, whatever is emanated out is always absorbed back into the heart. Likewise, the offering goddesses that we emanate have to be dissolved back into the heart. This is for the condition to bring the subtle energies, the winds, into the central channel. Although such an explanation is not given in the lower tantras, but that is the purpose when you explain it from the Highest Yoga Tantra perspective. 
Here during the mantra recitation, we do the practice of emanating and collecting in relation to purify sentient beings of their negativities and obscurations and placing them in the state of enlightenment. I think this is the practice or the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the pure activities of Buddha. 
You need to think about how you connect the different elements of the sections of the practice to the meditation on aspects that is concordant with the four complete purities of the body, environment, enjoyments and activities.  
In relation to the four branches;
generating the self-generation deity is the self basis, 
visualizing the moon disc at the heart of the self-generation deity is the mind basis, 
placing the mantra garland on the moon disc is the sound basis
Out of the four, three are completed. If you add in the meditation on generation of the front-generation deity, then you have the other basis. 
After repetition is done, then one goes on to the accomplishing the front-generation. That would be the other basis. In accomplishing or establishing the front-generation, there is a basis for accomplishing it, whether it is coloured sand mandala or painted cloth mandala. Whatever it is, first, one must dispel the interferences and follows by purifying it in emptiness. 
How To Meditate On The Front Generation (Page 109)
Cleanse the front mandala of hindrances by means of the (action) mantra along with its visualization: 
Om Padmantakrit Hum Phat. 
Om svabhava-shuddhah sarva-dharmah, svabhava-shuddho ham. 
The mandala becomes just empty. 
From the sphere of emptiness a white (syllable) Bhrum radiating five (-colored) light rays separates from the (syllable) Hrih at my heart and comes to rest at the site of the mandala. It transforms 
into a multicolored lotus, on which rests a multicolored crossed vajra. Upon its central hub is the inestimable mansion composed of a variety of jewels. It is square with four doors and four archways. 
The basis of accomplishment mandala which is the basis for establishing or accomplishing the front-generation must first be purified in emptiness. From within the state of emptiness, you emanate the syllable Bhrum from the syllable Hrih at your heart. This syllable Bhrum which is radiating five coloured light rays goes to the place where the basis of accomplishment mandala is. The basis of accomplishment mandala is already been purified into emptiness as you have meditated on the emptiness of that. 
At the place where the basis of accomplishment mandala is, where it is already purified into emptiness, you visualize the syllable Bhrum emanating from your heart and it goes to the place where the basis of accomplishment of mandala was before it was purified into emptiness. From the syllable Bhrum arises the entire celestial mansion which rests on a central hub which itself rests on a big lotus. This whole thing is in the text. The entire celestial mansion arises from the syllable Bhrum. The significance is like what I have mentioned in the last lesson, it is to signify how all things exist in mere name and are merely imputed by thought. 
For someone who is really meditating, then you have to know all the measurements and essential characteristics of the entire inestimable mansion with all its features and so forth. 
In the middle of the (mansion) is an eight-petalled lotus. At its center is a precious throne, upon which is a multicolored lotus and a moon disc. On each of the petals of the four directions is a moon-disc cushion. 
Upon the central cushion is a white syllable Hrih, which becomes a white eight-petalled lotus as brilliant as refined gold and marked by the syllable Hrih. Light rays radiate from it, making offerings to the arya beings and enacting the welfare of all sentient beings. They collect back and from their transformation arises Arya Avalokiteshvara with a white-colored body in the prime of youth and radiating rays of light
Of the eleven faces, the root face is white; the right, green; and the left, red. Above that, the central face is green; the right, red; and the left, white. Above that, the central face is red; the right, white; and the left, green. They also have long narrow eyes and smiling expressions. Above these is a wrathful black face with bared fangs and wrathful wrinkles, a third eye, and orange hair standing upright. On its crown is a peaceful, red face with a crown protrusion, having a chaste aspect, devoid of ornaments, and with (its own) neck. 
The first two hands are folded at the heart (and hold a jewel). The second right hand holds a rosary; the third eliminates the hunger and thirst of the hungry ghosts by sending down a stream of nectar from (the mudra of) granting sublime (realizations); and the fourth holds a wheel. The second left hand holds a golden lotus with a stem, the third holds a water vessel, and the fourth holds a bow and arrow. 
The remaining nine hundred and ninety-two hands, as soft as lotus petals, are (in the mudra of) granting sublime realizations. 
In the palm of every hand is an eye. The hands do not extend above the crown protrusion nor below the knees. 
An antelope skin covers the left breast and there is a lower garment of fine cloth. (The waist is) endowed with a golden belt adorned with jewels; (the head of the wrathful face) is beautified with a garland of orange hair. He has a jeweled crown, earrings, necklace, armlets, bracelets, and anklets, wears garments of various (-colored) silks, and radiates rays of white light.
In the middle of the celestial mansion there is an eight-petalled lotus. 
On top of which is a precious throne. 
Upon which there is a lotus and moon disc. 
Upon which Chenrezig is generated
On the eastern (petal, the syllable) Hum becomes blue Akshobhya with right (hand) in the earth-touching (mudra) and the left in the (mudra of) meditative equipoise. 
On the southern (petal, the syllable) Tram becomes yellow Ratnasambhava with right (hand in the mudra of) bestowing sublime (realizations) and the left in the (mudra of) meditative equipoise. 
On the western (petal, the syllable) Om becomes white Vairochana (with both hands) in the mudra of supreme enlightenment. 
On the northern (petal, the syllable) Ah becomes green Amoghasiddhi with right (hand) in the mudra of granting refuge and the left in the mudra of meditative equipoise. 
They are all also beautified with precious ornaments and garments of various silks and seated with their legs in the vajra posture. 
Essentially in the middle, the principal is eleven-faced Avalokiteshvara with a thousand arms. On the petals of the four cardinal directions, you generate the four Buddhas. 
Altogether you have the five Buddha lineages. 
Chenrezig himself in the middle is under the Amitabha lineage. 
On the eastern petal is Akshobhya.
On the southern petal is Ratnasambhava.
On the western petal is Vairocana.
On the northern petal is Amoghasiddhi.
So four plus one - that is how you have the five Buddha types or the five Buddha lineages. 
Those of you who are interested you can read the ritual in the means of accomplishment on your own. It is very clear in the text. 
Upon a lotus and moon disc at the heart of the principal (deity) is the white (syllable) Hrih from which light rays radiate, invoking from the Potala in the southern direction Arya Avalokiteshvara 
surrounded by the entire assembly of buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions
This is generating the front-generation commitment being. Just like what happen during the self-generation practice, in relation to the front-generation practice, after generating the front-generation commitment being, you invite the wisdom beings to absorb into the front-generation commitment being. That is why it says upon the lotus and moon disc at the heart of the principal deity, there is a white syllable Hrih, from which light rays radiate and invoke from Potala and so forth Arya Avalokiteshvara.
Invocation (Page 113)
Kneel down and with (hands in) the mudra of invocation-interlacing the fingers, the palms facing upward, aligning and straightening the two forefingers, and beckoning with the two thumbs-invite the exalted wisdom beings by saying the following: 
Protector of all sentient beings without exception, 
Divine destroyer of the obstinate hosts of maras and their forces, 
Perfect knower of all things without exception, 
0 Bhagavan, please come o this place together with your retinue. 
0m Arya Lokeshvara-saparivara vajra-samaya Jah Jah Jab, Hum: Bam Hoh
When inviting the wisdom being to dissolve into the commitment beings, one does so with respect. If possible, kneel down with the gesture of invocation. Then you invite the wisdom beings with the verse “Protector of all sentient beings without exception.” If possible you can recite that verse with a pleasant tune. 
Contemplate that: 
They become non-dual with the commitment beings.
The crowns of all the deities are marked by a white Om, their throats by a red Ah, and their hearts by a blue Hum. 
The wisdom beings are invited and become inseparable from the front-generation commitment being. All the deities are marked at their three places with the three syllables Om, Ah and Hum 
Empowerment (Page 115)
Again, light rays radiate from the Hrih at the (central deity’s) heart, invoking the empowering deities, the five (buddha) families with Amitabha as their principal, together with their retinues. 
Present offerings while saying: 
Om Pancha-kula-saparivara-argham, padyam, pushpe, dhupe, aloke, gandhe, naividya, shapta-praticcha svaha. 
“All Tathagatas, please bestow the empowerment upon him.” 
Requested thus, the Goddess Dressed in White and the others, who are emitted from the (tathagatas’) hearts, hold aloft vases filled with nectar, say: 
Just as at the very time of birth, 
The devas offered ablution (to the Buddha), 
So do I, with pure divine water, 
Offer ablution to the holy body. 
Om sarva-tathagatha abhishekata-samaya shri ye hum. 
and bestow the empowerment. Thereby, the entire body is filled and all defilements are purified. From a transformation of the surplus water remaining on the crown, the head becomes adorned 
with Amitabha-the very nature of one’s guru---on the crown, Akshobya on the forehead, Ratnasambhava behind the right ear, Vairochana at the back, and Amoghasiddhi behind the left ear. 
Next is inviting the empowering or initiating deities. The initiating (empowering) deities are invited and offerings are made to them. After offerings are made to the initiating deities, one makes a request. The initiating deities starting with Pandaravasini and so forth are emanated from the hearts of the initiating deities and hold aloft vases filled with nectar with which they confer initiation. Once the entire bodies of the front-generation deities are filled with nectar, they are all adorned with the individual Buddha lineage. This is the other basis. 
You meditate and generate the inestimable mansion. Inside the inestimable mansion, you generate the front-generation deities, samaya or the commitment beings. Then you invite the wisdom beings to absorb into them and then you do the initiating and sealing impression.
Student asking question (inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah. Good question. All defilement is purified. 
It says that empowerment is bestowed, and the entire body is filled and all defilements are purified. Here we are talking about the front-generation. What are the defilements of the front-generation deities? 
The idea is basically the same behind doing the ablution or offering bath. We offer ablution to the gurus, deities, buddas, bodhisattvas and so on and so forth. We are not offering the bath to them because they need it and there is something to purify from their side. It is because of our defilements and obscurations, and we perceive defilements in them. The purpose is to purify our own obscurations when we do the bath offering. I guess the principle is probably is the same here. As long as the mind is impure, then appearances to the mind will be impure. So it is for the purpose of purifying the mind. 
Blessing the Offerings (Page 115)
Bless the (two waters, five enjoyments, music, and) five sense pleasures saying: 
Om Padmantakrit Hum Phat. 
Om svabhava-shuddhah sarva-dharmah, svabhava shuddho ham. 
(The offering substances) become just empty
From the sphere of emptiness, from (eight) Bhrum (syllables), eight vast and extensive precious vessels arise. Within each (the syllable) Om melts into light from which arise drinking water, water for (bathing) the feet, flowers, incense, lamps, perfume, food, and music. Empty in nature, they have the aspect of the individual types (of offerings) and function to bestow special uncontaminated bliss. 
Om argham Ah Hum; 
Om padyam Ah Hum;
Om pushpe Ah Hum;
Om dhupe Ah Hum;
Om aloke Ah Hum;
Om gandhe Ah Hum;
Om naividya Ah Hum;
Om shapta Ah Hum
Presenting the Offerings (Page 117)
Contemplate that offering goddesses emitted from one’s heart holding the appropriate offering substances fill space and offer the two waters (for drinking and bathing the feet), the (five) enjoyments, and music as well as the five sense pleasures. One can also offer by using other offering garland verses or by using just the offering mantras, leaving out the verses
Next is blessing the offerings for the front-generation. The way of doing is the same that involves dispelling, purifying, generating and blessing. Generally, in the practice involving the front-generation, there is very often an extensive practice of making offerings to the front-generation. Very often it is like that and it is quite common. 
Offering the Two Waters, the Five Enjoyments, and Music 
A host of oceans of drinking water from an ocean of realms 
Composed of an ocean of offering substances of the conquerors, 
I offer with an ocean of faith to the conquerors and their retinues,
who have oceans of qualities. Please accept it. 
0m Arya Lokeshvara-saparivara argham praticcha sviha)
**Drinking water is translated as libation
Here a host of oceans of drinks or libation from an ocean of realms composed of an ocean of offering substances of the conquerors. Just like how the buddhas emanate offerings, the bodhisattvas emanate offerings, how Samantabhadra emanates offerings, there are the offerings that are made by them. Likewise, the offerings that we are going to present should be like their offerings. That is what it is meant by “oceans of offerings substances of the conquerors”.  
It says a host of oceans of drink, and the idea of ocean here means we are talking about it being limitless, very vast, and extensive. This shows us what we need to visualize and what we need to imagine. 
The first two lines indicate the offering substances, and how we should conceive of it. 
“To the conquerors and their retinues, who have oceans of qualities” - this indicates the object to whom we are presenting the offerings to, basically the recipients. The recipients are the buddhas and bodhisattvas who possess incalculable and inexpressible qualities as the oceans of qualities is inexpressible. As you remember that you have come across in your studies, you talk about the qualities of the bodhisattvas on the grounds, then the kinds of qualities that the buddhas have and how the buddhas exalted body and mind are fused inseparably. 
The verse which says “to the conquerors and their retinues who possess an ocean of qualities”, that indicates the recipients of the offerings. This is what we need to think: Who are we offering to? We are offering to them. We really need to understand the recipients of the offerings. We really have to think a bit how the buddhas accumulated the collections of the three countless eons, so on and so forth. Then you have an idea what Buddha is and who you are offering to. 
 “I offer with an ocean of faith, please accept it” - this indicating the quality of the person who is doing the offering i.e. the person who is practicing. We are offering with ocean of faith. In this context here, ocean here has the meaning of limitless, that is basically with very strong faith and boundless faith. If you are able to think well the offering substances, the recipient of the offering, their qualities and also able to offer with boundless faith and strong faith, then we can accumulate lots of merit. 
The verse essentially is saying: “You are offering with boundless faith to the conquerors and the bodhisattvas who have limitless qualities”. What are you offering them? You are offering them limitless, measureless offerings. If you put the three together, then there is a reason to say that the merit that is accumulated will also be limitless. If you get the idea with the first verse, you extend the same idea with the rest of the verses. This is because there are many other things to be offered, foot wash, water, flowers, incense, lights, scented water, food and music. These can be offered by reciting the offering verses and the mantras slowly. If you can do it with tune, the idea of doing it with tune is it gives time to meditate. Otherwise, if you do it quickly, you might not have the time or you might not be able to meditate well. 
In relation to the four branches, there is the concentration with repetition and without repetition. There is an explanation in relation to the long dharani of Avalokiteshvara. We will look at it in the next session. 
A host of oceans of water for (bathing) the feet from an ocean of realms 
Composed of an ocean of offering substances of the conquerors, 
I offer with an ocean of faith to the conquerors and their retinues, 
who have oceans of qualities. Please accept it. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-séparivara padyam praticcha svaha. 
A host of oceans of flowers from an ocean of realms 
Composed of an ocean of offering substances of the conquerors, 
I offer with an ocean of faith to the conquerors and their retinues,
 who have oceans of qualities. Please accept it. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivara pushpe praticcha svaha. 
A host of oceans of incense from an ocean of realms 
Composed of an ocean of offering substances of the conquerors, 
I offer with an ocean of faith to the conquerors and their retinues,
 who have oceans of qualities. Please accept it. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-siparivira dhupe praticcha svaha. 
A host of oceans of clear light from an ocean of realms 
Composed of an ocean of offering substances of the conquerors,
I offer with an ocean of faith to the conquerors and their retinues,
who have oceans of qualities. Please accept it. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-siparivara aloke praticcha svaha. 
A host of oceans of perfume from an ocean of realms 
Composed of an ocean of offering substances of the conquerors, 
I offer with an ocean of faith to the conquerors and their retinues, 
who have oceans of qualities. Please accept it. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivara gandhe praticcha svaha. 
A host of oceans of food from an ocean of realms 
Composed of an ocean of offering substances of the conquerors, 
I offer with an ocean of faith to the conquerors and their retinues, 
who have oceans of qualities. Please accept it. 
Om Krya Lokeshvara-siparivara naividya praticcha svaha.
A host of oceans of music from an ocean of realms 
Composed of an ocean of offering substances of the conquerors,
I offer with an ocean of faith to the conquerors and their retinues,
who have oceans of qualities. Please accept it. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivira shapta praticcha svaha.  

