Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L33.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:17.256095
================================================================================

In the previous 2 lessons, we have looked at how the practice of meditating on the aspects that is concordant with the 4 complete purities of the resultant stage that is found in the self-generation rite of Avalokiteshvara.  
From your own side, you need to have an idea how that is the case. For example, when you look at the self-generation rite, there is the practice of making offering to the self-generation on how is that related to one of the 4 complete purities of the resultant stage. 
One of the complete purities is that of abode. There are many action tantra self-generation rites that do not specifically talk about or mention about the meditation on the inestimable mansion during the self-generation rite.  There is the arising as the deity but many of the self-generation rites do not go on to describe the meditation on the inestimable mansion. Yet meditating on the inestimable mansion is the meditation that is concordant with the aspect of complete purity of the abode.  If that is being in the case, why is it not specifically mention in many of the action tantra self-generation rites?  This is something to think about.
Yet meditation on an aspect is concordant with the pure abode of the resultant stage is an essential feature of the tantra, and as such is somebody is to ask you: Where is this practice in the self-generation rite? What are you going to say? You must be able to answer fairly quickly.  
So why isn’t there the meditation on the inestimable mansion?
Also in the action tantra self-generation rite, many at time during the self-generation section, one only arises as the principal deity of the mandala.  Although there may be other deities in the mandala but many a time they are not generated but only arise as the principal deity.
One of the critical essential points of the practice is the generation as the deity.  In the context of the action tantra that we are talking about here, you need to have a good understanding on how that is done, for example, by way of the 6 deities.  
Another thing that you should really understand well is the way of consecrating or blessing the offering and offering it. If you understand the general procedure, you can apply it many rituals, whether in your own personal practice or in a puja and so forth; that is if you want to practice. Therefore it is important; first to gain an understanding. As I mentioned before, there are 4 outlines in the practice of consecrating offering:
Dispelling, 
Purifying, 
Generating 
Blessing
You need to have a good idea before you can implement it into your practice. You must know it well. Only on that basis then you have something to apply when you practice.
Therefore, when you are picking up the information at the time of learning or when the time of listening you have to pay attention, and you have to strive to really understand it.So it is important that you have to pay attention when you are listening to the explanation.  
In this Avalokiteshvara sadhana that we are looking at, after the self-generation comes the meditation on the front generation.  In generating the front generation, first the inestimable mansion is generated. Then inside you generate the principal deity and the entourage deities.  After generating the commitment being, you invite the wisdom being to dissolve into them, follow by initiation, and seal impression. After which then there is an extensive section of making offerings.
The 4 branches are:
Meditation on the self-generation is the self-basis, 
Meditation on the front generation is the other basis, 
Meditation on the moon disc in the heart of the deity is the mind basis,
Placing the mantra garland on the moon disc is the sound basis.  
In the previous lessons we looked at the offering verses. It describes, for example, if you are offering flowers, 
you are offering ocean of flower, basically as many as you can
you are offering to the buddhas who possess an ocean of qualities
you offer with an ocean of faith i.e. you offer it wholeheartedly with an immeasurable, limitless amount of faith.
In the practice, you will find different offering verses. There is much to think about the meaning of those verses.
Offering the Five Sense Pleasures  (Page 121)
As these supreme visual forms, which appear though lacking inherent existence,
Are offered to the buddhas, who are the field of merit, 
With a mind of inseparable appearance and emptiness, 
Please accept them with a mind inseparable from great bliss.
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivira rupa praticcha svaha.  
“The buddhas who are the field of merit” – refers to the recipients of the offering i.e. to whom we are offering. They are the buddhas and bodhisattvas who are a field of merit for us, in dependence upon which when we make offerings, we accumulate immeasurable merit.
“As these supreme visual forms, which appear though lacking inherent existence” - here form is the example. It could be any offering.  Whatever offering that we send, we should bring to mind the fact that they are empty of existing inherently.  Yes, there is appearance, they appear but they do not exist truly. So always bringing to mind the inseparability of appearance and emptiness.. 
As I have mentioned before, if we are making offering, we are able to bring to mind how the offering by nature empty of existing truly then it will make a difference to our practice of making offering will not be tainted or mixed with attachment and miserliness. 
With what kind of attitude or perceptions should we make offerings? With a mind of inseparable appearance and emptiness, i.e. with a mind that understands how appearance and emptiness are inseparable.  With that understanding, one makes offerings.
If the offerings are presented with such a perception and such an understanding, then there is nothing wrong in saying that become an offering which is the play of non-dual profundity and clarity.
If the offerings are made with such an understanding, a perception of the empty nature of the offerings, they appear but they are empty, then the practice of making offering itself with this perception will then become an antidote to grasping at true existence. It will be able to reduce apprehension of true existence. It will be able to harm that grasping of true existence.  As such you will lead to decrease in attachment and miserliness and what have you.
The purpose of making offering is to accumulate merit but if the practice of making offering is done with the perception of the inseparability of appearance and emptiness, then the practice become really profound.
As we have seen so far, the very essence of the 3 lower classes of tantra, it is the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. The heart of the matter is that. Here in the context of 3 lower classes of tantra, if you are able to make the practice of making offering, if that can be made with this perception of inseparability of appearance and emptiness then the practice of making offering would itself lend itself to generating the very essence of the 3 lower classes of tantra, the non-dual profundity and clarity. 
 “Please accept them with a mind inseparable from great bliss” - from our side we think that as a result of accepting or partaking of the offering, the recipient, the merit field, develop or generate this mind that is inseparable from great bliss.
Whatever offering that are made here, this is how we should practice, particularly you take your time to do it slowly or you do it with a pleasant melody. The point is that you get into the thinking and have the frame of mind that everything goes nicely and slowly. If you are able to think well, that might have a good effect on the mind and make the mind change for the better. Definitely you accumulate powerful wave of merit.
As these melodious sounds, which appear though lacking inherent existence, 
Are offered to the buddhas, who are the field of merit. 
With a mind of inseparable appearance and emptiness, 
Please accept them with a mind inseparable from great bliss. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivira shapta praticcha svaha.  
As these supreme scents, which appear though lacking inherent existence, 
Are offered to the buddhas, who are the field of merit, 
With a mind of inseparable appearance and emptiness,
Please accept them with a mind inseparable from great bliss. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivira gandhe praticcha svaha.  
As these supreme tastes, which appear though lacking inherent existence. 
Are offered to the buddhas, who are the field of merit, 
With a mind of inseparable appearance and emptiness, 
Please accept them with a mind inseparable from great bliss. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivira rasa praticcha svaha
As these supreme tangible-objects, which appear though lacking inherent existence, 
Are offered to the buddhas, who are the field of merit, 
With a mind of inseparable appearance and emptiness, 
Please accept them with a mind inseparable from great bliss. 
Om Arya Lokeshvara-saparivira sparsha praticcha svaha
The ritual continues with the offering of garments, ornaments, vase and mandala offering.
Offering Divine Garments  (Page 127)
In order to purify my mind, I offer an exquisite precious garment
Multicolored like Indra’s variegated bow, 
That when touched becomes the cause of bliss. . 
May I be adorned with the holy garment of patience. 
Om vajra vastraye Ah Hum svaha
Offering Ornaments (Page 127)
As the conquerors have natural ornaments of the signs and exemplifications, 
They do not seek to be adorned by other ornaments, 
Yet, by offering them supreme precious ornaments, 
May all migrators acquire a holy body adorned with the signs and exemplifications. 
Om vajra alamkara vapushani Ah Hum svaha
Offering a Vase (Page 127)
By offering this auspicious vase of beautiful jewels
Filled with essences of the assembly of gods. 
May all stains of karma and delusions be purified and
May I be imbued with the moisture of bodhichitta 
Om vajra kalasha All Hum. 
Mandala Offering (See page 127)
After all these offerings are made, then there is the practice of praising the mandala deities.
Blessing the Vase Water and Reciting the Mantra (Page 127)
Then, contemplate as follows (while) reciting the long dharani 101 times and the hundred-syllable mantra of Padmasattva. Thus, bless the vase water by means of contemplating that the nature of the front vase water is the exalted wisdom of the Great Compassionate One and that its aspect is nectar water that can purify all sicknesses, spirits. negativities, and obscurations of the three doors along with their imprints.
Streams of nectar descend from the fingers of both the self- and front (generations), filling the vase with the nectar-water of exalted wisdom. 
Then there is accomplishing the vase water, as the text says: 
“Stream of nectar descend from the fingers of both the self- and front generations, filling the vase with nectar-water of exalted wisdom.”  
With such visualization, one recites the mantra, the dharani.
Long Dharani  (Page 133)
Namo ratna trayaya. Namah arya jnana sagara, Vairochana, vyuha rajaya, tathagataya, arhate, samyaksam buddhaya. 
Namah sarva tathagatebhyah, arhadbhyah, samyaksam buddhebhyah. 
Namah Arya Avalokiteshvaraya, bodhisattvaya mahasattvaya mahakarunikaya. 
Tadyatha, Om, dhara dhara, dhiri dhiri, dhuru dhuru, itti vatte, chale chale, prachale prachale, kusume, kusume vare, 
ili mili, citi jvalam, apanaye svaha
Absorption of the Exalted Wisdom Beings (Page 133)
After establishing the vase water, contemplate that:
The exalted wisdom beings of the self-generation absorb into the front generation 
After accomplishing the vase, then one imagines that the wisdom being of the self-generation absorbs into the front generation. Then one continues with the practice of reciting the “Po’ Praise*.
*So called because most lines of the Tibetan text end end with the syllable “po” meaning ‘the one who’.
It says that one should prostate while reciting the “Po” Praise.  If one does well, one accumulates a great amount of merit. When that is done then there is a request to Chenrezig.
When paying homage to Avalokiteshvara, ideally one should combine one’s body, speech and mind together while doing it.  As you bring Avalokiteshvara to your mind, verbally recite the praise and physically you prostrate. In essence if one pays homage with one’s 3 doors - body, speech and mind - then it makes a difference to the benefit from the practice and also makes a difference to the merit that is accumulated.
The Principal Practice of Praise (Page 135)
Then, the principal practice of praise is as follows. Contemplate that: 
Upon a lotus and moon disc on the crown of my head is Bhikshuni Lakshmi, dressed as a renunciate. With hands folded at her heart she intercedes (with the merit field on one’s behalf). 
Imagine that all mother sentient beings of the six types (of rebirth) are arranged around oneself and are also physically doing prostrations, verbally reciting the praises, and mentally going for refuge with intense admiration and respect. Then, together with prosrrations, do twenty-one repetitions of the ‘Po’ Praise. 
Praise to Avalokiteshvara (Page 135)
Om. I prostrate to the Protector of the World
You are the guru of the world, praised by the three realms. 
The one who is praised by the chief of the worldly gods, the maras, and Brahma. 
Praising you, supreme king of sages, fulfills (the wishes of beings). 
I prostrate to the supreme protector of the three realms. 
Holder of a noble holy body (containing) the bodies of infinite ones gone to bliss, 
Your crown holds the One Gone to Bliss of Infinite Light.
Your supremely generous right hand dispels the hunger and thirst of the hungry ghosts;
Your left hand is perfectly adorned with a golden lotus. 
You are the one with a swift, orange garland of fragrant top-hair. 
Your face is beautiful like the full moon. 
Your lotus-like eyes are exquisite and encompassing. 
Your fragrant (body) is pure white, like snow or a conch. 
You wear clusters of flawless glittering pearls; 
You are adorned with beautiful light rays like the red of dawn. 
Your arms are arranged like a pond of lotuses; 
You are youthful and have the color of the autumn moon. 
Your two shoulders are adorned by many jewels; 
Your palms are as smooth and young as the best of leaves. 
Your left breast is covered by a antelope skin; 
You wear alluring earrings, bracelets, and ornaments. 
You dwell on a supreme stainless lotus; 
The surface of your abdomen is as smooth as a lotus petal. 
You have a sublime golden belt adorned with jewels; 
You wear a skirt of exquisite cloth around the hips. 
You have the Able One’s supreme wisdom, gone beyond the great ocean; 
You have collected a multitude of merit to acquire the supreme state. 
You are the source of constant bliss and the dispeller of aging and dim; 
You are the triple-liberator and display holy deeds to those enjoying space. 
Supreme embodied being, victor in battle with mara’s forces,
Your feet are alluring with the sound of golden anklets. 
You isolate (beings from self-interest) with the four abodes of Brahma. 
You move with a swan’s gait and like a proud elephant. 
You fully completed the accumulation and look after the doctrine. 
You are the one who frees from the ocean of milk and the ocean of water. 
Whatever man or woman 
Always rises at dawn, respectfully 
Brings Avalokiteshvara to mind, and 
Purely and clearly recites this supreme praise, 
All their mundane and supramundane needs 
Will be fulfilled in this life and all future lives. 
After the Po Praise one makes a request.
The Conclusion Ceremony (Page 139)
REQUEST 
O Arya Compassionate-eyed One 
Who is the treasure of compassion, 
I request you, please listen to me, 
Please guide myself, mothers and fathers 
In all six realms to be freed quickly 
From the great ocean of samsara.
I request that the vast and profound 
Peerless awakening mind may grow. 
With the tear of your great compassion, 
Please cleanse all karmas and delusion.
Please lead with your hand of compassion
Me and migrators to fields of bliss.
Please Amitabha and Chenrezig 
In all my lives be virtuous friends. 
Show well the undeceptive pure path 
And quickly place us in Buddha’s state 
The request has to be heartfelt and sincere. If it is done sincerely with heartfelt, it contributes to the positive development of the mind and the mind will changes for the better.
After the request, one offers tormas to Avalokiteshvara, then the dharma protectors, and to the local gods or landlord.  Before the tormas are offered, they have to be blessed. The general procedure and the outline are same:
Dispelling, 
Purifying, 
Generating
Blessing.
Beside the tormas offering there are also the outer offerings. 
Offering the Tormas (See page 139)
Blessing of Tormas
Offering the Tormas to the Great Compassionate One and His Retinue 
After the offerings, one recites the praises to the dharma protectors (guardians). 
Praises to the Dharma Protectors (See page 143)
Then there is offering ablution. You emanate from the heart of yourself as Avalokiteshvara. You emanate offering goddesses holding vases of nectars who then offer ablution of baths to the principal deity and so on and so forth.
Offering an Ablution (Page 157)
Then actually offer an ablution to the reflection of the deities appearing in a mirror and, as the significance of the meditation, imagine that emanated offering goddesses holding vases of nectar offer baths to the principal deity of the from generation, Arya Avalokiteshvara, and the surrounding gurus, meditational deities, buddhas and bodhisattvas, heroes, dakas and dikinis, Dharma protectors and guardians, etc., thereby purifying all imperfections, such as defilements, impurities, and so forth. 
In a fragrantly scented bathing house 
With a bright and shining crystal foundation, 
Attractive pillars of shining jewels 
And adorned with a canopy of glittering pearls,
Just as at the very time of birth, , 
The devas offered ablution (to the Buddha), 
So do I, with pure divine water, 
Offer ablution to the holy body. 
By offering ablution to the protector Avalokiteshvara,
The lamp of migrators, with a stream of fragrant nectar, 
May all stains of the two obscurations of migrators be cleansed 
And may there be the good fortune to acquire the stainless three bodies. 
Offer ablution to the holy body with the previously blessed vase water saying: 
Om sarva-tathagata Arya Lokeshvara -saparivara abhishekata samaya shri-ye Ah Hum 
Extensive Ablution (Page 159)
(One can offer an ablution in turn to the gurus and meditational deities, the tathagatas and their children, the hearers and solitary realizers, and the dakas, dildnis, and protectors)
I offer an ablution to the tathagata and their children
With many jeweled vases 
Exquisitely filled with pleasing scented water 
Together with an abundance of songs andmusic. 
Om sarva-tathagata Arya Lokeshvara-saparivara abhishekata samaya shri-ye Ah Hum 
Drying the Holy Bodies (Page 159)
Dry the holy bodies saying:
I dry the holy bodies with matchless cloths, 
Clean and anointed with the finest scents. 
Om Hum Tram Hrih A
Om sarva-tathagata Arya Lokeshvara-saparivara 
Kaya-vishvadhana svaha
I have mentioned this in one of the previous lessons that the purpose of offering ablution or bath to the gurus, yidams, buddhas, and so forth is not because there are something to be purified or the need to wash them; but rather it is for the purpose of purifying our own obscuration, our own impure appearances. When we offer ablution, it is explicitly mentioned that you offer to the Hearers and Solitary Realizer as well.  Since there are Hearer and Solitary Realizer who possess obscurations, it is alright to think that you are purifying their obscuration in that sense.  Then bath is also offered to the local gods, nagas, and so forth. Due to human activities and behaviors, we do cause contamination upon them which makes them suffer and upset. When we offering bath to them, the local gods, nagas and so forth, we think that whatever contaminations or impurities that have occurred to them, their obscurations are washed away.
After the ablution is done, one dry the holy bodies, and follow by the offering of the garment and ornaments. Depending on the aspects that the buddha are in, for example if you are offering to the Buddha in the supreme emanation, then you offer only the 3 robes of fully ordained monks. As for Buddha in the complete enjoyment aspect you can perform visualization of offering divine garment,  ornaments and so forth.
As before, whatever offerings we make, we should imagine them to be of the best quality. For example, if you are offering garment the garment of the highest quality. If you are offering jewelry and ornaments, they should be the most precious.  On top of that, we can bring to mind their empty nature and that makes the offering even better.
Then there is the aspirational prayer of this practice (Page 163)
In all my rebirth, may I belong to a good family.  
Be clear in mind and free of pride, 
Have great compassion, respect for my gurus, 
And abide in the pledges of Avalokiteshvara.
One makes aspiration that in all our future lives, may we be born in a good family of good lineage. But that alone is not beneficial, one needs to have a clear mind. That alone is also not enough. We need to be free of pride. That alone is also not sufficient. As says here, it is very important to have great compassion. In particular, in the context of a person who is a practitioner of tantra correctly devoting to a virtuous friend and having single-pointed faith devotion in the guru is extremely important. It makes all the difference in whether experience and realization of the path are generated or not. So for a tantric practitioner that is really important. 
If you look at the Avalokiteshvara, in the aspects of Eleven-faced Thousand Arms Avalokiteshvara, the very top head is there is a Amitabha.  While Avalokiteshvara was on the path, he relied on Amitabha as his spirit guide and devoted Amitabha as the guru.  Even after achieving enlightenment, Avalokiteshvara in this aspect has head of Amitabha on the crown at the top.  This is to signify how important the virtuous friend is in the beginning, in the middle and at the end.
O Avalokiteshvara, whatever your body, 
Your retinue, life span, realm, and so forth, 
Whatever your supreme and excellent name, 
May I and others become only like that. 
O Avalokiteshvara, whatever your holy body, no matter how one look at the holy body, one never get tired.  
Your retinue is so many. 
Your immeasurable life span, your pure land, your realm and so forth, whatever qualities and benefits in your supreme and excellent name, here we aspire “May I and others become only like that.
By the force of the praises and requests made to you, 
May all diseases, evil spirits, poverty, and quarrels be calmed
And may the Dharma and good fortune increase 
In the regions in which I and others dwell. 
Here one is making the aspiration for oneself and others. It is not for oneself but others, wherever oneself, whatever place you are at - countries, region, universe, basically everywhere, may all the problems like sickness, diseases, spirit harms, poverty and conflicts may be pacified in those places. 
If one has heavy sickness it becomes an obstacle to practice. If there is so much sickness or if we are so poor, then generally it is very difficult to practice Dharma. So in the first place, it is better not be born in those situations. So we should aspire not to be under those circumstances.   Otherwise, generally it is very challenging to practice Dharma. Just being born in a place where there are no conflicts, you are doing well materially and are healthy, is not a big deal just being in that situation. If there is no dharma and one doesn’t practice dharma, then that is not the point. As it says, with that kind of positive circumstances may the dharma and good fortune increase.
May the precious mind of bodhichitta 
Be born in those in whom it has nor been generated; 
May that which has been generated not decline, 
But increase more and more.
The last verse is the prayer that we usually recite. Although we make the prayer for ourselves and others, it must happen to ourselves first. Without which, there is nothing much to say about wishing on other. We first must make and at least aspire bodhicitta for ourselves, and see if there is something can be done about before we think about others.
Whether we can offer benefit to others or whether we are beneficial to others, ultimately it come down to whether we have that beneficial intention or good heart. It comes down to that. This is something we have to focus on and keep in mind particularly for Buddhist practitioners who study a lot. 
In particular for people who study the buddhadharma, every now and then we just have to remind ourselves that the purpose of learning the dharma is to effect some positive change in the mind. At end of day is to subdue the mind and to pacify the mind. The point of learning is to effect some positive change. Using myself as an example, I have studied for 20 to 30 years and if at the end of the day, if the mind hasn’t improved for the better or worse still if it gets worse, then the study is completely pointless. 
The sign of having learned the buddhadharma well is that physically it has to be calm, relax, and ethical like what the prayer says: to have a clear mind, free of pride, have a good heart, have respect for the gurus. That should be the desired outcome. It is said that the effect or the sign that the study has hit the mark and has fulfilled its purpose, so these are the so called indications. 
I have mentioned before at the very beginning, when we hear these remarks in the teachings, these truths or these statements are basically sayings that we should take that to apply to ourselves. That is the point to see whether that applies to us or not. It is not so much about the teaching is talking about other people and not talking about ourselves. If we understand it that way then it is not so effective.
Those who put into practice of what they learn through reflection and meditation,  and if that has hit the mark and has gone well and done well, then the signs that individual will check if his afflictions have decreased over time, whether it is anger, desire and attachment and ignorance. If those have decreased then that is a sign he has reflected or meditated.
If we want to know whether our practice or our meditation is producing any effect or not, such as going for retreat, we need to check out whether it has any benefit or not. The thing to look out for is whether our afflictions has over time become lesser relative to before the practice. Are we better off now than we were before that practice? 
Then one recites the hundred syllables mantra together to ask for forgiveness in case in the practice we have made mistakes like in the meditation, in the recitation, in the offerings and so forth. 
Purifying Errors with the Hundred-Syllable Mantra of Padmasattva (Page 165)
Recite the following (Padmasattva mantra) three times: 
Om Padmasattva samayam anupalaya, Padmasattva
tvenopatishtha, dridho me bhava, sutoshyo me bhava, 
suposhyo me bhava, anurakto me bhava, 
sarva siddhim me prayachcha, sarva karmasu cha me 
chittarn shriyam kuru, Hum ha ha ha ha hoh,
 bhagavan sarva tathagata padma, ma me muncha, 
padma bhava, maha samaya sattva, Ah. 
Requesting Forgiveness: (Page 165)
Request forgiveness saying: 
0 Bhagavan Great Compassionate Ones, please pay attention to me. Since we are beginners and under the influence of drowsiness and excitement, our concentration has not been clear, our mantras have been incorrect, we have made additions and omissions in the ritual, have been scarcely clean and so on. I request you Arya Great Compassionate Ones to forgive us; please do not allow these to obscure us. 
Inner Ablution: Taking the Vase Nectar (Page 165)
Mix the water from the ablution above with water from the previously blessed (victory) vase, (pouring both into the action vase, and distribute the water) while reciting: 
Om Mani Padme Hum 
Contemplate as follows:
The principal, the Great Compassionate One and his retinue come to the space in front. White nectar flows from the parts of their holy bodies, washing all the outside, inside and middle of one’s body, purifying all the diseases, evil spirits, negativities and obscurations of one’s three doors along with their imprints, without anything remaining.
In the Nyung Na practice, at this point of the practice, the vase water is distributed as the vase water was blessed earlier on. Here, it said that we are supposed to take three washes or three sips:
First sip purifies the affliction obscuration, 
Second sip purifies the knowledge obscuration
On the third sip, imagine “The dharmakaya is realized.”
What the front generation basis of accomplishment is? There are different ways to conclude the ritual in the sense of either sending back the wisdom being or absorbing them. 
If the front generation basis of accomplishment is a sand mandala, then there is a certain way of doing it. 
If the front generation basis of accomplishment is a cloth-painted mandala, there is one way of doing it. 
If the front generation basis of accomplishment is a heap of substances like sand or grains, there is one way of doing it.
If the front generation basis of accomplishment is a cloth painted mandala, as it says that you make a request for the wisdom being to reside with the image. 
Requesting to Reside or to Depart (Page 169)
Requesting to Reside Continually When the Basis of the Front Generation Is a Drawn Mandala
After the concluding (inner) ablution, if the basis of establishing the front (generation) is a drawn mandala, (request the deities) to reside continually (with the image) by saying:
Please remain here together with this image 
For the welfare of migrating beings 
Excellently bestows health, long life, riches 
And supreme (realization).
 Om supratishtha vajra-ye svaha.
If the front generation basis of accomplishment is a heap of substances, whether it is grain or sand, then we request the wisdom beings to depart. 
Requesting the Deities to Depart When the Basis of the Front Generation Is Heaps of Substances (Page 169)
If (the basis of establishing the front generation) is mere heaps (of grains or colored stone-powder) on a mandala base, after performing the final ablution, think: 
Om. You enacted all aims of sentient beings
And bestowed appropriate attainments,
Although you depart to the buddha lands,
Please return again later
Om vajra muh.
The exalted wisdom beings depart from the natural abode. The supporting and supported commitment beings melt into light and dissolved into me.
I transform into the Great Compassionate One, with one face and two arms, marked by a white Om on the crown, Ah at the throat and a blue Hum at the heart.
When one enters into the post-session period, we should not be separated from the three recognitios:. 
Recognition of one’s body as the deity body, 
Recognition of one’s speech as the mantra 
Recognition of one’s mind as dharmakaya.
During the post-session period, without reverting back to ordinary way of seeing things and apprehending things, then one engages in practices like accumulating merit and purification. The post meditation period is extremely important and it is always been emphasized. Here in the context of tantra, it is emphasized that practitioner should conduct themselves without losing the three recognitions.  Otherwise, that post meditation period will not contribute to the development of that person practice.
In the post meditation period, one is supposed to hold on to divine pride and clarity. Even when you are going to sleep:
oneself in the form as Chenrezig gradually melts into light and absorbed into the syllables Hrih at the heart. 
The syllable Hrih also gradually dissolves and melts into light and then disappearing into emptiness like how a rainbow dissipates in the sky. 
Then keeping the mind in the state of emptiness. 
In that state of clear light one’s falls asleep. So it is said this is how it should be done.
I think it makes a difference to the quality of sleep and it doesn’t become that heavy and not so deep. Probably it makes a difference to the clarity of the mind as well. If one can sleep within the understanding of emptiness, then the whole sleep becomes virtuous.
For those who are able to do that, then in the sleep, they also realize emptiness.
This is for those who have an understanding and realization of emptiness. For those who don’t, before falling asleep, you can bring to mind Guru Avalokiteshvara and develop faith and devotion. Or you can think of great compassion, good heart, bodhicitta. If you are able to fall asleep within those virtuous thought, then that sleep becomes virtuous. 
If you remember from the study of mind and mental factors, there is a set of mental factors of four.
Mental factors that are classified as changeable mental factors and one of them is sleep. So sleep, being a changeable mental factor, could be virtuous or non-virtuous depending on the motivation. 
If we fall asleep within a special virtuous state of mind, then the entire period of sleep becomes virtuous; whether it is 5 hours, 6 hours, 7 hours or 8 hours then it is virtuous. If we fall asleep within desire, or attachment then the whole period, 5, 6, 7 or 8 hours become non-virtue.
This is important. Now we know, we heard about it, we have studied it then we have to put into practice. Even we cannot think about emptiness, but are able to think about something virtuous like bodhicitta or at least have some faith and devotion towards the guru deity and fall asleep within those thoughts then the whole sleep becomes virtuous. That is to our individual advantage and is our personal profit.
This is really important and we have to try for ourselves. If we can go about doing that in our daily lives, using Chenrezig as an example, you generate yourself as Chenrezig, identify yourself as Chenrezig, and before you eat, you can consecrate the offering by using the four steps (dispelling, purifying, generating and blessing) and transforming the food and imagine is nectar. When you partake of it while keeping your identity as Chenrezig, it also becomes an offering to the self generation, isn’t it?
Another way is that yourself as Chenrezig, you visualize at your heart there is a wisdom being in the form of Chenrezig in a simple form and thinking that he is the embodiment of all the objects of refuge and embodiment of all the gurus, embodiment of all the deities, embodiments of all the refuge. With that, when you eat, the food has been blessed and consecrated and imagine that you are offering nectar to that wisdom being with the embodiment of all the objects of refuge. 
It comes down to whether we knows how to practice, whether we know how to think or whether we want to do this or not? For a person who can do all of these, essentially he is able to transforms otherwise ordinary activities in daily life into something, and there is a condition or cause for accumulating merit; walking, eating, sleeping and so forth. For such a person then accumulating merit is easy because he is always accumulating merit.
For a person who is able to do these practices and integrate into life will accumulate merit easily. These are the different aspects of tantra. If you look at the practice per se, there are all these avenues, different methods and different manifestations. There is something in saying that tantra is skilful and profound.
There is an explanation of the meaning of the long dharani of Avalokiteshvara by one scholar. I don’t know exactly what his scriptural source is. There is no time and no need to go into every single word as to what it means. If you  looked at the long dharani: 
Namo ratna trayaya. Namah arya jnana sagara, Vairochana, vyuha rajaya, tathagataya, arhate, samyaksam buddhaya. 
Namah sarva tathagatebhyah, arhadbhyah, samyaksam buddhebhyah. 
Namah Arya Avalokiteshvaraya, bodhisattvaya mahasattvaya mahakarunikaya. 
The recitation is about slightly more than half of the long dharani. This section is identifying what is the object of attainment and we are prostrating to that.
Then the mantra goes:
(Tadyatha) Om, dhara dhara, dhiri dhiri, dhuru dhuru, 
itti vatte, chale chale, prachale prachale, kusume, kusume vare, 
This section identifying the path that is to be meditated upon basically includes the yoga with and without signs. The explanation of the dharani relates this section of the mantra to the practice of the six deities, then the concentration with repetition and the concentration without repetition.
ili mili, chiti jvalam, apanaye svaha. 
This section shows that after one has been made serviceable through proper approximation and the siddhis that can be accomplished.
Here chiti is generally refers to mind. 
Jvalam means to blaze
Apanaye means to pacify or to clear away.
Citi jvalam here is the mind is burned by afflictions such as desire, attachment. 
Then apanaye means to pacify our destructive emotion like attachment or desire. When we recite the dharani as a request that is what we are requesting for.
The main cause of our problems is our anger, attachment, desire. Since that is the case then to get rid of our problem, we need to pacify our afflictions. That is the goal and the whole point of doing the practice, studying, reflection and meditation. As it is said in the teachings, the sign of having meditated is the lessening of the affliction.
The main purpose of doing an approximation or a retreat or practice is, in this case the deity here, to pacify the desire, attachment, anger, the affliction. That is the purpose of the practice and that is what we should aspire and to pray for.
There is no specific explanation or the demarcation of the different stages of the practice in relation to the sadhana. You don’t find any particular text or, explanation saying “This part is this concentration and so forth.” What I have is just an explanation of the mantra. The mantra doesn’t tell you where in the sadhana that is referring to, but just rather applying it to the mantra. It is actually just saying an overview of the whole path structure: This is the concentration with signs and the concentration without signs. 
I guess we are finished with the lower tantra. Then we will start with the unsurpassed yoga tantra in the next session.
Q&A
Student 1:  Regarding the front generation, we start with the white “Bhrum” and separating from one’s heart. Therefore, the front generation generating from one heart. It is separated from one heart and the Bhrum, goes to mandala. Since the front generation is also generated starting from one’s heart same as a self- generation also generating from one heart. What would be the difference? Generally speaking, I struck with everything comes from one heart.
Khen Rinpoche: Whether it is a self-generation or front generation, at the end of the day, what is it that is the basis of accomplishment? It is our mind.
While the mind is the basis of accomplishment, but is not just the mind because what is it that arises as the deity is the self. We talked about the person, the “I” and the self. The “I”, the person, or the self is that which is merely designated in dependence upon the basis of designation, which is the mind.
In the case of generating the offering, or the front generation, they are established from a part of our mind. Although that is the case, we don’t think of the front generation as me or a self. While that is established from the mind, is the same with the offering as offering is established from a part of our mind. The basis of accomplishment is essentially a mind. We don’t identify the offering as me. We don’t identify the front generation as me. In this practice, in this case, the front generation is of a separate entity; different entity from the self.
Student 1:  A different entity from oneself but however by it is also still from my own mind. I label my mind as the bases and then I label that as “I” and the person. In the front generation, it comes out from my mind and is my mind in the front and in the mandala, do I say that it is a different bases from my own mind?
Khen Rinpoche: In this ritual when we generate the front generation, we imagine the syllable “Bhrum” emanate from our heart. Essentially it is a a part of our mind and that arises as the inestimable mansion and so on and so forth.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know exactly. 
Student 1:  About when we are reciting the long Dharani, I am just a little confused. We have concentration with repetition and concentration without repetition. At the end of the concentration with repetition, we have in between sessions. It seems to me that it is saying like concentration with repetition and concentration without repetition are all combined into one. So I am just wondering whether concentration with repetition is separate session from concentration without repetition. And also yoga with sign is a different session from yoga without sign.
Khen Rinpoche: In the explanation of the long dharani, they are not lump together. There are many syllables. The different syllables are correlated to different part of the path.
In the explanation of the kusume that refers to the concentration without repetition. Specifically refers to the concentration abiding in fire, the concentration abiding in sound: Then kusume vare, the next syllable, is the yoga without sign. 
It is like one couple of syllables put together referring to something in a general way but rather the different syllables are correlated to the different part of the path. Well, let see we have time in the future, then maybe, we can go through that.
We are going to start on the unsurpassed yoga tantra session. You have the text so you start reading for at least two or three pages right. 