Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L34.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:21.359634
================================================================================

Student 1: In relation to the explanation on the Nyung Nay sadhana what is the meaning of the seed syllable such as Hrih at the heart? Different deities may have different seed syllables but I don’t know the meaning of the seed syllable. Also it is always said that the body, speech and mind of the deities are marked by Om Ah Hum. What is the significance of the body, speech and mind being marked by Om Ah Hum? As in the Yamantaka long sadhana, the various points of the face of the deity is marked with different syllables. Can you please explain?
Khen Rinpoche: The five buddha lineages have their own seed syllables: 
Vairochana is Om
Akshobhya is Hum
Amitabha is Hrih
Ratnasambhava could be Ah, not sure
Amoghasiddhi could be Tam
Assuming the correlation of what I have just said between the syllables and the five buddha lineages are correct, the point here is that, for example, if you generate as Vairochana, it will be generated from Om. So Om is called the seed syllable of Vairochana. It is a seed syllable of Vairochana. Precisely it is from that seed syllable that Vairochana arises. Perhaps that is why it is called the seed syllable.
So it is called the seed syllable because it is from whatever syllable in question that a deity is generated.
If you look at the mandala, whether it is a drawing or a constructed mandala, many a times different syllables are drawn at different places of the mandala to represent a deity. So by looking at the syllable, you can have a rough idea about the deity in question. Sometimes instead of syllables, the hand implements are drawn to represents the deity in the mandala. For example, many a times, Amitabha lineage is represented by a lotus because Amitabha is from the lotus lineage.
Placing the three syllables Om Ah and Hum at one’s three doors is symbolizing the exalted body, exalted speech and exalted mind. What we need to think about is how:-
Ah symbolizes exalted speech
Om symbolizes the exalted body
Hum symbolizes the exalted mind
Ah is supposed to symbolize an exalted speech but how does it work? It is said in the tantra that the syllable Ah is the supreme of all syllables. Ah is the root of all syllables or consonants.
Student 2:  In Nyung Nay, in the self generation, we are referring to the four purities:
Purity of the body which is the deity’s pure body 
Pure enjoyment being the offering to the self generations
Pure activities will be the emitting and absorbing
What about pure mind in the practice of the four purities?
Khen Rinpoche: That is not one of the complete purity.
Student 2: I see. 
Khen Rinpoche: The four purities are body, environment, enjoyment and activities. Only four.
Student 2: So no mind. 
Khen Rinpoche: No mind. 
Student 2: The environment would be the mandala and the inestimable mansions. Last Sunday, I was talking about the Path of Accumulation in the three lower classes of tantra, it seems that from the beginning of yoga with sign, you already kind of like into the Path of Accumulation. However, when I relate to the sutra, normally when one enters the Path of Accumulation, you do have calm abiding and it is almost to the end of the Path of Accumulation. At that time calm abiding focusing on the wisdom realising emptiness would be achieved. So at the very beginning when one enters the lowest classes of tantra path, say yoga with signs, it would be a calm abiding focusing on objects other than wisdom realizing emptiness, am I correct?
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know whether you are correct or not. 
These are qualms to which there are no clear answers. If you follow the position of Jetsunpa whose position is adhered to by Sera Je College, then a person who enters the Mahayana path necessarily has calm abiding. 
If one takes this position, you need calm abiding to enter the Mahayana path. But how you are going to explain it? In order to enter the Mahayana path, you need to have uncontrived bodhicitta, which is a mind that spontaneously thinks about achieving enlightenment day and night. It has to come effortlessly. If you adhere to this position, perhaps the reason would be that in order to have this kind of mindset day and night coming just effortlessly and uncontrived, then it would be difficult without depending on a stable mind such as calm abiding.
If you take this position, then you would have to answer another question and this question is more general: Is calm abiding a necessary prerequisite for the generation of any path or not? This also means even the Hinayana path. Basically in order to have uncontrived renunciation, do you need calm abiding or not? If you extend the earlier reasoning, then you might have to end up saying “yes”.
If you read our root text, Ngawang Palden’s presentation on the tantric stages, in the case of action tantra, they talked about concentration with repetition and concentration without repetition and within that there is concentration abiding in fire and concentration abiding in sound. He says that you achieve calm abiding at the time of the concentration abiding in sound. He seems to be saying that it is not achieved prior to that.
There are different positions taken by the various great masters of the past. I think we have gone through this. According to one of the writings of Longdol Lama Rinpoche, he said calm abiding that is achieved during the concentration abiding in sound is taken to mean calm abiding that has emptiness as its object of observation. It does not say it is calm abiding in general  So you have to take the calm abiding that is achieved during the concentration abiding in sound to be calm abiding observing emptiness. That means it is not an issue if you have achieved calm abiding prior to that.
Then in one of the writings of KachenYeshe Gyaltsen, he thinks that it could be possible that you can achieve calm abiding observing the deity’s body prior to concentration abiding in sound. 
The first of the two yogas is the yoga with signs which involves primarily generating oneself as a deity. You arise as a deity through the process of the six deities; the last is the sign deity during which the main practice is to elicit clear appearance and divine pride. In this context I personally think it is possible to achieve calm abiding by observing the deity’s body. So basically you can have calm abiding prior to the concentration abiding in sound.
I wonder whether you can say that the calm abiding that is achieved during the concentration abiding in sound, whether you call it the uncommon concentration or the uncommon calm abiding. Perhaps I think the calm abiding that is achieved during the concentration abiding in sound can be taken to be the calm abiding observing emptiness; not just calm abiding in general.  If you say that the calm abiding that is achieved during the concentration abiding in sound is the calm abiding observing emptiness, then it fits nicely into the picture because you achieve the special insight observing emptiness during the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound. I think maybe you could say that calm abiding can be achieved prior to the concentration abiding in sound. 
Nothing is clear but I just give some idea. Still you can think more.
Student 3:  Your answer to Student 1 just now was that there are purities of the body, the environment, activities. I thought implicitly the deity’s mind and speech are actually the first purity. Otherwise how do you actually practise divine pride because when you practise the divine pride, you are actually seeing yourself as the deity?
Khen Rinpoche: There is no mind. 
Student 3: But I thought is implicit.
Khen Rinpoche: When you count the four purities, the mind is not inside there. 
Student 4: Can you explain a bit about the three tiered being- commitment being, concentration being and wisdom being? What is the function of the three tiered being?
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know why we need three tiers. Anybody have idea why? Why three tiers? I don’t know exactly. I don’t see anything there clearly says about that.
We have a body. The commitment being is kind like a body or a container within which the mind resides. The mind has to depend on a physical basis and within the commitment being resides the wisdom being.
The commitment being is essentially our own visualization. It is the wisdom being that makes it powerful. That is why the wisdom being needs to enter and absorb into the commitment being.
I’m not sure. I didn’t see anything on this. Idea is something like that.

Student 5: Regarding divine pride, it was explained that when we generate divine pride, we have the full confidence that “I am the deity”. My problem is that the use of the word pride which always has the negative connotation. Besides being confident, are there some other aspects that pertain to a divine pride?  Is it just this confidence or are there other elements to this divine pride? 
Then how should this divine pride that “I am Chenrezig” being practiced during post meditation session? 
What is the proper way of practising this divine pride during post meditation session?
Khen Rinpoche: You have difficulty going about your daily life when you think you are Chenrezig? 
Student 5: Yeah.
Khen Rinpoche: You can’t do anything? 
Student 5: It is not a matter of not being able to function thinking I am Chenrezig but I’m just thinking in very practical way of how should I enhance my divine pride you know? 
Khen Rinpoche: Enhance?
Student 5: Enhance. Is it something that we should make stronger?
Khen Rinpoche: You are saying it is so strong and how to reduce. Now you are asking…
Student 5: I mean how should it be practiced during post meditation? During meditation we can say “I am Chenrezig.” During post meditation, what is the proper way of thinking “I am Chenrezig”? Are there other aspects of divine pride that we should be aware of apart from having this confidence? 
Khen Rinpoche: I think that is all.
Student 5: That’s it? 
Khen Rinpoche: I think so. 
Student 5: So it is just the confidence and during post meditation I keep on having this strong idea “I am a deity”. Sometimes this idea of “I am a deity” with the negative mind arise “I’m superior to everybody else cause I am a deity” comes up.
Khen Rinpoche: I am deity. I am superior?
Student 5: Yeah. I don’t know whether that negative mind can arise. Then how?
Khen Rinpoche: Then sit down. 
First you must understand what it means to arise as deity. Who is it that is arising as deity? Oneself! Literally oneself arising as deity. What is the basis of designation of this divine pride? You are imputing the deity onto what? In the first place, the problem comes because of not knowing what it is. 
We have the ordinary contaminated aggregates which is the basis of designation of the ordinary I. If this ordinary I becomes the basis of identifying oneself as the deity, then you got a big problem. Then the afflictions such as pride can arise if you think the ordinary I is the deity. 
If the ordinary I which is designated in dependence upon the contaminated aggregates is taken to be the deity, i.e. the I being the deity, then you got a problem. Such a way of identification has no benefit. In fact it is a wrong consciousness. Conceiving the coarse ordinary I as Buddha is a wrong consciousness and you are not going to achieve anything useful whatsoever. 
(Position 1)  There is a school of thought that says that the basis of designation in dependence upon which you impute I the deity is ones’ object of attainment, the enlightenment. The object of attainment in which your bodhicitta (mind generation) is focusing on and wanting to achieve the Buddhahood, i.e. there is this Buddha that you will become. One school of thought takes that object of attainment – the Buddha that you will become, as the basis of designation, and upon which then you identify “This is me”. 
Khen Rinpoche:  What’s wrong with that? Okay? Or not okay? Correct?
Student 6: Your future Buddhahood is a non-existent because you have not…
Khen Rinpoche: Non-existent? What do you mean?
Student 6: You have not achieved it so how can it be a basis of designation on something that you have not achieved?
Khen Rinpoche: There is causal refuge and resultant refuge. Your resultant refuge exists or not? The enlightenment that you will achieve in the future exists or not? Doesn’t exist now but in general does it exists? Just because it exists doesn’t mean it has to exist now. 
There is the Buddha that you will become and that is your object of attainment. Taking that as the basis of designation and you identify it then you elicit clear appearance and divine pride on the basis of that. Is that a problem or not?
Khen Rinpoche: Problem? No? 
The purpose of cultivating clear appearances and divine pride is to stop ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. As such, this position is incorrect. 
By focusing on your future object of attainment, the Buddha that you will become and taking that as a basis of designation and identifying yourself with that, there is no benefit. What is the purpose? Are you are going to stop ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness?
By focusing on this object of attainment, the Buddha that you will become, is there ordinary identity and ordinary appearance or not?
If there isn’t, then what is the point of meditating on that and cultivating clear appearance and divine pride where in the first place there is no ordinary appearance and no adherence to ordinariness to stop. 
So it is incorrect to conceive of the ordinary I which is designated in dependence upon the contaminated aggregates to be the deity. Likewise, there is no purpose and benefit in identifying yourself as being the future Buddha that you will become in the future. There is no point because it doesn’t stop ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. 
The divine pride in conceiving the I to be the deity, the I is not the ordinary I, neither the I that is imputed in dependence upon the future object of attainment - one’s future enlightenment. 
(Position 2) However, one schools of thought that says that it is the general I, the I that pervades past, present and future, this I that exists, is not the specific I, but the general I that identifying that and meditating on that as the deity. 
When we say “arising as the deity”, who is it that arise as deity? It is the I, isn’t it? What on earth is this I? You really have to think “who exactly is this person that is generated and arises as deity”? 
There is this general I that pervades of all times - past, present and future - including enlightenment. So taking this general I as the basis of designation, then visualizing and meditating in the aspect of deity and holding on to divine pride and clear appearance. Will this be okay? It is definitely a better position than the previous two but is there a problem with this or not?
Student 7: I thought that the taking the resultant state of one’s enlightenment would be the best position for the basis of designation of I. If we take the general I to be the basis of designation of the enlightened being the deity….. 
Khen Rinpoche: If you take your object of attainment, your future enlightenment, as the basis of designation, what ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness is there in relation to the Buddha that you will become in the future?  Is it ordinary or not? 
Student 7: There is a difference in the time frame.
Ven Gyurme: No. Is it ordinary or not? The Buddha that you will become is ordinary or not? Yes or no?
Student 7: No.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay then. That is better because?
Student 7: It is like it helps you to maintain a pure perception. If we were to take the general I that pervades the whole continuum, past, present and future lives, we have been lower realm beings in our past lives and right now we are deluded ordinary sentient beings and take that as a basis of designation of I that is the enlightened being, the deity, to me is like things just fall apart.
Khen Rinpoche: That is not what we said. We are talking about the general I. There is a general I and there is a specific I. The general I exist at all times, right? 
Student 7: Yes, three times, past present and future. 
Khen Rinpoche: It definitely exists at all times. We are not talking about the specific I. We are not talking about the I as a hell being, or I as a ordinary sentient being. We are not talking specifically of this I. We are talking about the general I. So what is the problem?  
Student 7: It is too vague. The general I of the past, present and future is like there is no mental image of I that arise in my mind. It is like you can say meaning generality. It is really nothingness. If you ask me how do I think of myself, the general I of past, present and future, seriously right now my mind is blank. 
Ven Gyurme: It is not the general I of the past, present and future. The general I exist covering all times. We are not saying general I of past, present and future which exists or pervades. We are just talking about general I, does the I exists or not? 
Student 7: What I’m saying is that if we have this perception of ourselves as the resultant state of enlightenment, somehow it helps us to in a way more focus on the goal that we are achieving. In some sense it does at the time of the path. There is a difference in the quality of our perception because the problem with us right now is that we see ourselves as ordinary. We don’t see ourselves as a divine being. The goal that we set it is based on the resultant state that we would like to achieve. That is why we make aspirational prayers. That is how I see it. Generally when people train, they always have goal in mind that they want to achieve. If we say the resultant state of enlightenment is not useful, I think our refuge vows……
Ven Gyurme: No, what Khen Rinpoche was trying to say is this: If you take the second position, then you meditate  to abandon what?  Is there ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness? It is just that. You meditate to abandon that, right? So if there is nothing to abandon then you meditate on what?
Student 7: There is something to abandon. Right now I’m not enlightened, so that is the object of abandonment. For me I take it there is a difference in the time frame, i.e. the person that I am right now and the person I am in the resultant state of enlightenment, are not two different persons. It is the different in time frame. Right now I see myself as an ordinary deluded sentient being, but if I see myself… 
Ven Gyurme: No. I don’t think you got what Khen Rinpoche said, the future enlightenment, you as a Buddha, has ordinary appearance or not? Is ordinary or not? 
Student 7: No.
Khen Rinpoche: Think about it. 
(Position 3) Think about the third option which is in fact something that is mentioned in one particular presentation of the tantric stages of the path by some great master. 
There is a general I that covers all times and it exists, right? If you take that as the basis of designation and meditate on that in the aspect of deity and so forth, is there any problem? Does the general I that covers past, present and future all lifetimes exists or not?  There are four pillars here. Is there a pillar that pervades all four pillars or not? 
Student 7: General pillar?
Ven Gyurme: Yes or no?
Student 7: It is a general pillar but I won’t say it is one pillar. 
Khen Rinpoche: Is there a pillar that pervades all four of these pillars here or not? In here, is there such a pillar that exists or not? 
Student 7: General pillar.
Khen Rinpoche: If you eliminate one of these pillars individually, at the end do you have a pillar that pervades all the four pillars? Yes or no?
Student 7: I mean if all four pillars are non-existent
Ven Gyurme: Yes or no?
Student 7: No.
Khen Rinpoche: There is a pillar that covers all the four. But when you eliminate all the four, then do you have any left or not?
Student 7: No.
Khen Rinpoche: There is a pillar in this room that pervades all four of these pillars. You cannot say it doesn’t exist. But yet when you say it exists, you look for it you cannot find. That is why it exists in mere name, not findable under analysis. 
Is there a pillar that pervades all the four pillars? Yes. But if you look individually for this pillar, is this pillar that we are talking about pervades all four pillars? This pillar that pervades all four pillars is pillar 1 or not? No. Is pillar 2? Is pillar 3? Is pillar 4? It is none of these four but yet you cannot say it doesn’t exist. So it exists. In what? In mere name. 
Student 7: Yes, it exists as that. 
They say that as you think like this, there is benefit in understanding at the emptiness of things existing from their own side. You look at this in general, it exists in mere name, but if you try to look for the imputed object, you cannot find, is not this, is not that, but you cannot say it doesn’t exist. 
It is the same as the emptiness of the I. What the I or the self is that which is merely designated in dependence upon the aggregates, and is nothing more than that. If you look for the I within the basis of designation, there is nothing you can point to that is the self. 
There is an I that moves from life to life, from hell to this life as a human being, from human being to enlightenment. There is such an I, right? This is the general I that covers all times. Whereas the I of this life, the human identity, which is designated in dependence upon the human body and mind, this specific I, does not go to enlightenment even next life.
Student 7: What if when we see ourselves as the resultant state of the enlightened being that we become? Yes, there is no ordinary appearance to abandon because the moment we see ourselves as the enlightened being that we will become, the resultant state of enlightened being, at the same time we would have stopped the ordinary appearance - appearance of ourselves as an ordinary being. That moment when we see ourselves as a divine enlightened being at the resultant state, at the same time, we would have stop the perception of seeing ourselves as ordinary sentient being.  
Ven Gyurme: Are you stopping something that exists or doesn’t exist?
Student 7: What I’m saying is that when we see ourselves as the resultant state of enlightenment, and that is the basis of designation of the deity. When we see ourselves as the resultant state of enlightened being, at the same time, we would have stopped seeing ourselves as ordinary. You cannot see yourself both as an ordinary being and as a divine being. It is quite impossible. When we cultivate that divine pure perception, immediately ordinary perception is stopped simultaneously. 
Khen Rinpoche: So you think about it. If you take your object of attainment, your future enlightenment, as the basis of designation upon which you cultivate divine pride and clear appearance, is there any problems or not? Likewise, if you take the general I to be the basis of designation and then cultivate divine pride and clear appearance, what is the problem thinking that the ordinary I, the one that exists in dependence upon the contaminated body and mind, thinking that this ordinary I is the deity? What is wrong with that? 
Student 8: If we take the I that got feeling and the aggregates and thinking that I as the deity, that is going to be a problem because then we will never be able to develop divine pride, but rather we will develop the negative pride.
Khen Rinpoche: Why?
Student 8: I don’t think that is a problem if we use the emptiness of I to generate that divine pride as a deity, then there wouldn’t be a problem. From the very beginning when we started doing the empty deity and the six deity process, at the very beginning we are supposed to cultivate the emptiness of this self in order to arise yourself as a deity. So if I use my ordinary I and the general I to develop that divine pride, then there is a problem. What is the problem? We all have the buddha nature within us, but at the moment it is very clouded. If I think that I am a Chenrezig but is covered with all these defilements, I don’t think it’s correct. But if I am able to use the proper technique and so skill to arise as a deity in using the emptiness of I then I don’t think there is a problem. 
Ven Gyurme: You are saying emptiness of the I is the basis of designation for deity?
Student 8: Yeah.
Ven Gyurme: I is permanent? 
Student 8: I is permanent? No.
Khen Rinpoche: You think about these three positions, what would be the fallacy, if there is any?
What is wrong with saying that the I that is designated in dependence upon the contaminated body and mind, taking that as the basis of designation and then cultivating divine pride and clear appearance. What would be the problem? 
Likewise, by taking the Buddha that you will become in the future as the basis of designation and then cultivating divine pride and clear appearance, is there any problem?
Then the third one would be the general I. 
What is to be stopped here in the tantric practice is ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. In the process of stopping these two, the main section of the process is the meditation on emptiness. The meditation on emptiness is the primary thing that purifies ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness.
In Highest Yoga Tantra, whether through imagination or through the actual realization, when we take the clear light ascertaining emptiness and identify that thinking “This is my resultant dharmakaya.” In Highest Yoga Tantra we practice we have the clear light realizing emptiness, extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness and then identify oneself as the resultant dharmakaya and hold on divine pride as the resultant dharmakaya “This is my resultant dharmakaya.” 
So this is at the level of make-belief but this is the method of practicing at the beginning “This is my resultant dharmakaya”. At the level of imagination, at the beginning we visualize manifest extremely subtle mind of clear light causing it to realize emptiness and identify this as “I am the resultant dharmakaya”.  This is for the purpose of creating the cause to actually achieve such a result in the future as it is mentioned in the sutra. What is it that becomes the dharmakaya? Basically, it is the naturally abiding lineage together with the clear light.
At the beginning when one meditates on emptiness, it purifies in emptiness. That purification ceases ordinary appearance. This purification in emptiness stops the ordinary appearance, it stops adherence to ordinariness. So at the level of imagination at the beginning of Highest Yoga Tantra practice, that is what we think “This is my extremely subtle mind clear light realizing emptiness. This is the actual dharmakaya (truth body)”. 
It is from within this dharmakaya, one imagines this is the resultant dharmakaya, the actual dharmakaya and one arises into the form body from this. The form body is a display of the dharmakaya and the manifestation of the dharmakaya. After arising in the aspect of the deity with all the features, whatever deity you are meditating upon, then one cultivates clear appearance and divine identity or divine pride. 
When one arises in the form body with all the features, faces, colors, implements and so forth, there is the deity’s body clearly appearing and one thinks that one is the actual deity and feeling “I’m the real deity” completely devoid of all faults and endowed with all the qualities. There is this appearance of a deity’s body with the feeling being the actual deity. This is the basis of designation. This clear appearance of the deity’s body is the basis of designation in dependence upon which there is a sense of I.
This I that is designated in dependence upon clear appearance of the deity’s body. This I is the basis of designation of identifying yourself as the deity. 
Another way is that there is this clear appearance of the deity’s body that is completely devoid of all faults and endowed with all the qualities and thinking “This is me”. It is possible, right? 
Starting with placing divine pride as the dharmakaya, by identifying at the level of visualization at the beginning, this extremely subtle mind of clear light realizing emptiness, is the actual dharmakaya.
From this, one arises as the form body. Then you elicit clear appearance of yourself with all the necessary features, colours and so forth, appearing clearly. It is the body of the deity that is completely devoid of all faults and endowed with all qualities that is appearing. 
This is one way you can say this is the basis of designation upon which you identify “This is me”. Then through constant familiarization, and through progressing on the different levels of the Highest Yoga Tantra, at very high levels, then this realization does not remain at the level of visualization. A fully qualified deity body actually arises. That is where the illusory body comes into the picture. So this fully qualified deity’s body, the illusory body, is the actual substantial cause for the Buddha’s form body.
In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, you imagine you ascertain emptiness with the extremely subtle mind. Although at the beginning it is visualization and that is what we think. The mind that ascertains emptiness is an extremely subtle mind, clear light. So this mind realizing emptiness is the resultant dharmakaya. So you place divine pride as dharmakaya. From that one arises as form body, so then you try to elicit clear appearance and divine pride with respect to that. At the beginning, one purifies in emptiness. That purification in emptiness at the beginning is very important. That really goes a long way in stopping the ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. 
In the teachings, there is one common qualm that is raised: For those who have very powerful clear appearance and divine pride, how do they engage in purification practices like the Vajrasattva mantra and 35 buddhas during the post-meditation session. The idea is that if you really have this clear appearance of yourselves and identity a deity that is very natural and real for them. There are different ways of going about this. 
According to one master during the confession practice, you imagine the ordinary I, the ordinary person at the heart of oneself as the deity. That is the person that does the confession.
Another option is that for those people, the advice to them is that they hold on to the clear appearance but they should loosen the divine pride. 
There is no need to worry too much about this and it doesn’t apply to us. 
Student 9: In both sutra and tantra, the dualistic appearance only subsides when one sees emptiness directly. However, in the six deities, the very first one, the empty deity, when everything dissolves, we are supposed to be in that stage is not a dualistic appearance. Is that just a label by our mind?
Ven Gyurme: Is your question this: When we meditate on the ultimate deity, we imagine the experience to be like someone who has directly realize emptiness, no dualistic appearance whatsoever? Is that how we should imagine? 
Student 9: Yes. Is that how we should imagine. That is why we say there is no dualistic appearance. 
Khen Rinpoche: We imagine this to be the case but we cannot say because we imagine it that way, therefore, we have no dualistic appearance.
Student 9: Cannot, I mean we are conceptual mind. 
Khen Rinpoche: So for anybody who has before the direct realization of emptiness, the mind is conceptual. The mind that is conceptual necessarily there is meaning generality. If there is meaning generality, there is no way for there to be an absence of dualistic appearance. 
Student 9: In Lesson 22, we were talking about yoga without signs. You mentioned another name for yoga without signs is empty yoga or non-dual yoga. I just wonder what that means.
Ven Gyurme: Empty yoga
Student 9: Non-dual yoga as mentioned in the performance tantra lesson. I am just wandering what that means. 
Khen Rinpoche: Which part?
Ven Gyurme: The four types of yoga?
Student 9: Yoga without signs
Ven Gyurme: Four types of yoga? How they are all subsumed under the two yogas that one is it? So you are asking whether the empty yoga is yoga without signs or not, is it?
Student 9: Yeah. Another one is non-dual yoga. I don’t understand the meaning. 
Khen Rinpoche: Next time, I don’t know. 
 The Five Buddhas form a base of a Mandala, the lotus mandala shows each of the Buddhas seed syllables in the Lanza Sanskrit:
- Om at the central point, Hum below in the Eastern quarter, arranged around clockwise, following the suns path, are Tram, Hri and Ah.
Each of the Five Buddhas are associated with their own family and the conversion of the Five Mind Poisons into the Five Wisdoms:
1. Om, Virochana, Buddha family. Ignorance converts to all accommodating wisdom.
2. Hum, Akshobya, Vajra Buddha family. Hate/anger converts to mirror like wisdom.
3. Tram, Ratnasambhava  Jewel Buddha family. Greed/pride converts to equanimity equality wisdom.
4. Hri, Amitabha, Lotus Buddha family. Desire converts to discriminating wisdom.
5. Ah, Amoghasiddhi, Karma Buddha family. Envy converts to all accomplishing wisdom.