Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L35.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:20.560344
================================================================================

Highest Yoga Tantra 
A detailed explanation of highest yoga tantra
The detailed explanation of the way to progress on the path of highest yoga tantra has two parts:
1. The system of mainstream highest yoga tantra
2. The system of Kālacakra tantra
The system of mainstream highest yoga tantra
This has four parts:
1. How to become a vessel suitable for meditating on the path
2. How to keep the vows and commitments purely
3. How to practice the path
4. How to manifest the fruits of practice
1. How to become a vessel suitable for meditating on the path
You become a vessel suitable for meditating on the path by first entering any suitable maṇḍala of highest yoga tantra explained from within the authentic classes of tantra and elucidated by qualified mahāsiddhas, and then you obtain empowerment.
In order to enter into the unsurpassed yoga tantra, you have to obtain an empowerment in the mandala of unsurpassed yoga tantra. As such, first you have to enter into the mandala of any suitable unsurpassed yoga tantra, and then obtained empowerment. If ones enter the mandala, takes the empowerment and receives it, then one becomes a suitable vessel for meditating on the surpassed yoga tantra. That is the purpose of receiving or taking and obtaining the empowerment.
Further, from the perspective of fully practicing of the path, you must obtain the four empowerments.
The four empowerments (initiations) are:
Vase
Secret
Knowledge and wisdom 
Word initiation
In order to practice both the generation and completion stages of unsurpassed yoga tantra, one must obtain these four initiations.
[Principles of Buddhist Tantra: The first qualifies us to practice the generation stage. The remaining three qualify us to perform the completion-stage practices that, respectively, establish the illusory body, clear light, and the state of union.]
There are three maṇḍalas where you obtain the vase empowerment: 
(1) the painted-cloth maṇḍala, 
(2) the colored-sand maṇḍala, and 
(3) the body maṇḍala.
For some special disciples there is also (4) the absorption maṇḍala. Therefore in general there are four maṇḍalas.
What is the mandala in which one obtains these four initiations?  Of the four, the first is the vase initiation. With respect to the vase initiation, one obtains it in either in:-
The painted cloth mandala,
The colored sand mandala or 
The body mandala.
So these are the three mandalas in which one obtains the vase initiation. 
The painted cloth mandala is like the thing that is drawn or printed on. The painted cloth mandala is one of the bases of accomplishment. 
Another basis of accomplishment is the colored sand mandala; the usual of what we called the sand mandala. 
There is also the body mandala. The body mandala is not just visualizing the deity on the body or placing the deity in or on the body but rather the body mandala means generating deities with the body as a basis of accomplishment.  With the body or the body parts as the basis of accomplishment then one generate that into a deity. That is the body mandala.
However, for some special disciples there is also the absorption mandala. 
Therefore, in general there are four mandalas, in which one can obtain the vase initiation.  We have mentioned the absorption mandala (or concentration mandala) before.  In the case where the person who is conferring the initiation has a really special level of meditative absorption and the students or the disciples who are also similarly that qualified, then in those cases there could be a situation whereby a vase initiation is conferred using such a mandala.
It is not suitable to confer empowerment in the body maṇḍala on those who have not obtained initiation previously. Body maṇḍala empowerment is conferred in the Drilbupa system of Heruka, but tantras such as Yamāntaka have no body maṇḍala, and tantras such as Guhyasamāja have a body maṇḍala but empowerment is not conferred there.
It is not suitablee to confer empowerment in the body mandala on those who has not obtained initiation previously. If we look at the practice of Vajrabhairava, there is no mentioned of the body mandala practise. If you look at the method of accomplishment for Vajrabhairava you will not see any practice of body mandala. As such there is no initiation into the body mandala as well in the case of Vajrabhairava. If you look at the Vajrabhairava practice there are sessions where it involves placing or meditation of deity on the parts of the body but that alone do not constitute a body mandala practice. In order for something to be a body mandala practice, the basis of accomplishment for generating the deities has to be the body or body parts. As such, although there is a practice of meditating on deities in the practice of Vajrabhairava, that alone does not make it a body mandala practice.
Khen Rinpoche: Ok? Or no?  Nothing, nothing goes inside?  Takes time.  So just leave imprint.
What you have to catch is this.  Body mandala practice is not just a practice involving placing or visualizing deities at different parts of the body.  That alone does not make it a body mandala practice.  In order for something to be a body mandala practice, the basis of accomplishment for generating the deities has to be any of the body parts. So if there is such a practice whereby you take any of the body parts or specific body parts and using them as a basis of accomplishment for the generation of the deity then it becomes a body mandala practice.  
Khen Rinpoche: OK?  You must know that first. 
In the practice of the Guhyasamāja, for example, if you look at the meaning of accomplishment of the deities, you will find the practice of body mandala.  Although there is a practice of body mandala in Guhyasamāja, there is no initiation into the body mandala in Guhyasamāja.
As for Chakrasamvara, there are three different traditions:
Luipa
Ghantapa 
Krishnacharya
Of these 3 main traditions of Chakrasamvara, it is said that there is a practice of body mandala in the Ghantapa tradition of the Chakrasamvara, and there is also the initiation into the body mandala.
In the Ghantapa tradition of the Chakrasamvara, there is an initiation into the body mandala. Before one is suitable vessel to receive the initiation into the body mandala of the Ghantapa tradition of Chakrasamvara, one must first receive initiation into the external mandala of Chakrasamvara in the Ghantapa tradition. As such, this example illustrates what was said earlier on - it is not suitable to confer empowerment in the body mandala on those who have not obtained initiation previously. 
How do we understand the word initiation (empowerment) here? 
Using the Ghantapa tradition of Chakrasamvara as an example, there is outer mandala and inner mandala. The inner mandala refers to the body mandala. So there is the initiation in the body mandala of Ghantapa tradition of Chakrasamvara.  But before one can receive this, one must first obtain initiation in the outer mandala of Ghantapa tradition of Chakrasamvara.
* Ghantapa is Sanskrit (Drilbupa in Tibetan)
Heruka also translated as Chakrasamvara
It is said that the three higher empowerments are bestowed, respectively, in the relative-bodhicitta maṇḍala, the lotus maṇḍala, and the ultimate-bodhicitta maṇḍala.
*Lotus mandala is translated as bhaga mandala
Of these 3 higher empowerments:
The secret initiation is conferred in the conventional bodhicitta mandala,
The knowledge wisdom initiation is conferred in the bhaga mandala
The word initiation is conferred in ultimate bodhicitta mandala.
[BP1: There are four types of mandalas where we attain the vase initiation. Which mandalas are used to confer the three higher initiations (the secret, wisdom knowledge and the word initiations)? 
• The secret initiation is conferred in the conventional bodhicitta mandala. One obtains the secret initiation by experiencing or tasting the bodhicitta of the guru’s father and mother. 
• The wisdom knowledge initiation is conferred in the bhaga mandala. The bhaga mandala refers to the secret place of the mother. 
• The word initiation is conferred in the ultimate bodhicitta mandala. The initiation is conferred through introducing the disciples to the meaning of the unification of no more learning. I guess one can say that the ultimate bodhicitta mandala refers to the unification of no more learning. ]
What is the meaning of mandala?  Mandala means taking the essence.  The word mandala in Tibetan is dkyil ‘khor – dkyil means essence and ‘khor means condition to take. In Sanskrit is mandala. So one meaning of mandala is taking the essence. When we talk about mandala in the context of initiation please do not have this idea that it is referring to something that is drawn or something that is constructed out of sand.  If you apply the word mandala in the context of highest yoga tantra, keeping in mind the meaning of mandala being taking the essence, the essence here refers to the wisdom of bliss and emptiness.
In the context of secret, knowledge wisdom and word initiation, by entering into that mandala, one takes the essence for the purpose of generating that wisdom of bliss and emptiness in one’s mental continuum. As such we are taking the essence.  
Another meaning of essence is the final attainment of the four bodies. So by entering into the mandala and taking initiation for the purpose of depositing or planting the seeds for the four bodies in one mental continuum. 
In tantra we also talk about inseparability of method and wisdom i.e. method being inseparable from wisdom. Here in the context of Highest Yoga Tantra it is the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. 
First you need to get this right first. 
Bliss is actualized or manifest. 
This bliss is then used to ascertain emptiness.
Within one blissful consciousness there is a method and wisdom which are fused together and are inseparable. 
When we talk about the wisdom of bliss and emptiness, this is what we are talking about. 
Bliss is a consciousness. There is a blissful consciousness and the bliss that ascertaining emptiness. These two are fused together as inseparable. 
When we talk about wisdom of bliss and emptiness, this is what we are referring to. 
When we talk about method and wisdom, these two being inseparable.
It can have a different meaning. 
In the context of highest yoga tantra, when we talk about method and wisdom and bringing these together, you first need to identify them separately:
The method here refers to the illusory body, and
The wisdom refers to clear light. 
When we talk about method and wisdom in the context of highest yoga tantra:
The method is the illusory body.  Illusory body is the method through which one achieves the form body.  
The wisdom refers to the clear light which it the method to achieve the truth body. 
It is said that all highest yoga tantra or unsurpassed yoga tantra are called the tantra of the inseparable method and wisdom because of all them show the methods or practices for actualizing the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. 
Accordingly to Je Rinpoche’s Gelug presentation, the unsurpassed yoga tantra or highest yoga tantra is only divided into two:
Father Tantra
Mother Tantra
There are other systems of divisions. In those divisions you will see an additional division of non-dual tantra.  This is something that is not posited in the Gelug tradition because according to Je Rinpoche, the so called the non-dual tantra is not a division but rather is a basis of the division. 
According to Je Rinpoche all unsurpassed yoga tantras or highest yoga tantras are all tantras of the inseparable method and wisdom. As such, when we say the tantra of inseparable method and wisdom we can say tantra of non-dual method and wisdom. As such, all highest yoga tantras are the basis of division. The non-dual tantra is a not a division but rather a basis of division.
According to Je Rinpoche all unsurpassed yoga tantras are essentially non-dual tantra. 
What are non-dual tantras? 
Non-dual tantras are tantras of the inseparable method and wisdom.
In this context, when we say all unsurpassed yoga tantras are non-dual tantras and non-dual tantras mean they are tantras of inseparable method and wisdom. This method and wisdom here refers to the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. 
In this context, the non-dual tantras means tantras of inseparable method and wisdom. Here it means the wisdom of bliss and emptiness.
The wisdom that realizes emptiness is the wisdom which leaves bliss to be the method.
In this context, why is this bliss is classified as method?  That is the question?
How is this bliss a method for achieving if you say the method is that which achieves form body of the Then questions arises. 
Here in this context the bliss cannot be posited as the method for achieving the form body because it is the illusory body and is not the bliss. Here in this context, perhaps if we say that the bliss is the method for achieving the method for realizing emptiness, then perhaps it will be ok.
Khen Rinpoche: You understand? Should be.
You just have to get this.
According to Je Rinpoche all unsurpassed highest yoga tantras are tantras of inseparable method and wisdom. 
What is this inseparable method and wisdom?
It is the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. 
Why is this so? Because all Highest Yoga Tantra and unsurpassed yoga tantras explicitly teach the development of this wisdom of bliss and emptiness. As such, all highest yoga tantras are non-dual tantras. Since the very essence of unsurpassed yoga tantras is the wisdom of bliss and emptiness, so all highest yoga tantras teach the generation or development of this. As such all highest yoga tantras and unsurpassed yoga tantra are non-dual tantras.
When these Highest Yoga Tantra and unsurpassed yoga tantras are divided, there are two divisions:
 Father Tantra
Mother Tantra
So according to Je Rinpoche, all unsurpassed highest yoga tantras when divided there are basically into two: father tantra and the mother tantra. 
What are the differences between the two? What makes something father tantra and not the mother tantra?
Those tantras that mainly teach the generation of the illusory body which is the uncommon cause of the form body of the Buddha are father tantra.
Those tantras that mainly show how to actualize the clear light which is the uncommon cause of the truth body are called mother tantra. 
Father tantra is the unsurpassed yoga tantra that primarily shows the method for generating the illusory body which is the uncommon cause for the form body. 
Mother tantras are the tantras that mainly show the development or generating of clear light which is the uncommon cause of dharmakaya or the truth body. 
If mother tantras primarily talks about the development or generation of the clear light, it is essentially talking about generating the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness. Other than that, what else is there?
Khen Rinpoche: You understand why I am saying this? You got the implication or not? 
Haven’t started anything on highest yoga tantra, you already blur. 
Student 1: The non-dual tantra refers to the indivisibility of the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. Bliss which is the not referring to the illusory body but refers to the wisdom realizing emptiness. Is it correct to say? 
Khen Rinpoche: If it is bliss, it is not necessarily a bliss that realizes emptiness.
Student 1: In this context of non-dual tantra in the basis of division to father and mother tantra, because this bliss is not related or associated with illusory body is earlier asserted to be the wisdom realizing emptiness. So then, mother tantra is again a non-dual bliss and emptiness. Where does the bliss go to now? 
Khen Rinpoche: The bliss goes nowhere. The bliss is still there. 
Student 1: I get the problem now.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the problem? There is no problem.
Student 1: The father tantra is non-dual bliss and emptiness, yet bliss in the generality of tantra is not non-dual and bliss is the wisdom realizing emptiness. Yet, non-dual tantra is divided into father and mother tantra. So that means there is bliss at the generality level and there is a bliss at the specific mother tantra level. Am I right to say that?
Khen Rinpoche: All unsurpassed yoga tantras and highest yoga tantras are tantras that have explicitly talks about the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. All highest yoga tantras do that. That is the purpose. 
Guhyasamaja is classified as a father tantra. Since it is the highest yoga tantra it necessarily talks about the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. If we say that Guhyasamaja on the basis of showing how to develop this wisdom of bliss and emptiness through which then one comes to achieve the illusory body. This means it fits into the definition of father tantra. Out of the clear light and illusory body, it primarily teaches or shows the development of the illusory body. 
Guhyasamaja is a father tantra. As such, it is the unsurpassed yoga tantra and does talk about the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness. On the basis of which it shows the development of the generating the illusory body. As such, it is a father tantra. Since the Heruka Chakrasamvara tantra which is classified a mother tantra, of the two - clear light and illusory body - since it primarily teaches the development of clear light, so it is called mother tantra. So you can phrase it like that.
We will summarize again. 
All unsurpassed yoga tantras are tantras of inseparable method and wisdom.
In this context:
the method refers to bliss 
the wisdom refers to wisdom realizing emptiness.
All highest yoga tantras are tantras of the inseparable method and wisdom. 
As such they are also called non-dual tantras. 
This is the basis of division of highest yoga tantras. So when divided, there are:
father tantras 
mother tantras
Father tantras are those unsurpassed yoga tantras that primarily shows the development of the illusory body.
Mother tantras are those unsurpassed yoga tantras that primarily shows the development of clear light.
Khen Rinpoche: OK. You understand? That’s all.
Student 1: In these 2 phrases:
The wisdom of inseparable bliss and emptiness in that context and
the inseparability of method and wisdom
the wisdom of inseparable bliss and emptiness, in this context of inseparable method and wisdom in tantra the bliss is taken in this context to be wisdom realizing emptiness. Is it right to say that? 
Ven Gyurme: Are you asking in the phrase the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness, the bliss necessarily realizes emptiness or not?
Student 1: I am not saying all the time. I am saying in this context.
Ven Gyurme In the context of tantra of inseparable method and wisdom, right?
Student 1: You have the inseparability of method and wisdom. The method aspect is the bliss realizing emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: These two is inseparable.
Student 1: I am having a hard time trying to identify and locate this illusory bliss. Very difficult to identify what this exactly mean? Because you have these 2 phrases, it seems they are same and yet they seem they are very different. Inseparability of method and wisdom in this context. The method is bliss realizing emptiness and you have the inseparability of bliss.
Ven Gyurme Can I put it that way - you are trying to ask: In the context of wisdom of non-dual emptiness, is it one mind or coming together of two minds?
Student 1: No la, we all know it is always just one consciousness.
Ven Gyurme: No, but you are having problem with that. Are you asking whether is one mind or two minds, right?
Student 1: No, no, not going in that direction. I am just trying to figure out what is this bliss in these two phrases mean. It seems like you have the inseparable wisdom of bliss and emptiness, and this bliss is the wisdom realizing emptiness. 
Ven Gyurme: So it is one mind or two?
Student 1: It is one mind all the time. Lower tantra already one mind, so no need to talk about highest tantra. Always talking about one mind. You have the inseparable method and wisdom in the context of inseparable tantra, which is the bliss realizing emptiness. Are these talking about the same thing? Or is there ..
Khen Rinpoche: Which two?
Student 1: These two phrases:  inseparable method and wisdom in the context of inseparable tantra and the wisdom inseparable bliss and emptiness. Are these two referring to the same?
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, it’s the same thing. I don’t know. If I am not wrong I am hearing the same thing.
When we say inseparable method and wisdom and inseparable bliss and emptiness, we are talking about the same thing. 
Student 1: Yet in the father tantra shows the method to eventually achieve the illusory body. Is it the bliss aspect of inseparable bliss and emptiness that lead to that? 
Khen Rinpoche: Are you ok with the inseparable method and wisdom and inseparable bliss and emptiness? These two being the same. 
Student 1: Wisdom of inseparable bliss and emptiness, yeah, ok.
Khen Rinpoche: So inseparable method and wisdom and inseparable bliss and emptiness is the same thing. 
If we say in a general way, what are father tantras and mother tantras? Father tantras are those that primarily shows the method i.e. it talks about the method aspect of the path. The mother tantras primarily teach the wisdom aspect.
Here when we talk about the father tantra as being the tantra that mainly teach the method which is the method for achieving the form body of the Buddha. The method here does not refer to bliss. The method here refers to the illusory body.
Student 1: OK. That why I got confusion. There is method and wisdom and method here refer to the bliss. Here the method does not refer to the bliss.
Khen Rinpoche: When we divide the unsurpassed yoga tantra into the father and mother tantra the division is made on the basis of whether the tantra primarily teaches the method or wisdom. In this context here the method is not the method that was talked about earlier. The method here refers to the illusory body which is an uncommon for actualizing the form body. It is not bliss.
The question is not about the father tantras. The question is about mother tantras. Since we say that mother tantras are those unsurpassed yoga tantras that primarily teach the wisdom aspect which is in this case is clear light which is the uncommon cause for dharmakaya. The clear light for the wisdom here is the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness. 
Again it becomes uncomfortable. That is where the implication is. It is a bit of the problem. Everything also talks about the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness. 
Father tantra is also the Highest Yoga Tantra and it is also necessary a tantra that teaches and show the development of the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness. If we say the father tantra is the Highest Yoga Tantra and is tantra that talks about the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness. On the basis of which, then it primarily teaches the development of illusory body which is the uncommon cause for actualizing the form body. What about the mother tantra then? 
Student 1: So rather than saying that method to for the development, the way to develop the form body to separate the word development and from the method and wisdom. 
Khen Rinpoche: It teaches the illusory body which is the uncommon cause for form body of Buddha.
Student 2: I don’t quite understand this mother tantra. So mother tantra doesn’t primarily teach us about illusory body. So it doesn’t primarily teach us the cause for form body?
Khen Rinpoche: In essence if cut short the translation, the word comes down to primarily. It is not that mother tantra does not talk about illusory body but primarily it deals with clear light. That is why the word ‘primarily’.
In the teachings Je Rinpoche’s assertion is that we don’t divide the unsurpassed yoga tantras into 3, instead we only have 2. We don’t have that division of non-dual tantra. The father tantras themselves are also classified in this way. 
Father tantra of which there are:
Attachment method tantras,
Anger method tantras and
Ignorance method tantras
Although the mother tantra is not classified in such a way but in meaning, it is there.
In father tantra they are actually classified like that: anger method tantras, desire or attachment method tantras and ignorance method tantras. That is why you see these terms in highest yoga tantra: taking desire as the path and that is common.  There is also taking anger or hatred as the path. Then there is taking ignorance as the path. These terminologies exist.
In Je Rinpoche’s the Lamp Illuminating the Fives stages, such a question is asked. 
Yes, there is taking desire into the path. Essentially the point is what is the meaning of taking hatred as a path and ignorance as a path? 
How should we understand taking hatred as a path? There are wrathful activities.
There is the performance of wrathful activities such as killing, destruction, expelling and so forth. At the time of performing the activities, at the causal motivation phase, there is no hatred, there is no anger but at the time of performing that activities of killing, expelling and whatever wrathful activities there is the generation of not anger but it is kind of forceful, harsh mind. It is harsh and is the opposite of gentle.
Khen Rinpoche: Very wrathful.
In the same text it talks about so called taking hatred as the path. In the practice of the protection wheel, when we generate the protection wheel for the purpose of protection against the interferers, there are also practices during the protection wheel for expelling or destroying the interferers. 
At the causal motivation phase, when one meditates on the protection wheel it is compassion but at the time of chasing away the interferers, destroying them so on and so forth, it is said that at that moment we generate, literally like anger, hatred, malice, ill will and is used.
There are such father tantra which employ these so called anger or hatred as the path. So these tantras are called anger method tantras.
How about ignorance method tantra? The explanation is that it doesn’t really a method whether it is an anger method tantra or desire method tantra. Since the ignorance is always concomitant with anger and attachment, as such, when it is an anger method tantra, by the way you have ignorance. As such there is the ignorance method. Or whether, when there is attachment, since ignorance is always concomitant that goes with that desire or attachment, by the way, ignorance is also there.
In Je Rinpoche’s Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages of Guhyasamaja which says that “You must understand ignorance method tantra to mean that by the way ignorance is there, concomitant with either anger or attachment. It is not that one focuses specifically on ignorance and using it as a method. There is no permission for that. There is ignorance method tantra solely from the perspective of ignorance being a concomitant with desire or hatred through the force of either anger or attachment. Then by the way ignorance comes into play as well. As such, from that perspective, it is called ignorance method. This is mentioned in, by Je Rinpoche in his Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages. This is something to think about.
There is another explanation of the meaning of ignorance method - taking ignorance as the path. You should not take ignorance in ignorance method to mean the actual ignorance but rather it refer to asleep - the clear light of sleep. So that is given name ignorance. There is the practice of sustaining the practice during the clear light of sleep. There are methods for that. As such they are called ignorance method.
Earlier on we saw what Je Rinpoche mentioned in his Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages. In the context of taking anger as the path, at the time of performing wrathful activities, not during the causal motivation phase, but during the actual performance (Je Rinpoche used the word harsh mind) there is a harsh mind at the time of the actual performance of the activity. There are some scholars who say that you cannot take that harsh mind to mean actual anger or hatred. There are other scholars said that the harsh mind is the actual hatred and the actual anger. Actually one uses and utilizes that as the path.
When we looked at these phrases, “Taking attachment as the path” and “Taking hatred or anger as the path, ” are these attachment and anger are referring to the actual afflictions themselves or something else, this is something that we  have to really think about.
As for taking ignorance as the path, there are these two different interpretations of what ignorance is. 
One argument is that, whenever you take desire as the path or anger as the path, since ignorance is always concomitant with those states anyway, when it becomes desire as the path by the way. It is a method of utilizing ignorance as well since ignorance is concomitant with desire. Likewise, is the same thing with anger. But there is another interpretation in that when we say taking ignorance as the path, ignorance is not the actual ignorance but rather refer to sleep. So there are practices for sustaining the practice. Or manifesting and utilizing the clear light of sleep.
Back to taking desire or attachment as the path, does it mean that desire or attachment, the affliction itself is transformed into the entity of the path or not? 
If we say “Yes”, then it is very complicated and is very difficult. There is one explanation that goes like this and taking desire as the path means this:
With desire or attachment as the condition, then the bodhicitta in the body is melted. 
Through the melting of the bodhicitta, bliss is induced and bliss is generated. 
This bliss is used to ascertain emptiness. 
Through that, attachment itself is exhausted and is ceased
So this is one of the meanings of taking desire as the path.
There is this explanation. 
For somebody who does not possess the special method of highest yoga tantra, in order for that person to melt the bodhicitta in the body, actual real desire and attachment is needed. 
For somebody, who has the skilful method of highest yoga tantra, he or she does not need the actual desire or attachment to melt the bodhicitta in the body through which bliss is induced and then so on and so forth.
There is this explanation. In order to melt the bodhicitta in the body through the bliss is induced and through which one uses that to utilize to realize emptiness, basically to melt the bodhicitta, one does not need necessary actual desire or attachment. Rather through the skilful means of unsurpassed yoga tantra by the coming together of external conditions and internal conditions, then one can melt the bodhicitta in the body and through which bliss is induced, and then uses the bliss to realize emptiness. Through which one ceases the obscuration. Even the knowledge obscuration and then through which one achieves enlightenment.  So the essence is, you don’t need the actual attachment or desire to melt the bodhicitta. It is not necessary that there must be the actual or real desire or attachment. But rather it is like taking the bliss as the path. Likewise, in taking hatred or anger as the path. At the time of performing the wrathful activities at that time of the performance, during the time there is a harsh mind or forceful harsh mind, that is not the actual hatred or anger.
If we take this as an answer to the question about how the bodhisattva on the pure ground can engage in such a practice, they can take joy or bliss as the path. Bliss is necessary and without which one cannot eliminate that. We need to induce the bliss. Without which, we cannot use that to ascertain emptiness. Without which cannot abandon the subtlest obscuration. In order to induce the bliss, it is not necessarily to have desire or attachment.
There are individual who enters the path of unsurpassed yoga tantra from the onset. As such they entered the path with desire and attachment. But when inducing the bliss, they still depend on the special method of highest yoga tantra by depending on both external conditions and internal conditions but nevertheless, it is probably alright for them to use their desire in their practice. For them, their desire and attachment will not harm them. At their level, it doesn’t harm them. They have it as they have not abandoned it yet.
Student 3: The not so actual anger that is used as a path in highest yoga tantra, there is such a not so actual anger caused the bodhicitta to melt and ascertain emptiness at the most subtle…..
KhenRinpoche: Anger melts bodhicitta?
Student 3: Yeah, because you are taking anger into the path in highest yoga tantra. Taking desire into the path of highest yoga tantra means you caused the bodhicitta to melt and generate the most extremely subtle mind to realize emptiness and achieve enlightenment. Taking that into the path to enlightenment. Therefore, I would take that as, taking anger into the path to enlightenment means, through this one also achieve enlightenment. Taking anger into the path would be the same of taking desire into the path in the context of using that path to achieve enlightenment. 
Ven Gyurme:  Basically why do you need to take anger as the path? How does it contribute to our enlightenment?
Student 3: Because we can take desire as an aid to enlightenment in sutra, but then, that is not actually that is a branch for benefitting and so on. Here when talked about the highest yoga tantra practitioner, yogi, achieving very high levels engages in killing and there is this not so actual anger. How does that cause him to achieve enlightenment when he manifest that anger?
Khen Rinpoche: The purpose of taking anger as the path it is not the same as taking desire as the path. It is not for the purpose of generating bliss and so forth. It is called an anger method tantra. Why is it a method?  When you perform wrathful activities for the purpose of stopping certain individuals, let’s say, who are doing actions that bring about a lot of harm and a lot of negative karma, and that is a method to stop those sentient beings.
These wrathful activities are such as killing, expelling, chasing away technically can only be achieved by people, first must be bodhisattva having uncontrived bodhicitta. That alone is not enough. He must have pretty high level of attainments and realization. If that person can kill another sentient being he must also have the power to be revive him i.e. if he can take and put him back together; that kind of thing. Otherwise then it is just…
Handout