Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L36.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.797360
================================================================================

In the last lesson we saw how the unsurpassed yoga tantra is divided into father tantra and mother tantra.
You can have just a rough idea of the difference between a father and mother tantras. 
The uncommon cause for achieving the form body of a Buddha in unsurpassed yoga tantra is illusory body. So the unsurpassed yoga tantras that primary teaches on the stages of achieving such an illusory body is classified as father tantra.
Of the two - illusory body and clear light- clear light is the uncommon cause for achieving the truth body (dharmakaya). The unsurpassed yoga tantras that primarily explains the method for actualizing this clear light is classified as mother tantra.
Just have a rough idea of how and why the unsurpassed yoga tantras are divided into father and mother tantras. As to what exactly these clear light and illusory bodies are and what are the stages for achieving them, the explanation will come later on when we look at the completion stage.
The father tantra is itself divided into three:
Attachment method tantra, 
Hatred or anger method tantra 
Ignorance method tantra
As for the mother tantra, although there isn’t such an explicit division per se but some scholars assert that it is possible to say that such characteristics do exist in mother tantra in meaning although they are not divided in such a way. 
As for the attachment method tantra and the meaning of taking attachment or desire as the path, this is something we have to think about. What does it mean to take desire or attachment as the path?
There are different takes on this. As I have mentioned earlier on, due to the melting of the constituents or the bodhicitta in the body, and then bliss arise from the flow and melting of the bodhicitta. This bliss is used to ascertain emptiness. With that ascertainment of emptiness, one ceases or exhausts desire. So here in that sense, desire or attachment acts as a condition for the melting of the constituents or the bodhicitta in the body which leads to bliss, and then using the bliss to ascertain emptiness. With that ascertainment, one ceases attachment. So this is one way of explaining it. 
What about those persons who already have abandoned attachment and desire? How do they take desire as the path?
By depending on either the action mudra or the wisdom mudra, the external karma mudra or the internal visualized wisdom mudra, the meditator can still effect the melting and flow of the bodhicitta and so forth which leads to the bliss that ascertain emptiness and so forth. The point here is that desire is not an absolute necessary to effect that kind of bliss from the melting of the constituents.
As to whether one needs an actual external consort or not to effect the melting of bodhicitta, there are different positions on it. Some masters say that in order to effect that, you must have an actual external consort. Whereas there are others who say that it is not absolutely necessary as one can still effect the melting of the constituents of the bodhicitta by depending on the visualized mudra or wisdom mudra.
As for hatred or anger method tantra, when we come to the meaning of taking hatred as the path, such an explanation is not found. An explanation to what you have just heard as to what take desire as the path means is not applied like that to taking hatred as the path. 
 Je Rinpoche wrote in his Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages that at the point of performing wrathful activities, there is causal motivation. At that time, there is basically primary motivation that motivates the practitioner to do the act. At the causal motivational phase, the motivation is compassion. But at the time of performing the activity, the motivation or the attitude is that of some kind of strong energy, forceful mind, kind of harsh. That is what Je Rinpoche said. But as to what this forceful attitude or harsh mind means, again there are different takes on it. There are some scholars who say that this harsh mind is a fully qualified actual hatred while others say that it is not. 
Such a method for taking hatred or anger as the path is not for the purpose for inducing the bliss for the melting of the bodhicitta but rather it is just utilized as a method for benefiting others, a way to work for sentient beings. If you remember in the Paramitayana, the Buddha gave permission for the bodhisattvas to engage in the three physical non-virtues and the four verbal non-virtues. Because these individuals do not have self-cherishing, they are motivated by compassion. If it is useful, they can engage in those actions to benefit others. It is said that for these bodhisattvas who engage in what is normally regarded as non-virtues, the three are the body, the four the speech, for them not only do they not accumulate negative karma, in fact they accumulate merit. Even in Paramitayana, bodhisattvas do have the permission if there is some purpose to engage in those actions that are normally considered to be non-virtues. I’m sure that when they commit those actions, what motivates them is definitely great compassion. But at the time of performing the action, there is also some forceful attitude and harsh kind of energy there. The bodhisattva who has the purpose to take the life of another sentient being definitely motivated by great compassion and the causal motivation. However, at the time of committing the action, does he have the intention to kill the person or not? Yes, right? If you say that this intention is virtue, then is a bit difficult to accept, right? So is it virtue or non-virtue? Again this is another thing to think about: What does taking hatred as the path actually mean? 
Then there is the ignorance method tantra. How is ignorance a method or how is it utilized? There is more than one explanation for this. One of the explanations is that whether you are talking about concomitant with these two afflictions - attachment or hatred - there is always ignorance.
So when desire becomes a method or whenever hatred becomes a method, through the force of the ignorance being concomitant to these two afflictions, in meaning it also becomes ignorance method. 
There is another take on what ignorance method means. According to this interpretation, in this context ignorance is just a name or word to mean sleep.  Ignorance is not a fully qualified and not an actual ignorance. If you take ignorance to mean sleep, then there is this method of sustaining the clear light or sleep and using that as the path. So this is another different take on what ignorance method is.
Back to the hatred or anger method tantra, there are some masters who say that the anger here is the fully qualified anger - a real anger, real hatred. For them, anger as being the cause of enlightenment. There are instances where you can posit anger as being the method for enlightenment. Whether you talk about method or cause, in this case is the same.
According to this position, if you talk about a person who has already developed bodhicitta in his or her mental continuum, does the person has anger or not? 
Khen Rinpoche: You all look same as the weather. Nice weather to sleep. I’m asking question. What do you think? Whether bodhisattva get angry or not? How they get angry?
For those who take the position that taking hatred as the path is actually the actual hatred anger, then you ask the question: Whether bodhisattvas have anger or not? You have to say yes. There are bodhisattvas who have anger because it is clearly mentioned in some of the teachings. There are bodhisattvas who get angry. In Je Rinpoche’s Illumination of the Intent, he cites few examples of the lower bodhisattvas who get angry at higher bodhisattvas destroy their merit accumulated over a hundred eons. 
It is a clear explanation as to depending on who gets angry and who is the object of anger, then different amount of merit is destroyed. For example:
how a non-bodhisattva gets angry at the bodhisattva
how a bodhisattva gets angry at its peer 
how the lower bodhisattva gets angry at the higher bodhisattva
There are all these explanations.

As to what this forceful attitude or harsh mind is, the other position is that this is not an actual hatred or anger but just a forceful or harsh energy there.
As to the meaning of mandala, we looked at it in the previous lesson.
One receives the four initiations of unsurpassed yoga tantra by depending on different mandalas. The word mandala means taking the essence. One meaning of taking the essence is that by entering those respective mandalas, the seeds for actualizing the four bodies are planted in the mental continuum. As such, that is how one takes the essence by entering the mandala and receives those imprints.
(Refer from Handout)  I don’t know what the source of this chart is. It was extracted from some program material. We may need to change. 
Khen Rinpoche: Look like some mistakes in the chart. Need some corrections in the last column. 
When we talk about initiation (empowerment), there are three different ways of talking about it. One way of talking about it is that in terms of:
the ripening causal empowerment,
the liberating path empowerment 
the resultant freedom empowerment
Generally there are these three. 
So as you listen then you just make the change. I think it needs to change.
Khen Rinpoche: Make new chart. Whatever mistakes, change.
Vase, secret, wisdom and word - these four are definitely the ripening cause empowerment because what these four empowerment does is that they purify the stains of the body, speech and mind and establishes and empowers the trainee to meditate on the generation stage and the completion stage. Through that, the imprints are left to actualize the four bodies. As such, there are these four – vase, secret, knowledge wisdom and word initiations. These are all ripening causal or cause empowerment. These four - vase, secret, knowledge wisdom and word initiation – are ripening causal empowerment.
The liberating path empowerment basically refers to the generation stage and the completion stage of unsurpassed yoga tantra. In short, the generation stage and the completion stage is the liberating path empowerment. You could say liberated resultant initiation is the state of enlightenment but here it refers to the body of unification which is enlightenment. So that is the liberated resultant empowerment. 
In order to achieve the liberated resultant empowerment (initiation), which is the state of unification, one must actualize the generation stage and the completion stage of the unsurpassed yoga tantra. This means that before you can achieve the liberated resultant initiation, first one must have the liberating path initiation. Before the liberating path initiation, one must have the ripening causal initiation because that makes the person a suitable vessel for meditating on the path. So the ripening causal initiation empowers the person to hear, reflect and meditate on tantra. When one receives an empowerment (wang), then that is the entry into tantra. One enters into tantra for the purpose of hearing, reflecting and meditating on it. So that is what the ripening causal empowerment does. 
Of the four initiations, the vase initiation, there are different ways of dividing it. There are different elements. Whether you talk about in terms of 6, 9, 11 or more, the purpose of the vase initiation is that it purifies the stains of the body and it empowers one to meditate on the path of the generation stage and an imprint is established in the mental continuum to actualize the emanation body. Sometimes it is said an imprint is left on the mental continuum to actualize the Buddha’s body. 
If you look at the vase empowerment initiation in terms of 6 elements or 6 parts to it, they are:
Water initiation
Crown initiation, 
Vajra initiation, 
Bell initiation
Name initiation 
Vajra master 
The first of the 6 is the Akshobhya water initiation which:
purifies the stains of hatred, 
transforms aggregate of consciousness 
of the five wisdoms, it manifests the wisdom of dharmadhatu or the sphere of the sphere of reality. 
At the time of the Akshobhya water initiation, the vase water is generated in the nature (entity) of Akshobhya father and mother. So Akshobhya father and mother melt and transform accomplish as the vase water. The disciples are generated as Akshobhya father and mother as well. In essence, through tasting the vase water, the minimum at the level of imagination, the disciple thinks “Now I experience the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness.” At the very minimum if one thinks like that then one receives the Akshobhya water initiation. 
At the time of receiving Akshobhya water initiation, since this is in the context of the unsurpassed yoga tantra, the essence of which is the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness. As to whether we receive all these different initiations of the unsurpassed yoga tantra or not depends on whether we generate the thought, at least just make belief, “Now I have generated this great bliss which ascertains emptiness and becomes non-dual”. At the very least just think “Now I develop this wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness.” During the empowerment, initiation is given. During the explanation, the person who is conferring initiation explains in such a way, so the person who is receiving it should at least imagines that is happening or that has happened during that initiation so one receives at least something. 
The essence is the same with the remaining four initiations. Next is the Ratnasambhava crown initiation. For those who are receiving that initiation, the crown is generated in the nature of Ratnasambhava father and mother. When the crown is placed on the crown of the head then one must think “I generated the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness”.  When the explanations is given at the end of the initiation when it is said “Now by receiving this Ratnasambhava crown initiation which:
purifies the stains of miserliness, 
transforms the aggregate of feeling and
manifest the wisdom of equality.” 
So one think in the way as it is explained then one receives the initiation. 
Next is the Amitabha vajra initiation. Everything is the same but just change the implement - the vase initiation substance to the vajra and the deity to Amitabha father and mother. Everything else is the same. For the function of this initiation, 
purifies the stains of attachment 
transforms the aggregate of discrimination 
the wisdom of individual analysis or wisdom of individual investigation is manifest. 
Next is the Amoghasiddhi bell initiation. In essence it is the same but just change the deity to Amoghasiddhi father and mother, the initiation substance becomes the bell. Everything else is the same. What is its function? It function is:
purifies the stains of jealousy,
transform the aggregate of compositional factors 
the wisdom of accomplishment or activity is manifest. 
Last is the Vairocana name initiation. There is no initiation substance being employed for this initiation. The people receiving this initiation are generated into Vairocana father and mother. How is this initiation conferred? It is conferred by the expression of the name of the tathagata that one will become in the future, i.e. “bla, bla, bla you will become this tathagata bla, bla, bla in the future”. The condition is hearing that expression. Then the person receiving this initiation imagines, at the very least, “Now I have experience bliss which realizes emptiness. Now I have the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness”. So this is the minimum way of obtaining the Vairocana name initiation. This Vairocana name initiation functions is to:
purifies the stains of ignorance,
transforms the aggregate of form 
the mirror-like wisdom is manifest 
As for the Vajra master initiation, the disciples are generated into Vajradhara. One is given the mudra or consort, so to speak. Anyway, the vajra master initiation empowers the individual to be able to explain or teach that tantra. Basically it empowers the student to be able to act as a vajra master in the future.
 During the vajra master initiation, you have to think “Now I have generated this wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness”. Its functions for the individual to be able to hear, reflect and meditate on the meaning of tantra and also to be able to expound it or to teach. 
During the wang, there is the flower garland initiation at the beginning. One drop the flower in the mandala to determine the type of lineage that one belongs to out of the five Buddha lineages. That initiation leaves an imprint in the mind to achieve enlightenment in that lineage of the Buddha. 
At the beginning, there is the flower garland initiation that leaves the potential in the mental continuum for that individual to become enlightened in the particular Buddha lineage which was determined by where the flower fell in the mandala. In order for that individual to be able to bring that into effect, actually for that to come into reality, he must first get rid of the defilements or the obscurations that prevent him from doing so. As such, there are:
The Akshobhya water initiation for cleansing or washing those stains. 
The crown initiation establishes a potential in the person’s continuum to actualize the crown’s protrusion of the Buddha. 
The Amitabha vajra initiation leaves a potential in the continuum for that individual to achieve the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness. Basically these are the exalted mind of the Buddha.
 The Amoghasiddhi bell initiation establishes a potential in the continuum to actualize the exalted speech of the Buddha and turns the wheels of Dharma. 
The Vairochana name initiation establishes a potential in the continuum for that individual to achieve enlightenment, becomes a Buddha, with that specific name. 
The Vajra master’s initiation establishes a potential for one to achieve the rule of the kingdom of Dharma.
These 6 collectively which made up the vase initiation (empowerment) establish a potential to actualize the emanation body. 
The secret initiation makes one’s subtle energy or the winds (lungs) serviceable. The secret initiation leaves the potential to actualize the body’s speech which essentially is the enjoyment body in tantra.
The word initiation establishes the potential to achieve the unification of the illusory body and clear light. 
The vase initiation leaves the potential to actualize the emanation body.
The knowledge wisdom initiation establishes the potential in the continuum to empower to meditate on clear light.
The word initiation establishes the potential to achieve unification of which there are two:
the learners’ union 
the unification of no-more-learning. 
You can say that:
The vase initiation establishes the potential to actualize the emanation body. 
The secret initiation - the enjoyment body. 
The knowledge wisdom initiation - the truth body
The word initiation - unification.
As for the root text, we have finished with the section that talks about:
the types of initiation there are in unsurpassed yoga tantra, 
the types of mandala that one enters into for receiving those initiation
So that is done and finished.
Khen Rinpoche: Leave imprints.
You hear terms like the clear light, illusory body, union and unification. There is no need to stress about these terms for now. As we go along with the text, we will become progressively clearer.
Khen Rinpoche: So now some questions for discussion. Next Sunday (27 Aug 2017) I am not coming for discussion but it doesn’t mean you don’t have to come. You must come. 
Khen Rinpoche: Make sure you come for the discussion. Don’t depend whether I come or not. I am running out of questions also. Any good questions to discuss? Last, the questions you have already finished discussion? Last Sunday you have already finished everything or not?
We talked about many of these big stuffs like theories and what have you but there must be something practical in that. Whatever the topic it is, you should have some rough ideas it is so much so that because you have thought about it and perhaps meditated on it. If you are asked to talk about it to a group of people, you should be able to say something. That is what we are looking for. Using an example, in the action tantra, we talk about arising as a deity through the 6 deities. The first is empty deity (ultimate deity). We are talking about the person that is the ‘I’ arising as the deity. The first step here is you have generating the empty deity. What exactly it is? Essentially we are talking about meditating on emptiness. What does it involve when you say meditate on emptiness? At the end of it, you should come out with your own answer based on your own understanding. 
When you come together, let’s say your group have 10 people, and when it is your turn of giving presentation of your understanding, you talk for 5 or 10 minutes. Of the 6 deities, you start to talk about  the first deity which it is called empty deity based on your own understanding.  It is not so much of the point whether is right or wrong but the exercise is that you actually have thought about it. You are expressing your own view and your understanding. That is what the exercise is about. The rest of the group people are listening to you, learning and pay attention to you. When it is your turn you explaining, please do not read from a prepared script. It is a verbal presentation without notes and without script. You have to ready be able to get this on your own. We have talked so much about the action tantra such as you generate as deity and so forth. This is how you generate yourself as deity through the 6 process and at the end there is the practice of clear appearance and divine pride. Through that you stop the ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. You must have an understanding. You must have something in it “it is like that.” You have your own idea from whatever understanding you get. 
Question: When we say ‘I’ arise as deity, what is this ‘I’ that arises as deity? There are 3 options:
(Option 1) Is the ‘I’ that arise an ordinary ‘I’ or not? If you say that is there any problem? If there is, then what is the problem? 
(Option 2) Is this ‘I’ that arises as deity is the ‘I’ the Buddha that we will become in the future - the resultant Buddhahood?  Then using that as the basis of designation then one thinks that it is “me”. Based on this then training in clear appearance and divine pride anyway, is this correct or wrong?
(Option 3) The ‘I’ that arises as the deity the self of the person that pervades all lifetimes. The general ‘I’. Is this the ‘I’ that arises as deity? Why? If not, why also? 
Basically it is thinking about the meaning of the apprehension aspect of the mind realizing emptiness arising as the deity, what is the meaning of that?
Next is about offering. In tantra, when the offerings are consecrated, there are these four-fold processes: dispelling, purification, generating and blessing. 
The exercise is that you must really know inside and be able to say what these four are. Not just say out the four but present your own understanding. In order for you to be able to come for the Discussion and be able to give a short presentation without looking at notes, you must do the preparation. Since there is no class for the next two weeks then a very good use of time will be thinking about these questions. So at the end from your own side you must know at least something about what we have mentioned so far and express that during the Discussion.
(No class for next two weeks and resume on 31 Aug).
Essentially you get the understanding of these two things: 
Based on action tantra, when we say generate ourselves as deity, what exactly does that mean? 
How the practice of the offerings is done in tantra? How it is blessed?
Maybe you add this question in your discussion. It was there in the previous one. We talk about the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. Clarity here refer to the deity’s body of appearing clearly to the person who processes that yoga. So the clear appearance of the deity’s body and they said that is the phenomena source form. So what is the substantial cause for that? Is it necessarily preceded by the former moment of form or not? Basically the question is what is the substantial cause? We need to think about it, it is one thing to say that the clear appearance of the deity’s body is phenomena source form but what exactly is the substantial cause. Can consciousness act as the substantial cause or not? In this case, can consciousness act as the substantial cause for this clear appearance of the deity’s body which is the phenomena source form? If not then what? If you don’t have enough question then this is the addition. 
Khen Rinpoche: The essence is how to generate yourself as deity and how to make offerings and then the last one. 
Please think about the questions. You must get something from your side. We have spent so many lessons talking about self-generation, so please put effort to think about it. Whether it is right or wrong, the point is to get something. Think about it and come with an answer and say it out. If someone not able to express then it is an exception as nothing can be done. But nevertheless, whether you are going to express or not express, the important thing is to think about it. Put effort and think about the questions. I guess for individuals it is kind of like people who have realized emptiness directly when they say the ultimate truth is inexpressible and inconceivable