Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L37.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.322444
================================================================================

Khen Rinpoche: If you have questions from the Sunday discussion that you can’t clarify, maybe just one or two questions.
Student 1:  In the deity yoga, the nature of the appearance of the deity is phenomena source form. With reference to Lorig that we have learned earlier on, conceptual mind has no observed object condition. Therefore, before path of seeing, how can the mind perceive the appearance of the deity?
Khen Rinpoche: Are you asking about the appearance of the deity which is the phenomena form source and on how it can be the observed object condition?
Student 1: How can it appear to a conceptual mind? 
Khen Rinpoche: Observed form in Lorig?
Ven Gyurme: You are saying that the appearing object has to be a permanent phenomenon that is meaning generality, right?
Khen Rinpoche: As an example, to the thought apprehending a vase, a vase appears. To the thought apprehending form, form appears. We are not saying that anything that appears to a thought is always permanent phenomenon. As for the appearance of the deity’s body to the thought, there is a part of it which is a composed (composite) phenomenon. That means it is not necessarily a permanent phenomenon.
Student 2: We learned that through familiarity, the object of meditation can become a reality. The difficulty for me is that something which is dependent designation, for example, a god, human, hungry ghost positing a same base to be nectar, water, and pus respectively. If that being posits something else other than what they are positing, eventually it will become that object. For example, human positing the base of water to be nectar, eventually it will become nectar. Other than saying that it is due to the ripening of virtuous imprint, how can I understand if you posit something long enough, that becomes an object in reality? For example, you posit appearance of deity’s body long enough then you become the deity’s body. 
Khen Rinpoche: For example, if we visualize a flower, that visualized flower has an imputed form. It is said that through repeated familiarity of the imputed flower over time, there are people to which that imputed flower actually becomes a flower that one can touch like a real flower.
Let’s say in the generation stage of Highest Yoga Tantra, when the meditator achieves calm abiding, the appearance of the deity’s body is so real and the experience is no difference from actually seeing an actual deity’s body.  This clear appearance of the deity’s body which is achieved by the meditator on a generation stage while it appears so real and clearly, but it is not an actual deity’s body. The actual deity’s body is only achieved on higher levels of the completion stage. 
Within the completion stage, when the meditator achieves the final mental isolation, the extremely subtle mind realizes emptiness and through which that mind is called the example clear light.
That example clear light acts as the cooperative condition while the extremely subtle wind that is one entity with this mind acts as the substantial cause. 
With the extremely subtle mind and wind comes in as the cooperative condition and substantial cause, the meditator arises into the illusory body. This illusory body is an actual deity’s body. This is how it is explained in unsurpassed yoga tantra. 
This illusory body which is an actual deity’s body is not like the coarse body, but rather it is a subtle body, for it is established from mere subtle wind mind.
(continue the root text..)
How to keep the vows and commitments purely
Second, if while meditating on the path you guard the commitments and vows taken at the time of the empowerment, you will establish the actual siddhis. If you fail to guard your vows, however, it is said that though you may strive for eons, you will not establish the siddhis; even attaining a mere pleasant rebirth will be difficult. Therefore, having understood the advice you were given upon becoming a proper vessel after receiving empowerment, guard the commitments and vows even at the cost of your life. 
 (Commitments is translated as samayas, and siddhis is translated as attainments)
When one obtains a wang (empowerment) in the unsurpassed yoga tantra, one takes the bodhisattva and the tantric vows. After taking these vows, one must strive to guard them against any downfalls. In order to do that, one must know what the vows and samayas are. So guarding the vows and samayas purely is extremely important without which no attainments will be achieved. 
In particular, strive intently to avoid root downfalls and remain untouched by other downfalls. Should they occur nonetheless, restore them by confessing according to the rite. 
With regards to the tantric vow, you must know what the downfalls are. There are 14 root downfalls, 8 heavy transgressions, and there are many other branch samayas. There are also 19 samayas of the Five Buddha Lineages. These branch samayas are also to be observed. 
There are people who believe that it is not a must to avoid alcohol or intoxicants when taking the tantric vow. They say it is not mentioned in the root downfalls so it is not a root downfall but it is a branch samaya. 
As in the Six Session Guru Yoga, it is mentioned to avoid the four root plus alcohol. It is clear that it is a branch samaya to avoid alcohol. There are also other branch samayas like abandoning the ten non-virtues, cultivating the ten virtues and so forth. In particular, it is usually emphasized how important it is to avoid being stained by a root downfall because if one is stained by a root downfall, there is no way to achieve the attainments, including the supreme attainment in this life. However, if one is stained by a root downfall, one should restore the tantric vow through the proper rites. If one has engaged in completed an approximation of the deity, one can purify and restore the tantric vow through self initiation. If not, then one has to obtain the empowerment again.
For it is said that if you guard against downfalls having obtained complete empowerment, then even if you do not meditate on the path you will establish the supreme state within seven to sixteen lives. But if you neglect the vows you are meant to guard, you will fall into unpleasant rebirth no matter how hard you strive.
These may be understood in depth from the Explanation of the Fifty Verses of Guru Devotion and the explanation of the root downfalls in the Cluster of Siddhis.
After having obtained empowerment and properly guarding the vows and samayas, how is the path of highest or unsurpassed yoga tantra is practised? 
How to practice the path
This third section has two parts:
1. How to meditate on the two stages
2. The practice of enhancing these two stages
1. How to meditate on the two stages
This has two sections:
1. How to meditate on the generation stage
2. How to meditate on the completion stage
1. How to meditate on the generation stage
Debating the definition of the generation stage Paṇchen Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen states that the generation stage is defined as “a yoga that matures the mental continuum for its resultant completion stage that does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation but newly investigates any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death, and the intermediate state.”
Reply: I think he means only the main generation stage because it is not logically necessary that the generation stage engages in meditation on any aspect related to birth, death, or the intermediate state.
In order to understand the definition, there are a couple of things to sort out.
What is the difference between the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel and not entering, abiding and dissolving? 
What is this meditation on aspects that are concordant with death, intermediate state and rebirth?
These are the things to be sort out. Before one can do that, I think we must have at least some understanding of the practice of taking the three bodies as the path. If you have some idea of that, then this definition of the generation stage would be easier to understand. 
Let’s look at this practice of taking the three bodies as the path. 
First, you need to have some idea of the   presentation of the three bodies:
The three bodies which is the basis of purification, 
The three bodies which is the path that purifies 
The three bodies which is the result of purification. 
The three bodies which are the basis of purification
There are the three bodies of the basis of which there is the truth body of the basis. The truth body (dharmakaya) of the basis is the ordinary death. Essentially, the truth body of the basis is the mind at the time of death. So the mind at the time of death is given the name the truth body of the basis. 
After death, one takes rebirth, but before one takes rebirth, one enters into the intermediate state. So the intermediate state is the enjoyment body of the basis. 
From the intermediate state then one takes rebirth which is given the name of the ordinary emanation body or emanation body of the basis. 
These are the three bodies of the basis – death, intermediate state and birth. 
These three bodies of the basis in the unsurpassed yoga tantra are the basis of purification. The unsurpassed yoga tantra is the method for purifying these three bodies so as to achieve the three bodies which are the result of purification, the three resultant bodies. 
The method to purify the three bodies of the basis is essentially the generation stage and completion stage of unsurpassed yoga tantra. 
As such; 
there are the three bodies which are the purifiers in relation to the generation stage,
there are also the three bodies which are the purifiers in the completion stage. 
So there is the path that purifies those three bodies of the basis - the generation stage and the completion stage. 
Generation stage
In the generation stage, there are the three bodies during the generation stage practice. If you look at any self-generation rite of unsurpassed yoga tantra, at the time of generating as a deity, it starts with:
Om Svabhava Shuddha Sarva Dharma Svabhava Shuddho Ham
Then the practice starts. During the generation stage, it is just done at the level of visualization, it is make-believe only. 
One enters into meditative equipoise on the meaning of emptiness. Then one makes believe visualizes or imagines that this is the actual dharmakaya (truth body). 
This is the truth body in the continuum of a person on the generation stage. 
If we use Vajrabhairava as an example, one arises from the dharmakaya into Manjughosha. That is the practice of taking the intermediate state as the path of the enjoyment body. Then one arises from that into the Vajrabhairava with 9 faces, 34 arms and 16 legs. That is taking the rebirth as the path of the emanation body. 
Here using Vajrabhairava as an example. 
One meditates on emptiness.
Then imagines that the mind has ascertained the meaning of emptiness is the resultant dharmakaya. 
Then one arises from that into the sambhogakaya in the form of youthful Manjughosha. 
From that one arises into Vajrabhairava. Then one thinks that is the resultant emanation body. 
In the context of Vajrabhairava, these are the three bodies of the generation stage. 
These meditations that are done in the generation stage are just makes believe at the level of visualization. It is not that one has achieved any actual body; but just makes believe “Oh, I have achieved this, I have achieved that”. This is where part of the definition comes into play. 
The point of the generation stage is that it is a ripener; it is a yoga (practice) that ripens the mental continuum for its completion stage which is the result. Now it is at the level of visualization, but nevertheless, this practice matures (ripens) the mind to be able to actualize the three bodies of the completion stage. That is why in the definition it says:
“This is a yoga that newly investigates any aspect that is concordant to birth, death and the intermediate state.” 
Newly investigate, it is just an imputation and make believe. 
In the completion stage, there are the three bodies of the completion stage. When one achieves the example clear light of the final mental isolation, and after that, there is the meaning clear light. These two, the example clear light and the meaning clear light, are the truth body (dharmakaya) of the completion stage. 
The example clear light of the final mental isolation acts as the cooperative condition for the achieving the impure illusory body:
The meaning clear light acts as the cooperative condition for achieving the pure illusory body. 
These two illusory bodies, the impure illusory body and the pure illusory body, are the complete enjoyment body of the completion stage.
The impure illusory body has not severed the relationship with the physical body which is its support. So the impure illusory body has to enter into the physical body which is its support. From there, the individual can work for others. This is the emanation body of completion stage. 
What about the pure illusory body? 
The pure illusory body has severed its connection with the physical body which is its support. It does not need to depend on the physical body which is its support. But in order to work for others, the meditator can re-enter the physical body, therefore assuming a coarse body through which then he can work for sentient beings. That is another way. 
Without doing that, the pure illusory body can also work for others and this is the emanation body of the completion stage. 
Now this is quite straightforward and it is not difficult.  
What are the three bodies of the basis of purification? It is very simple - ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth. Through meditating on the generation stage and the completion stage, one gets rid of those three. 
We talk about the three bodies of the basis of purification. Other than it being just a terminology, what do the three bodies of the basis of purification actually refer to? 
It refer to the three things – ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state, and ordinary rebirth – that are to be gotten rid of.
How do you get rid of it? You meditate on the generation stage and the completion stage. 
Whatever it is, the point here is in tantra, essentially here in Highest Yoga Tantra, you are talking about a path that meditates on aspects that are concordant with ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth for the purpose of overcoming ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth. 
Let’s look at first one, meditating on aspect that is concordant with ordinary death during the generation stage. 
How does one meditate on the aspect that is concordant with ordinary death in the generation stage? Essentially it is the meditation on emptiness. If one has realized emptiness, then that is the real meditation. Even if not, at least at the level of correct belief thinking that although one has not realized emptiness one imagines that one has realized emptiness and so forth. Essentially such a meditation is a meditation on the aspect that is concordant with ordinary death. 
From within that meditation on emptiness, from the visualized dharmakaya one arises into the enjoyment body. Depending on which unsurpassed yoga tantra that we are talking about:
In Vajrabhairava, one arises as youthful Manjughosha. 
In Vajrayogini, one arises as syllable Bam.
In Heruka Chakrasamvara, one arises as the nada 
Whatever it is, this is the practice of taking the intermediate state as the path of the sambhogakaya. At this point, one is meditating on the aspect that is concordant with the intermediate state. 
In the practice of Vajrabhairava, from Manjughosha one arises into Vajrabhairava with 9 faces, 34 arms and 16 legs. That is the practice of taking ordinary rebirth as the path of the emanation body. 
In the generation stage, taking Vajrabhairava as an example, at the time of meditation in emptiness, one makes belief or imagines that the mind realizes emptiness is the actual dharmakaya. 
After one has arisen as the youthful Manjughosha, one imagines that this is the actual enjoyment body. Then when one arises into the full form of Vajrabhairava one makes belief or imagines that “This is the actual emanation body”. Based on that, one has to elicit clear appearance and divine pride. 
Since this is a generation stage practice, the so-called three bodies are not the actual bodies but actually it is done at the level of imagination. As such it is called a yoga that newly investigates or newly impute. 
Ven Gyurme: I am not sure about investigating. That is why I was suspecting there must be a mistake in the translation because it is called an imputed yoga. It is not investigate. It is the mind that imputes. This means it is at the level of visualization, make belief that it is the actual dharmakaya, this is the sambhogakaya, and this is the nirmanakaya. Anyway, I will check the Tibetan text. Even if you change the word ‘impute’, you cannot just change it because we have to arrange the word in a certain way. Anyway just to take notes
The purpose is to stop the ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth. But it is not the actual stopping as it is not done by the generation stage. The actual stopping of the ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth is only achieved at the certain level of the completion stage. 
In the completion stage when one achieves the example clear light of the final mental isolation, one realizes emptiness. The example clear light is the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness. 
The example clear light is the thing that actually purifies ordinary death. With the example clear light then ordinary death is purified. As such, for that individual, there is no more ordinary intermediate state. Instead of arising into the intermediate state, there is none of that. In its place, when the meditator arises from the meditative equipoise, he achieves the impure illusory body which is the substitute for the ordinary intermediate state.
It is said that the person who has achieved this impure illusory body is someone who will achieves enlightenment with that basis. Since there is no more intermediate state for this individual, there is also no more rebirth for this individual. This example clear light is an extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness but it is not a direct realization of emptiness. The realization of emptiness is via meaning generality. As such, it possesses duality appearances. There is debate about whether this is conceptual or not. I would think it is conceptual.
When the extremely subtle mind realizes emptiness directly then it becomes the meaning clear light which by nature it is direct perception. When this meaning clear light is obtained, this meaning clear light of the fourth stage is the direct antidote to all the afflictive obscurations. When the meditator arises from that, he achieves the pure illusory body. 
You have to keep this in mind. 
There are three bodies of the path. When you look at it in more detail, it talks about the three bodies at the time of the generation stage and the three bodies at the time of the completion stage.
When the completion stage is culminated i.e. when one reaches the end of that, one achieves the three resultant bodies, which is the result of purification -
the wisdom truth body,
the enjoyment body and 
the emanation body.
In the definition of the generation stage, it is the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with birth, death and intermediate state. Here these birth, death and intermediate state are the three basis of purification - the three bodies of the basis. 
Perhaps you can use this analogy to describe the process. When you mine gold, you dig and what you get is just deposit. The gold is there but it is kind of embedded with all kinds of things such as soil, different minerals and so forth which depend on where you extract it from. The gold is there but it is not visible yet. You have to wash it and extract it using all kinds of chemicals. There is a whole process. Only after that then you get the actual gold.  This process is kind of like what is done in the completion stage. With the gold then you can fashion it into jewelry, ear-rings or ornaments. That is like the end product. So that is like the three bodies of the result, which is the result of purification.
The purpose here is to overcome ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth.
If ordinary death is overcome then there is no more intermediate state. 
If there is no more intermediate state then there is no more rebirth. 
With regards to the emptiness as the object, in sutra and tantra the emptiness as the object is the same. The difference between sutra and tantra lies in the mind that realizes emptiness. Within tantra specifically it is the unsurpassed yoga tantra. You can see the huge difference between tantra and sutra because in unsurpassable yoga tantra, the mind that realizes emptiness is the extremely subtle mind.
With regards to the object of abandonment, that which is described in sutra is basically the same as what is asserted here in the unsurpassed yoga tantra. There are the afflictive obscurations and there are also the knowledge obscurations.
 The knowledge obscurations essentially consist of two things: the predispositions of ignorance together with the factor of the mistaken dualistic appearances that arisen due to that. Here in the unsurpassed yoga tantra, the knowledge obscuration primarily is the appearance of true existence. Although the object of abandonment is pretty much the same but the mind that acts as the antidote to these obscurations are different.
In unsurpassed yoga tantra, with regards to the knowledge obscurations, the description of what is posited as the knowledge obscurations is much more subtle than what is posited in sutra. 
Yes, we talk about the predisposition of ignorance and the mistaken dualistic appearances which arises due to that. In unsurpassed yoga tantra, they talk about the three minds: 
the mind of appearance,
the mind of increase 
the mind of near attainment.
These three minds are very subtle minds but are posited to be thought or conceptual. As such they possess dualistic appearances. These three are posited as the knowledge obscurations in unsurpassed yoga tantra and such a presentation is not found in sutra.
Because these three minds are so subtle, one must generate a very special mind that takes emptiness as its object which can act as antidote to these three minds: the mind of appearance, increase and near attainment.
As such this is one special feature of unsurpassed yoga tantra, the generation of extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness, which is a special mind which can act as the antidote to these very subtle knowledge obscurations.
From this you can see why one needs to depend on the path of Highest Yoga Tantra or the unsurpassed yoga tantra to achieve enlightenment. In order to achieve enlightenment you need to abandon the knowledge obscurations including all the subtle ones. 
In order to abandon these extremely subtle obscurations, you need to generate a mind that is powerful enough to overcome them. Such a method is found only in the unsurpassed yoga tantra. From this you can see how without entering into Highest Yoga Tantra or unsurpassed yoga tantra, there is no way to achieve enlightenment.
If somebody were to ask why you must enter into unsurpassed yoga tantra to achieve enlightenment, you must be able to answer.
Khen Rinpoche: The answer is what? I have already told the answer. You have already forgotten! Okay, we talk more next time.
Student 1: After the person has taken the Highest Yoga Tantra initiation with the said downfall and secondary branches and it is said you should restore them by confessing according to the rite; the self-generation rite or taking the initiation again. I am just wondering whether the 100 Vajrasattva purification or the 35 Buddhas confession and prostration would purify these mistakes of the ten non-virtues and maybe secondary downfall or downfall. Speaking from myself, honestly the probability is very high.
Khen Rinpoche: I will answer next class. We do tsog now.
Handout