Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L38.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:26.769282
================================================================================

What does the practice of unsurpassed yoga tantra consist of?  It consists of the two paths.
What are the two paths?  They are the generation stage and completion stage.
Definition of the generation stage: A yoga that matures the mental continuum for its resultant completion stage that does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation but newly investigates any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death, and the intermediate state
As I mentioned in the last lesson, the generation stage is defined as a yoga that does not arise from the wind entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel. In order to understand that, we first must have an idea of what it means for the wind to enter in the central channel. Likewise, since the generation stage is the yoga that meditates on any of the aspects that are concordant with ordinary death, intermediate state and the rebirth, so in order to understand what such a meditation that is concordant with those aspects, we first must understand:
what is ordinary death, 
what is ordinary intermediate state 
what is ordinary rebirth.
As I mentioned earlier, before we can start to gain some idea what the generation stage and completion stage are, we first must have some understanding of the presentation of the three bodies:
the three bodies of the basis, 
the three bodies of the path 
the three bodies of the result.
Instead of being phrased such a way, sometimes you will hear these:
the three bodies which is the basis of purification 
the three bodies which is the path that purifies, 
the three bodies which is the result of purification
Other than being just a different way of saying the same thing, essentially we are talking about the same thing.
Whether we call it the three bodies of the basis or the three bodies which is the basis of purification, essentially the three are ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth.
The important point here is the practice to get rid of ordinary death. 
If ordinary death is not eliminated then you will not be able to eliminate intermediate state.
If intermediate state exists, then rebirth will happen.
So the point is to get rid of or overcome ordinary death. The method is the meditation on generation stage and completion stage.
As for the definition of the generation stage, the generation stage yoga is essentially a meditation on any of the aspects that are concordant with the ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth. So it is a meditation on the aspects that are concordant with those. 
The question is asked: Is the generation stage meditation really able to overcome these three? 
The answer is no.  Nevertheless, the meditation of the generation stage is a method for overcoming these three.
At the beginning of the main generation stage practice there is a meditation on the aspect that is concordant with ordinary death and essentially it is the meditation on emptiness. There is a practice which is taking death as a path of the dharmakaya. This is essentially the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with death.  Here, in practice wise it is a meditation on emptiness.
This is one of the essential points of the practice of the generation stage. When someone says they are practicing the generation stage, then this is the essential point of the practice. It starts with taking death as dharmakaya of the path; which is essentially the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with ordinary death.  So this is crucial.
During the generation stage, when one meditates on taking death as the dharmakaya of the path, which is the practice of taking death as the dharmakaya of the path, it is meditation on emptiness. Such a practice is a yoga that matures the mental continuum for the completion stage.  
How?  It is preparing the mind to be able to realize emptiness with the extremely subtle mind on the completion stage. This is one of the ways in which the generation stage practice matures the mind for the completion stage. 
The generation stage yoga basically is just an imagination; make believe. But nevertheless, it acts as a ripener of the mental continuum for the completion stage.  Such a meditation on the generation stage specifically taking death as the dharmakaya of the path ripens the mind for the completion stage such that during the completion stage there will come a time, specifically during the final mental isolation, when one generates the example clear light.
When one is able to manifest the extremely subtle mind and causing that to realize emptiness, that is the result which comes from this imagination that has to take place during the time of the generation stage.
When the yogi reaches the final mental isolation, he achieves the example clear light which is the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness. For that person there is no more death as he has overcome ordinary death.
This example clear light which is achieved during the final mental isolation is the actual path that purifies ordinary death. What the practice has done during the generation stage, the meditation on the aspect is concordant with ordinary death, is just a ripener for the completion stage. At that time, it is just a visualization; an imagination. So at the time of the generation stage, the ordinary death isn't really being purified.
The meditation on the aspect that is concordant with ordinary death during the generation stage, the example clear light,  the example clear light of the completion stage, and the fourth level meaning clear light, these three are posited to be the path that purifies ordinary death.
These three are posited as the dharmakaya of the path:-
The meditation on the aspect that is taking death as the dharmakaya of the path during the generation stage
The example clear light of the final mental isolation 
The 4th stage meaning clear light
For now you just have to remember what is posited as the dharmakaya of the path of these three things. As to what they really are, it will become progressively clearer as we go through the text, particularly when we reach the completion stage. It is only then you will have an idea of what exactly is the final mental isolation, example clear light and the meaning clear light and so forth.  But for now on just memorize these three things.
For you to have some little understanding now, you just take the example clear light of the final mental isolation is the extremely subtle mind that realizes emptiness but it does not realize emptiness directly. 
Whereas the 4th stage meaning clear light is the extremely subtle mind that realizes emptiness directly. That is the difference between the example clear light and the meaning clear light.
In the generation stage, after the practice of taking death as the dharmakaya of the path, the next essential point is the practice of taking the intermediate state as the sambhogakaya of the path.  
Taking Vajrabhairava as an example, at this point of the practice, in the case of Vajrabhairava tantra, within emptiness one arises as the Manjughosha. 
This may not be very clear if you look at the extremely abbreviated self-generation of Vajrabhairava. However if you look at the extensive of the self-generation of Vajrabhairava it is clearly specified that the boundary is like “This is the taking death as the path of the dharmakaya. Next is taking the intermediate state as the sambhogakaya of the path where you imagine arising as Manjughosha. 
In the case of Vajrabhairava, at the time of doing the practice of taking intermediate state as the sambhogakaya of the path, one arises as the Manjughosha. This is the practice that ripens the mind for the completion stage. So this meditation on arising as Manjughosha in the Vajrabhairava practice is taking intermediate stage as the sambhogakaya of the path (or enjoyment body of the path). So if you look at it in terms of generation stage, this is the sambhogakaya of the path.
How does this practice of taking intermediate state as the path of the sambhogakaya during the generation stage ripens the mind for the completion stage?  This meditation acts as a condition that ripens the mind such that during the completion stage when the yogi arises from the example clear light into the impure illusory body.  
The accomplishment of the impure illusory body which occurs after the yogi has risen from the example clear light is a result that happens due to that meditation that was done earlier during the generation stage in terms of Vajrabhairava practice of arising as Manjughosha.
The impure illusory body arises from within the example clear light. As I have mentioned earlier, the example clear light is the path that actually purifies ordinary death.  
Once the example clear light is achieved there is no more ordinary death for the individual. As such, for that individual there is also no ordinary intermediate state. What comes in place of the intermediate state is this impure illusory body which is concordant with the intermediate state. So this impure illusory body is the path that actually purifies the intermediate state. 
This impure illusory body is a very subtle body. Its substantial cause is the extremely subtle wind.
So the extremely subtle wind which is the mount of the example clear light is the substantial cause of the impure illusory body.  So this impure illusory body is the path that actually purifies the intermediate state. If you posit in term of the completion stage, this impure illusory body is the sambhogakaya of the path.
As the yogi progresses on the path, after the impure illusory body he will achieve the 4th stage meaning clear light. This meaning clear light is also posited as the dharmakaya of the path. Arising from the meaning clear light, the yogi achieves the pure illusory body which is also an uncontaminated body. This pure illusory body is also posited as the sambhogakaya of the path.
Back to the generation stage, the third main essential point of the practice of the generation stage is the practice of the taking ordinary rebirth as the nirmanakaya of the path. Essentially one arises from Manjughosha one changes to Vajrabhairava with 9 faces, 34 arms and 16 legs.  If you look at the extensive self-generation rite, there is a lot of description on the aspects of this Vajrabhairava.
If you are talking about it in terms of the generation stage, the meditation of Vajrabhairava which is taking the ordinary rebirth as the nirmanakaya of the path in terms of the generation stage, this is posited as the nirmanakaya of the path.
Such a practice, which is the generation stage practice, is a ripener for some achievements of the completion stage. 
It is said that with this impure illusory body alone one cannot do extensive work for sentient being. The physical body is the result of karma, and since the impure illusory body connection with the physical body which is its basis (its support) has not severed, this impure illusory body again enters the physical body which is its support. Therefore this impure illusory body is said to take hold of a coarser body and with that it is able to do extensive work for sentient beings. 
This impure illusory body entering to the old physical body which is its basis, this is posited as the emanation body (nirmanakaya) of the path.
Since the illusory body is extremely subtle body, as such it cannot be seen by most people. In order to benefit others, the illusory body needs to hold to a coarser form. If you are talking about the pure illusory body, it either enters a physical body which is its basis or another body. So the pure illusory body can enter another body as well and hold that coarse body. Anyway this is also posited as the emanation body of the path (nirmanakaya of the path). 
This is how we posit the emanation body of the path time. 
For now you just hold onto this. Just memorize and remember this. Later on in the future, it will become clearer. Now is not the time to ask ‘what is it exactly, how and why’. 
These are the 3 bodies of the path time which are the very thing that eliminates the 3 bodies of the basis time. 
When the completion stage is culminated then one achieves the body of the resultant time. In terms of the body, one achieves the body of unification, the body which possesses the 7 branches of unification. This is essentially 3 of the 4 bodies. 
This is the complete enjoyment body. 
The wisdom of the non-dual bliss and emptiness in the continuum of that is essentially the wisdom truth body.
The emanation bodies that are issued from the complete enjoyment body which is the basis of emanation. 
So the enjoyment body is the basis of emanation from which a variety or host of multitudes of emanation bodies are emanated to work for sentient being. Those emanation bodies are the emanation body. 
In general the 4 bodies of the Buddha are achieved simultaneously. How we explain here is that the enjoyment body is the basis of emanation from which emanation bodies are emanated.
Generally, we talk about the actualization of the 4 bodies which have to be actualized simultaneously. If you are talking about the supreme emanation body then the supreme emanation body is issued forth from the complete enjoyment body which is the basis of emanation. 
Remember the terminologies 
The three bodies which is the basis of purification, 
The three bodies which is the path that purifies 
The three bodies which is the result of purification 
Another way of phrasing them are:
The 3 bodies of the basis time,
The 3 bodies of the path time, 
The 3 bodies of the resultant time 
What you have to do is that you must be able to identify what they are. You must be able to say what they are. 
Khen Rinpoche: Can you say? If you have any question so far. I already talked last class. Today I am repeating. You understand?  Get some idea or not? It is difficult or not difficult?  
You should get an idea roughly what are those three bodies of the path, time and result. Even if you get into the basis and to be able to understand all of that is based on how well one understands the basis of purification: the ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth. 
Without understanding these three there is no way to understand the generation stage, much less practice it. Since the generation stage is essentially a meditation on aspects that is concordant with these three: the ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth, so before you can have a meditation that is concordant with aspect of these three, you must know what they are individually. Then specifically what is ordinary death, what is ordinary intermediate state, what is ordinary rebirth?
Of the three, let’s look at the ordinary death. What exactly is ordinary death?
In order to understand ordinary death, first we must understand the stages of dissolution related to the death process. 
We have talked about the four periods that make up of an eon:
The period of formation, 
The period of abiding,
The period of disintegration 
The empty period
In the Abhidharmakosa there is an explanation of how the Southern Continent, the world of ours, came into being and how it was formed. After the formation, how the first human beings came into being. The Abhidharmakosa says that the first human beings of this world are all miraculously born. 
Khen Rinpoche: No other way. No father, no mother.
So the very first human beings of the Southern Continent are said:
to be miraculously born. 
have an immeasurable lifespan
have complete faculties and sense powers 
their bodies are said to have naturally emitted light
all possess a similitude possess of marks, signs and exemplification
they don’t consume food like us (coarse food) but rather they sustained life with food of joy
they possess miraculous powers. They can go wherever they like including flying around. 
But somewhere along the line, because the predispositions to consume coarse food were activated, they began to partake of coarse food. As such, when they need to partake coarse food, they need to have a mouth and the necessary orifices. Then these start to develop. 
Gradually both male and female sexual organs are developed. As they began to acquire both the male and female sexual organs then the predisposition for sexual intercourse was activated. As such they engage in sexual intercourse. Then it came to be the human beings who were born from the womb. As such they possess the 6 constituents (6 elements). This is how it is explained in the Abhidharmakosa of how the humans born from the womb. So these human beings were born from the worm and possess the 6 constituents. One way of counting the 6 constituents is: earth, water, fire, wind, channels and drops.
Another way of counting the 6 constituents is divided into 2 groups of three: 
3 constituents received from the Father: Bone, marrow, semen
3 constituents received from the Mother: Flesh, skin, blood
This is one way of counting the 6 constituents (elements) that are possessed by somebody in the Southern Continents who is born from the womb. It is said that only with such a basis, a human who is born from the womb in the Southern Continent who possesses these 6 constituents, is the basis upon which one can enter the tantric path on the onset and achieve enlightenment in that one short lifetime of the degenerate age in the very same basis. In terms of achieving enlightenment in one brief lifetime of the degenerate age, it is only possible with this kind of body and it is not possible in any other kind of body
From this we can understand how precious a human body of the Southern Continent is because the human body of the Southern Continent is the only basis because it possesses the 6 constituents. So this is the only basis upon which one can achieve enlightenment in one lifetime in one body.
Such a basis is not even possessed by those in the pure land. So you could say that such a rebirth in the pure land alone cannot achieve enlightenment in one lifetime. It is said that even the people in the pure land, for example the bodhisattvas, pray to be reborn in this world in Southern Continent with a body that possess the 6 constituents.
Khen Rinpoche: They pray to come here, and we pray to go there.
If you understand the significance of this, then when you read The Foundation of All Good Qualities where it says “This precious human life of freedom and endowments is found only once and is greatly meaningful”. That is another reason to appreciate or understand that very line. 
In all the tantra it is definite that you need such a physical support - one is a human being that is born from the womb in the Southern Continent possessing the 6 constituents. It is the very basis to achieve enlightenment from the time of entering into the tantra and then achieving enlightenment in that same lifetime. This has to be the basis. It is pervaded by being so. That means it is necessary being so. This basis has to be the one. Then naturally this leads to the question why. 
As I said earlier, one way of counting the 6 constituents are the four elements (earth, water, fire, wind) plus channels and drops. 
How many channels are there in this body of a human being in the Southern Continent? It is said that in total there are 72000. Of the 72000, the three principal ones are:
the central channel, 
the left channel 
the right channel. 
How death occurs for human-being of Southern Continent?
At the time of death, the winds that course in the 72000 channels are gathered into the left and right channels. They first gather in the left and right channels. The wind in the left and right channels then enters into the central channels from the bottom and the upper end of the central channel.
The winds enter into the central channel from the upper and the lower ends and then dissolve into this very small droplet which is a mixture composed of the white and red bodhicitta, which is extremely small, even smaller than the size of a mustard seed.  This is said to reside at the level of the heart inside the central channel. So the winds that are gathered in the central channel from the upper and the bottom end all dissolve into that very small white and red bodhicitta at the heart. This very small little drop acts as the basis for the extremely subtle wind and mind to abide. 
This very small little drop in the middle of the heart chakra inside the central channel is obtained from the father and the mother. Essentially, it is the white and red bodhicitta obtained from the father and mother. It is the very essence that obtained from the father and mother that abides as this white and red bodhicitta drop in the center of the heart. You could say abiding in the entity of having the potential of those two substances. We call this very small drop as indestructible drop which acts as the basis for the extremely subtle wind and mind to reside inside. This indestructible drop exists for as long as one is alive and is a mixture of white and red bodhicitta in the center of the heart chakra in the central channel.
The extremely subtle wind- mind which resides in this indestructible drop is called the eternal indestructible drop, for it is eternal, it is forever indestructible and it never goes out of existence. So there is the outer white and red bodhicitta which is the indestructible drop which exists as long as one is alive. This extremely subtle wind-mind which is eternally indestructible (forever unchanging) is the naturally abiding lineage (Buddha lineage) that goes into enlightenment.
This indestructible drop, which exists as long as one is alive, is that small little drop which is a mixture of white and red bodhicitta. The very essence of the white and red bodhicitta is received from our parents. Then a part of these two bodhicitta exists in a coarser form resides respectively in the crown and in the navel within the central channel:
The white bodhicitta resides at the crown
The red bodhicitta resides at the navel
I guess it has to be within the central channel.
The even coarser form of those exists:
in the form of bone, marrow and semen in case of the white bodhicitta,
in the form of  flesh, skin and blood in case of the red bodhicitta
In the context of unsurpassed yoga tantra, you can talk about the two truths of the basis in terms of the extremely subtle wind-mind.
These are the terminologies that are used in the Buddha teachings:
The two truths of the basis,
The method and wisdom of the path 
The two bodies of the results.
On the two truths of the basis:
The extremely subtle mind would be the ultimate truth of the basis
The extremely subtle wind would be the conventional truth of the basis.
When we talked about the two truths of the path, 
The clear light will be ultimate truth of the path 
The illusory body will be the conventional truth of the path.
On the two truths of the results
The wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness, which will be the dharmakaya, would be the ultimate truth of the result
The complete enjoyment body would be the conventional truth of the result.
The two truths of the results are made possible by actualizing and meditating on the two truths of the path. Because it is possible to meditate and actualize the two truths of the path, namely the clear light and the illusory body, therefore one can achieve the truth body and the enjoyment body of the result.
It is possible to meditate and actualize the two truths of the path because in the very first place, we possess the two truth of the basis. 
In the very first place, every sentient being possess within them the extremely subtle wind-mind, which is the basis of accomplishment, which is the very thing that can be transformed into the two truths of the path and result.
In the simple way of saying this is that, the extremely subtle mind progressively can be transformed into the clear light of the path. The extremely subtle mind can be manifested and make to realize emptiness. So the extremely subtle mind that realizes emptiness at the time of the path is the clear light of the path.
With repeated familiarization at the time of the path through meditation, this clear light of the path then becomes the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness at the time of path which eventually can be transformed into the wisdom truth body.
When the clear light of the path are actualized, then arising from this clear light one achieves the illusory body. It is the extremely subtle wind which is the mount of the path clear light that becomes the illusory body of the path. As the whole path is culminated, this illusory body essentially becomes the form body of the complete enjoyment body.
These are the critical points of tantra, here in particular the unsurpassed yoga tantra. From here we can see that it is only in the unsurpassed yoga tantra we will find the perfect complete explanation of how the two bodies - the truth and the form body - are actualized. In essence, the two bodies of the result are actualized on the basis of having obtained the clear light and illusory body of path.
The clear light and the illusory body  are only possible because in the very first place, we possess the extremely subtle wind-mind which is in essence the very thing that becomes the clear light and illusory body which then goes on to become the two bodies of the Buddha.
Such a presentation of the extremely subtle wind-mind together with the presentation of those slightly coarser levels of mind which exists prior to that, namely; the minds of appearance increase and black near attainment, is not found in sutra.
All the wind that course in the 72000 channels in the body at the time of death is gathered in the left and right channels. The winds in the left and right channels are then entered into the central channel from the upper and lower ends and dissolve into the indestructible drop at the heart. 
Only when all the winds dissolve into the indestructible drop inside the heart chakra, only then death occurs. This death specifically refers to the mind of death. This mind of death is the extremely subtle mind. Only then, death is manifest. This clear light of death is also referred to the mother clear light.
When the wind in the 72000 channels starts to gather in the left and right channel and then into the central channel and then into the indestructible drop, and this is happening at the time of death. There are a whole range of signs that occur during the whole process. There are external signs and internal signs. You must at least have a rough idea of what these signs are. Otherwise, it would be impossible to understand the generation stage and much less to meditate on it because meditating on the generation stage has to be a meditation on the aspect that is concordant with death and so forth. 
BP1:
When you look at the definition of the generation stage given by Panchen Lozang Chokyi Gyaltsen, what should a generation stage be? What are its defining characteristics? 
It is “a yoga that does not occur due to the entry, abidance and the dissolution of the winds in the central channel by the strength of meditation.” 
When the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel through the force of meditation, that practice belongs to the completion stage so it doesn’t happen at the generation stage. 
• What is the external sign indicating that the winds are entering the central channel? 
The exhalation, i.e., the movement of the winds from both nostrils, is balanced. Usually for us, there is a difference in the strength of the winds coming out from our nostrils. One is always stronger than the other. 
• What is the sign that the winds have entered and are abiding in the central channel? 
When one stops breathing and the stomach doesn’t move. Usually our stomach is moving 
• When the winds dissolve in the central channel, there are the signs of dissolution, starting from the mirage up to clear light. 
During the generation stage, the entry, abidance and dissolution of the winds in the central channel don’t happen through the force of meditation. When they happen through the force of meditation, then that is the completion stage.
The generation stage ripens the mind for the completion stage, its result. 
The generation stage is the meditation “on any of the three: birth, death and the intermediate state through discernment newly investigating any of their compatible aspects.” 
This meditation is done at the level of visualisation. Here it says, “through discernment newly investigating the compatible aspects of the birth, death and the intermediate state.” This means that it is not actually happening. It is not the real birth, death or the intermediate state (bardo) but rather the mind meditating on the compatible aspects of those three at the level of visualisation. This is the main practice of the generation stage. It is visualising or meditating on the compatible aspects of birth, death and intermediate state. 
The generation stage is the practice where one trains in visualising the purification of these three states: ordinary death, ordinary bardo (intermediate state) and ordinary birth. 
When we talk about the three bodies, there are: 
• the three bodies of the basis 
• the three bodies of the path and 
• the three bodies of the resultant stage (three resultant bodies) 
The three bodies of the basis are: 
• the dharmakaya of the basis. 
• the sambhogakaya of the basis. 
• the nirmanakaya of the basis. 
The dharmakaya of the basis can be taken to mean the clear light of death. At the time of death, all our consciousnesses will dissolve and finally the clear light of death, the most subtle mind, will manifest. 
In short, the dharmakaya of the basis refers to the most subtle mind at the time of death. 
Next is the sambhogakaya of the basis. 
What happens after the clear light of death? We have to take rebirth, but before that, we enter the intermediate state. Our body in the intermediate state is referred to as the sambhogakaya of the basis. 
From the intermediate state, we then take rebirth. Rebirth is posited to be the nirmanakaya of the basis. 
These are the three bodies of the basis but here we are not talking about the actual three bodies – the dharmakaya, sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya - of the Buddha but nevertheless they are given that name. 
What about the three bodies of the path? They are:
• the dharmakaya of the path is the example clear light and the meaning clear light. 
• the sambhogakaya of the path are the pure illusory body and impure illusory body. 
• the nirmanakaya of the path refers to the coarse body that arises that is other than the pure and impure illusory body. 
The human being of this southern continent is one that is born from the womb, possessing the six constituents (elements). There are different ways of counting these six constituents. 
• One way of counting them is the four elements (earth, water, fire and wind), the channels and drops. 
• Another way of positing them are the three that we receive from the father (bone, marrow and semen) and the three received from the mother (blood, flesh and skin). 
This is said to be the best body (best basis) for engaging in the practice of Highest Yoga Tantra and through that path to achieve enlightenment. One cannot practise Highest Yoga Tantra without such a basis
This body possesses three main channels: the central channel and the left and right channels. In general, there are 72,000 channels in the body. What happens when a human being of the southern continent born from the womb and possessing the six constituents, die? 
What happens during the death process? 
When the death process starts, all the winds in the 72,000 channels of the body gradually gather into the right and the left channels. The winds in the right and left channels then gather into the central channel. Gradually, the winds in the central channel gather and dissolve into the indestructible drop at the centre of our chest. 
The coarse winds start to dissolve and become subtler. Likewise, the coarse consciousness starts to dissolve and the subtle consciousness becomes manifest. As the consciousness becomes subtler and subtler, the mind gradually culminates and becomes the most subtle mind. That is the mind at the time of death which is also known as the clear light of death. That is real death, i.e., when the most subtle level of mind (the clear light of death) manifests is when death actually occurs. When this most subtle level of mind is manifesting, nothing else appears to that mind. When we say nothing appears to this clear light of death except emptiness, the emptiness referred to here is not the emptiness of true existence but rather it is mere emptiness, like the empty sky or simply nothingness. 
It is said in the teachings that an ordinary individual can abide in the state of the clear light of death for up to three days. Yogis/practitioners can abide in the state for many days because they are of a different level. This clear light of death is the dharmakaya of the basis and is also referred to as the mother clear light. This is something that you must know. This happens to everyone. When we die, the mother clear light manifests. Whether we say the mother clear light or the clear light of death or the dharmakaya of the basis, we are referring to the same thing. Is this mother clear light the actual clear light? The answer is no.
When we talk about clear light, we have to understand that we can look at clear light in terms of it being an object or a consciousness: 
• The objective (object) clear light refers to emptiness which is the mere negation of true existence. 
• The subjective (subject) clear light refers to the subtle wisdom which has emptiness as its object. 
When a human being of the southern continent born from the womb and possessing the six constituents dies, all the coarser winds and consciousnesses start to dissolve and become subtler. Eventually, when they all dissolve, the most subtle level of consciousness manifests. This is the clear light of death. 
When one moves from the clear light of death, one enters the intermediate state where one has to take rebirth without choice. The problem lies in our inability to stop actual death, i.e., the clear light of death which means we cannot stop ourselves from entering the bardo (intermediate state) which means we cannot stop rebirth. The whole point then is to stop, to purify and to overcome ordinary death. The practices for doing so come in the generation stage followed by the completion stage.
Let us take the generation stage practice of Guhyasamaja as an example. When we look at the sadhana, in the beginning, one visualises oneself as the principal deity and one visualises the 32 deities on different parts of the body. One then visualises the gradual dissolution, in stages, of these various deities. 
At the same time as one is performing these visualisations, one visualises that the death process is happening, i.e., one sees the signs of death and so forth. One trains the mind in this. Gradually, all the deities on the body and the body of oneself as the deity dissolve. Finally, oneself as the principal deity also dissolves into clear light. At that time, one concentrates single-pointedly on emptiness. This is the practice of taking death into the path of the dharmakaya. 
Of course, the actual signs of the dissolution are not happening. During the generation stage, one is simply visualising. Therefore, the generation stage is the yoga that meditates on birth, death and bardo “through discernment newly investigating any of their compatible aspects.” 
The practice of meditating on the aspects of death known as taking death into the path of the dharmakaya in the generation stage is not the actual thing that purifies ordinary death. What actually purifies ordinary death occurs at the completion stage. Specifically, it is the example clear light and the meaning clear light, which only happen during the completion stage, that actually purify ordinary death.
Returning back to ordinary death, the death process culminates in the clear light of death. When this stops, in the next moment, one enters the bardo as an intermediate state being (bardo being): 
• The substantial cause of the mind of the intermediate state being is the clear light of death. 
• The substantial cause of the body of the intermediate state being is the most subtle wind which is one entity with the mind of the clear light of death. 
• The intermediate state being is born miraculously in various types of birth (miraculous birth). 
• All the five senses are established simultaneously. 
• The body is said to be very subtle and does not possess obstructiveness. 
Once one is in the intermediate state, one has to take rebirth. If one is to be reborn as a human being, one will enter the intermediate state of a human being. 
One arises in the intermediate state from the clear light of death. In order to overcome this state, on has to purify it. In the generation stage there is the practice called taking the intermediate state into the path of sambhogakaya. In this meditation (on the aspects of the intermediate state), one goes through the five manifest enlightenments and then arises as the primordial protector. This is very clearly stated in the sadhana of the deity. 
Taking the intermediate state into the path of sambhogakaya during the generation stage is for the purpose of purifying the ordinary intermediate state. It is a practice that is done on the level of visualisation alone. That is not the actual method to overcome the ordinary intermediate state which only happens with the attainment of the two illusory bodies at the completion stage. 
From the intermediate state, one has to take rebirth. This process happens as one’s consciousness and winds become coarser culminating in one taking rebirth. As the meditation on the aspects of rebirth in the generation stage is to purify that, one visualises oneself arising as Vajrasattva from the primordial protector.
Question: In the definition of the generation stage, is there any significance to the word “newly" as in “through discernment newly investigating any of their compatible aspects”? Would it affect the meaning of the definition if this word is omitted? 
Answer: I think the word “newly” here has the connotation of initially rather than being indicative of the notion of time. At the beginning of the generation stage, when you first meditate, you do it just through visualisation. (It implies that). If we take this word to mean “initially,” is there a fault? With regards to omitting this word, I haven’t seen any texts commenting on this. This is something to be further investigated. 
Question: Is there a difference in the usage of the term, “birth” vs. “rebirth”? 
Answer: I don’t see anything wrong in using the two terms interchangeably. (Interpreter’s comment: For the purpose of translation, we only use the word, “birth”). 
Question: Does the subjective clear light go on to become the omniscient mind of the Buddha? 
Answer: Yes. 
Question: In the generation stage, the entry, abidance and dissolution of the winds in the central channel does not occur because one is using only the mental awareness. Does that mean that the sense awareness does not occur at all, i.e., (the sense awareness occurs) only in the completion stage? 
Geshe-la: Generation stage is mental. Completion stage, then it becomes real.
The definition of the generation stage talks about meditating on the compatible aspects of the death, the intermediate state and birth which is done to purify those three things but the important thing to understand is how does this happen? The text is not explicit with regards (to this point). From my point of view, we should relate it to stopping ordinary appearance and grasping (ordinary concept) of these three through developing divine pride and the clarity of oneself as a deity. This is only my idea and I could be wrong. You must think whether there is any problem with this.