Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L39.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:19.744634
================================================================================

Khen Rinpoche: Any question related to the last two classes? Talking about the three bases. For the basis, three in the path, three in the result. Any question ask now. 
Student 1: That day you mentioned about the two truths. Why is the ultimate truth attributed to a wisdom which is a mind rather than emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: In tantra, when clear light is discussed, it is done in terms of the objective clear light and the subjective clear light. 
The object emptiness is the objective clear light. 
The extremely subtle mind which takes emptiness as its object which realizes emptiness is the subjective clear light. 
Since one can talk about the clear light in terms of the object and subject, and when one talks about the ultimate truth, likewise we can talk about the ultimate truth as being an object or as being a subject. Here in tantra, in particular in the unsurpassed yoga tantra, the main concern is with the subjective clear light, the wisdom of great bliss which ascertains emptiness. 
When we talk about the ultimate truth in the unsurpassed yoga tantra, primarily the emphasis is on the subject, the wisdom of great bliss which realizes emptiness which is the direct cause or the thing that goes to enlightenment. 
In the text dealing with unsurpassed yoga tantra, the conventional truth here is talking about the illusory body. The conventional truth here constitutes the method because the illusory body is the substantial cause of the form body. 
Student 1: The fact that we have six constituents, we have to thank our parents for our six constituents which came from them. If we traced back of how the human being actually have the six constituents, it is actually because of consuming coarse food. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student 1: We have to thank the coarse food.  In the end, we have to thank them for having attachment to the coarse food in order to have the six constituents. 
Khen Rinpoche: If you do not know how to work with attachment then you get samsara. If you know how to work with attachment then you have this path. 
Student 1: So we have to thank them for having attachment to the coarse food to get channels and drops. I actually find tantra difficult. The reason is how do you actually prove that we have channels and drops?
Khen Rinpoche: In general, you can see the existence of channels and drops. Science probably can explain this. As for the explanation of the mind, put aside the extremely subtle mind, I think the scientists cannot even explain the coarser level of consciousnesses as how we understand it. 
Consciousness is formless and cannot be seen with the eye. We can only probably infer that they exist. I guess primarily is only through experience that you can probably certify that it does exist. 
Student 2: (From Lesson 37) After the person has taken the Highest Yoga Tantra initiation with the said downfall and secondary branches and it is said you should restore them by confessing according to the rite; the self-generation rite or taking the initiation again. I am just wondering whether the 100 Vajrasattva purification or the 35 Buddhas confession and prostration would purify these mistakes of the ten non-virtues and maybe secondary downfall or downfall. Speaking from myself, honestly the probability is very high.
Khen Rinpoche: We are talking specifically about tantric root downfall. If a root downfall occurs, engaging in purification even with the four opponent powers alone will not purify the downfall. In order for the vows to be revived, either you have to take it again in the context of wang (great initiation) or through self-initiation (technically is self-entry). 
With regards to the transgressions that are not root downfalls, I guess perhaps the confession can purify them.  
Earlier on one of the student mentioned that it was said in class that the consciousness to which the phenomena form source appears to is a non-conceptual mental consciousness. I think this is something that we need to think about. You can say that the consciousness to which a phenomena form source appears is a mental consciousness, but to say that it has to be a non-conceptual mental consciousness is a different thing. So I wonder that is the case or not. I think we need to reconsider if that was said in class.
In the context of unsurpassed yoga tantra, the practice of deity yoga starts with the generation stage. Essentially it will come a point especially when the calm abiding is achieved the meditator would have extremely very clear appearance of the deity’s body appearing but that appearance is appearing to a conceptual consciousness.
What is it that is appearing? You have to posit it as form. If it is form, then of all the divisions of form other than it being a phenomenon source form what else could it be? If that is the case, if it is phenomena form source, to which the consciousness is it appearing to? It is conceptual consciousness.  If that is the case, a phenomena form source need not necessarily appear only to a non-conceptual mental consciousness. That is the point I’m trying to say here. 
In Je Rinpoche’s Illumination of Intent, there is an explanation of a meditation on how the whole world is being filled with skeletons. It is an exercise to counteract attachment for those who have very strong desire. It is said in that text that for that person, who is doing the meditation, there are skeletons that are filling the whole world and that appearance of skeletons is an appearance to wisdom. 
There are forms that appear to a mental consciousness. If you think about it, other than being the phenomena form source then what else could it be?
Student 3: In Lorig, when you talk about conceptual consciousness, there is something called generally characterized phenomena and specific characterized phenomena. I can understand why something to do with meaning generality and yet there is a form that actually appears to a conceptual consciousness and that form will be phenomena as form. 
Khen Rinpoche: Can you say that coarse form cannot appear to thought?
Student 3: That one is not a problem. It can appear to a conceptual consciousness. 
Student 4: In Lorig lesson 3 BP2, there is a statement which says that form cannot appear to conceptual consciousness. 
Khen Rinpoche: Who said?
Student 4: I read somewhere 
Khen Rinpoche: Where? In the dream? Must be in the dream. I don’t remember. You go and read and bring back. 
Student 3:  During discussion I asked about this thing about the substantial cause of phenomena source form when we bring about dream elephant, in the end is the answer to the question on substantial cause for phenomena source form is imprint? In the view of lower tantra, if it is imprint, then what is the cause for that imprint? Is it contaminated imprint? Uncontaminated imprint? What exactly is the cause of that imprint?  If you were to trace back, the entry into tantra is to take the initiation. Every time when it talks about initiation, it says to plant an imprint. So when you talk about this imprint, what is this substantial cause of this imprint?
Khen Rinpoche: For generation stage practitioner, there is this deity’s body that is appearing to him clearly. So that appearance is a phenomena source form.  I think there was a question kind of similar to that in the discussion - What is the substantial cause of that?
Naturally with that question, one would ask: Is the substantial cause of form necessarily form? 
Just for discussion, if we take the position that the substantial cause of form has to be form, then with regards to this phenomena source form, we have to posit something which is form to be the substantial cause. 
If we posit wind which is the mount of consciousness, would that be okay? If you were to press further, then what would be the substantial cause of the wind (or the energy)?
At the end of the day, you have nothing to point to except the extremely subtle wind. But this extremely subtle wind is not like that the coarser level of energy. It is dormant and is not manifest. It exists in the form of a potential. What you have left is the extremely subtle wind-mind. If you were to look for a real extremely subtle wind-mind, you are not going to find anything, and it cannot be found. Usually when we talk about stuff and in particular now you are tracing all the way back to the very root of everything of the extremely subtle wind-mind, we might get this feeling that it has to be something there but this cannot be the case as it is totally wrong, because it cannot be found. We have this idea that it is the extremely subtle wind-mind and it is the basis of designation. But it is not the basis of designation. The extremely subtle wind-mind exists in mere name. Yet this extremely subtle wind-mind is the root of the entire samsara but it is also the root of nirvana. It is the root of everything. 
If you are talking about going through and experiencing ordinary death, one arise at the clear light of death. One arise from that, one will get the intermediate state. From there, rebirth. So the samsara comes from this extremely subtle mind. Because you are not able to stop that, samsara is endless.
When we are talking about ordinary death, the reason why there is ordinary death is because this extremely subtle mind, the clear light of death is manifest. 
Before the clear light of death is manifest it is not manifest at all. It is dormant. Because it manifest, that is why you have samsara. If it doesn’t manifest, then there is no intermediate state. 
Here we are talking about the ordinary death - clear light of death. Because it manifest, then there is intermediate state and then there is rebirth. As such, the mind of death, essentially is the extremely subtle mind, is the root of samsara.
When an individual is able to mix the mother and the son clear light, simply speaking means if the extremely subtle mind is made to realize emptiness, then you will achieve the path clear light - the first one is the example clear light. Once that is achieved, there is no more samsara because this person is certain to achieve enlightenment in that life.
When the example clear light on the final mental isolation is actualized, essentially it is the extremely subtle mind which realizes emptiness. Once that is achieved, there is no more samsara. It is certain to achieve enlightenment. Therefore, in this case, we can say that this extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness nevertheless the extremely subtle mind is the root of nirvana. This individual is definitely will achieve enlightenment in that lifetime.  Why? Because arising from that meditative equipoise he achieves the impure illusory body. In that same life he goes on to achieve the meaning clear light of the 4th stage, and arises from that into the pure illusory body. Then he achieves unification of learning. With that he achieves the unification of no more learning definitely in that life. 
Student 5: Since the basis of emanation of Shakyamuni Buddha, the complete enjoyment body in Akanishta pure land, achieved enlightenment there, that basis perhaps would not rely on the coarse white and red bodhicitta that we possess. How does one achieve enlightenment there generating the meaning clear light and the illusory body without relying on the coarse and subtle bodhicitta? How does one achieves enlightenment in Akanishta? 
Here, why the 6 constituents of semen, bone and marrow of the father, blood, skin and flesh of the mother and the white and red bodhicitta at the crown and navel are considered to be conducive conditions for penetrating and achieving the illusory body while other realms beings also possess the most subtle wind-mind, their constituents are not conducive? In other words, why is it that human of the Southern Continent born from the womb are suitable basis to achieve enlightenment? 
Khen Rinpoche: First, in order for human beings of Southern Continent who are entering the unsurpassed yoga tantra from the onset to achieve enlightenment in one short lifetime in this degenerate age in one body, he needs this physical body. 
In order to achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime of this degenerate age, you need to be a human being born from the womb and possesses the 6 constituents. As such, you need to be human being of the Southern Continent. That means those human beings in the north, east and western continents, if you subscribe to the Buddhist cosmology, cannot achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime. 
If you think about it, it is fair to say that those human beings are also born from the womb and also have the 6 constituents. What is there to stop us from saying that they have? 
Khen Rinpoche: Should have. Same as us. 
Ven Gyurme: We can talk about it, but we don’t even know where. We cannot locate them in the first place. 
Khen Rinpoche: Some things exist doesn’t mean we have to see. 
Anyway, the explanation goes like this:
They are all born from the womb and have the 6 constituents. Why is it that only human beings of the Southern Continent can achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime of the degenerate age through the practice of unsurpassed yoga tantra? 
It is a characteristic of this world, the Southern Continent, in that the karma that the beings accumulate in this world, especially if the karma accumulated is very strong, can ripen in this very lifetime.
In the Stages of the Path literature they talk in terms of karma that is so powerful that you can see it ripen in this life, and then there are some that are weaker which ripen in future lives. So it is just the nature of the beings of this world that the karma can ripen in this life if it is a very strong karma. But it is not really so for the human beings of the other continents. What is sure for them is that they have a certain level of enjoyment because of their previous karma that they accumulated prior to those rebirths in those 3 continents. Once they are born in those continents they are guaranteed to have a certain level of enjoyment. But it is not due to any actions that were done in that life but they are just experiencing the results of past actions which are kind of guaranteed.
The beings of those 3 other continents are not that if they accumulate some very strong karma then it ripen in that lifetime. It is not really that case, but it is the case for us, human beings of this world. I guess the explanation why in order to achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime of the degenerate age you need to have a human support of the Southern Continent. 
Then what about the desire realm gods? There are 6 subdivisions. What happen to them? Why not them? 
In the Abhidharmakosa, it is explained that two levels of the desire realm god:
The Land of the 33 
The Land of the Four Great Guardian Kings 
Those gods do engage in sexual intercourse but do not emit both the white and red bodhicitta during sexual intercourse. Essentially there is no emission. 
Then in the desire realm god level which is called Free of Conflict or Free of Combat, the desire realm gods do not engage in sexual intercourse but they enjoy just hugs or physical embrace.
Then in the desire realm god level called the Joyful, they do not even engage in embrace or hugs but they are just satisfied by holding hands. 
Then in the desire god realm level which is called Enjoying Emanation, they don’t even need to hold hands but bliss out just by smiling at one another.
Then in the desire realm god level called Controlling Others’ Emanations, they don’t even need to smile but mere looking at each other. 
This is how it is explained in the Abhidharmakosa how the different desire realm gods enjoy or how they are satisfied. 
The form realm gods do not possess the male and female sexual organs. 
The formless realm gods do not even possess form.
Khen Rinpoche: Formless gods don’t have form. That’s why it’s called formless. 
Many of the desire realms gods do not engage in sexual intercourse. Even for those who do engage in sexual intercourse, since there is no emission of white and red bodhicitta, then how do desire realm gods have children? If we talk about Devaputra, son of the god, how do they are reproduce?  There is no fallacy in that beings that are born in desire realm gods are born miraculously. In English, literally they just miraculously drop into the parent’s lap. 
Khen Rinpoche: Just appear.
Starting from the 1st of the six levels of the desire god realm, the 1st level is the Land of Four Great Guardian Kings, they are born having the nature of being 5 years old. Then the next level (Land of the 33) is 6 years old, then 7 years old, 8 years old and 9 years old and so forth.  
I don’t remember the details of the size or how big there gods are but it is mentioned in Abhidharmakosa.  They have immeasurable long life span compare to our human beings. 
When you put all these together you can see that for somebody who is entering tantra from the onset, in this case is unsurpassed yoga tantra, to achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime, this individual has to be a human being born from the womb possessing the 6 constituents of this Southern Continent.
In general, in the whole entire samsara, the 3 realms - desire, form and formless realm- , the form and formless realm are out. So you are only left with the desire realm. As for the desire realm, the desire realm gods are out. So you have only left with human being. As for the human beings of the four continents, the Northern, the Western and the Eastern continents are out. What left is the human beings who are born from the womb possessing the 6 constituents of the Southern Continent who have the basis to achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime of this degenerate age. 
The gods are out, the human beings of the other continents are out, and definitely the lower realms are out as well. Forget about tantra, they cannot even achieve the path. 
Khen Rinpoche: So end of the day, we are the best.  So when we think that, then there is no depression. 
(Student: Inaudible)  
Khen Rinpoche: Why? You want to go there? I think there is some answer for that. I don’t remember exactly very clearly. I will find out next time. Some scholars have some answers for that. I will find out. I will think about. 
Here in the unsurpassed yoga tantra, there is a lot of explanation about the extremely subtle wind and mind. This extremely subtle wind and mind acts as the root of cyclic existence and it is also acts as the root of nirvana. As I have mentioned in the last lesson, in order to have a good understanding of the practice of the generation stage, you must have a good understanding of the death process. 
Here in the commentary of the unsurpassed yoga tantra, there is a presentation of the body and mind. 
The body is divided into two:
Coarse
Subtle. 
When we talk about the coarse aggregates or the coarse body, there are five aggregates. These are coarse. The five aggregates is the basis of designation in dependence upon which the ‘I’ is imputed. This ‘I’ that is imputed in dependence upon the coarse aggregates, I guess you could call it the coarse ‘I’.
You can take the subtle here to be the extremely subtle wind. 
In dependence upon the extremely subtle wind which acts as the basis of designation, then there is an ‘I’ that is imputed. You can call it the subtle ‘I’. 
Likewise the mind is also divided into two: 
Coarse 
Subtle
Within such a division, the coarse level of consciousnesses would include:
the sense consciousnesses; which are the coarsest level of consciousness 
the mental consciousness; which is a little bit less coarse than the sense consciousnesses 
So within the division of coarse and subtle, you could include mental consciousness and call it the coarse mind. 
However, within mental consciousness itself, there are also different levels or different types of mental consciousnesses. 
To make it simple;
- You have the consciousnesses related to the physical support, the sense consciousnesses.
- Then you have the mental consciousnesses that come under the coarse mind. 
There is a set of consciousnesses or minds which are called the 80 indicative conceptions. This is something peculiar to unsurpassed yoga tantra. The 80 indicative conceptions are conceptual in nature and are included in the subtle consciousnesses. 
Within the category of the (extremely) subtle mind then there are four: 
The mind of appearance, 
The mind of increase, 
The mind of near attainment
Clear light
These are the four considered as subtle. 
There is mind of appearance, follow by mind of increase which is more subtle than the mind of appearance. Something there is more subtle than that would be mind of near attainment.  Then culminating in the extremely subtle mind of clear light, which is one entity with the extremely subtle wind, which is its mount.
So you know that the body and mind are divided into two: coarse and subtle. You need to understand this clearly. 
For as long as the coarse body and the coarse mind are manifest (are active), the subtle mind lay dormant. They only abide as in the form of potential. They do not perform any function.  They cannot engage in any activities. 
So for as long as the coarse level of body and mind exist and functioning, the subtle body and subtle mind cannot manifest and cannot function.  
When the karma for the coarse level body and mind to function is exhausted i.e. when they stop functioning, they dissolve into the subtle body and mind.  Only then the subtle body and mind become active, and is able to function or manifest.
The coarser level of body and mind then stop to function. 
The coarser level of energy and mind dissolves into the subtle body and mind.
The subtle body and mind is manifest.  
At the most subtle level, the extremely subtle wind-mind manifest.  This extremely subtle wind-mind is also called the eternal indestructible drop.  
For it is eternal, it is always been there and it will never go out of existence and it never changes. It is not born in that sense. It doesn’t die. It doesn’t go out of existence. It will never goes out of existence.
I think we have talked about the Buddha lineage, the phenomenon that is suitable to be transformed into the Buddha’s body. We have talked about the developmental Buddha lineage and the naturally abiding lineage according to the Sutra School, Mind Only School, and Middle Way School but the best explanation is found in the unsurpassed yoga tantra.  
The Buddha lineage that which is suitable to be transformed into Buddha’s body is essentially this fundamental mind of clear light together with its mount - the extremely subtle wind.  This is the thing that goes to enlightenment. This is the thing that can be transformed and gradually into the entity of the path. From that, it can be transformed into the truth body and the form body. It is this that goes from life to life.  
Our coarse body doesn’t go from life to life. Even our coarse level of consciousnesses, the sense consciousness, and the mental consciousness of this life doesn’t go to the next life.  What goes to the next life is the extremely subtle wind mind.
Question: Does the sense consciousness go from life to life or not?
When the coarse level of the body and mind present, is active and functioning, the subtle body and mind cannot function, cannot manifest, and is not activated.  When the karma for the coarse level body and mind is exhausted, then they start to stop functioning.  When they completely stop functioning, only then the extremely subtle body and mind comes to being and manifest.
For us the extremely subtle wind-mind is only manifest at the time of death and that happen due to karma. Through the path of unsurpassed yoga tantra, in particular through actualizing some levels of the completion stage, and through the power of meditation one is able to stop the coarser level of body and consciousnesses from functioning and then activate the extremely subtle wind mind. With that acting as the basis of designation, one can actually achieve actual deity’s body, starting with the illusory body. 
It is explain here in the unsurpassed yoga tantra that with the illusory body the yogi is able to accumulate unbelievable amount of merits. 
Question & Answer
Student 5:  The extremely subtle wind-mind is definitely impermanent yet it is unchanging, does not come about and does not disintegrate. How does one understand it to be impermanent yet doesn’t go through momentary disintegration? If it does then how is it?
Ven Gyurme: What is the meaning behind the adjective used and in the case that it is eternal that is unchanging, it doesn’t die.
Khen Rinpoche: The extremely subtle wind mind is definitely an impermanent phenomenon. It is impermanence in terms of its continuum. Therefore it definitely changes from moment to moment. But it is not like a coarse object in that it comes into being at the certain time and then it goes out of existence at the certain time. Definitely it is not like that as it always being there. While it is there, it undergoes change momentary.
Student 6: Generally in Buddhism, we learn about there is the mind that is beginningless and it doesn’t go out of existence. So, to Highest Yoga Tantra, it would mean the extremely subtle mind and wind? 
Because the sense consciousness of the previous life will go out of existence, can we say the substantial cause of the sense consciousness in the next rebirth will be imprints as explained in the twelve-link due to projected karma? 
Ven Gyurme: In short, you are asking what is this substantial cause of sense consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche: For future life?
Student 6: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: All consciousnesses have the extremely subtle mind as their root. Everything comes from that extremely subtle mind. I think we will look at this in the future. 
When you look at the reverse process arising from the mind of clear light, let’s say a person taking rebirth, if we are talking about the clear light of death, arising from the clear light of death:
the first one would be the mind of near attainment, 
follow by the mind of increase, 
follow by the mind of appearance; which is increasingly coarser and coarser, 
then come the mind of 80 indicative conceptions.
from there you have the sense consciousnesses. 
Basically everything goes back to the clear light mind and then out from the clear light mind.
If you accept that there is a basis of infusion for the predisposition so the thing that holds the predisposition and carries from life to life, then is this extremely subtle wind-mind the basis of all the predisposition or not? 
That is much to think about and it is not straightforward as there are implications. If you say the extremely subtle wind-mind has to be the basis of infusion of the predisposition because this is the thing that moves from life to life, then obviously this has to be the carrier. 
If this is the carrier, but it is not manifest when we are alive, then how can you put something into a non-manifest container? 
However, if you say that is not the basis of infusion then it follows that the basis of infusion would be coarser level of mind. When this coarser level of mind ceases to exist then all your imprints will disappear? 
So, that is much to think about. If you think about it, you don’t have much of a choice other than to say that this extremely subtle wind-mind is the basis of infusion, if you accept that there is a basis of infusion. The imprints must go from life to life. Then the container, the basis of infusion, must go from life to life.
Other than this extremely subtle wind mind, then what are you going to posit? 
You have the CMWS' explanation of the disintegratedness. The CMWS rejects the MOS assertion of the mind basis of all. In fact, this is just an intellectual construct of a tenet does not exist whatsoever. The CMWS say that there is no really need to talk about basis of infusion. You talk about how the continuum of imprints is maintained through the concept of disintegratedness - how when an action ceases, it produces disintegratedness. Since it is a product, it is impermanent. Therefore it maintains its continuum and it produces the next moment and so forth without having the need to talk about putting something in somewhere.
BP1
Question: What is the substantial cause of the example clear light and meaning clear light? 
Answer: As we had studied on buddha nature, the nature of the mind is clear light. This ultimately refers to the extremely subtle mind, the fundamental innate mind of clear light that we all have. There is also the extremely subtle wind which is of one entity with that fundamental innate mind of clear light. We have had this extremely subtle mind and wind since beginningless time. 
We can only find the explanation of this extremely subtle mind in the teachings of Highest Yoga Tantra. Such explanations cannot be found in the teachings of the three lower classes of Tantra or the Paramitayana. That is why they are unable to explain such a mind. 
As long as the “I” or “person” exists, the extremely subtle mind together with the extremely subtle wind will exist. These are the bases for one to accomplish the two bodies of the Buddha. This is the reason why we say all sentient beings can achieve enlightenment. Literally, we are “suitable” for achieving enlightenment. 
• The extremely subtle mind (the fundamental innate mind of clear light) is the substantial cause for actualising the dharmakaya. 
• The extremely subtle wind (which is of one entity with that extremely subtle mind) is the substantial cause for actualising the rupakaya (the form body of the Buddha). 
With regards to the question: 
• this fundamental innate mind of clear light is the substantial cause for the example clear light and the meaning clear light and 
• the extremely subtle wind is the substantial cause for the illusory bodies (i.e., the impure and pure illusory bodies). 
Question: The meditations that we are doing on emptiness, are they the substantial cause for the truth body? 
Answer: Your point is that besides the mind of clear light, all the meditations that we do in relation to deity yoga should also be the substantial causes for dharmakaya. 
When you investigate deeply, what exactly goes on to enlightenment? When you say the mind goes on to enlightenment, which mind goes on to enlightenment? This has to be analysed. 
What is the real substantial cause for the dharmakaya? What is the real substantial cause for the rupakaya? This is the same as analysing which mind moves on from life to life. Do all the consciousnesses that we have go on to the next life? 
The conclusion is that:
The extremely subtle mind is the substantial cause for actualising the dharmakaya, which refers here to the wisdom truth body. 
The extremely subtle wind is the substantial cause for actualising the rupakaya, the form body of the Buddha. 
(192)