Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L4.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:19.385047
================================================================================

 I will talk a little bit about the meaning of entering the path. When does one enter a path? It is when uncontrived renunciation has arisen in the mind. [Uncontrived renunciation – a genuine and constant aspiration to leave samsara]
In the Three Principal Aspects of the Path, Lama Tsongkhapa described clearly the measure of having generated renunciation: 
Freedom and endowments are difficult to find
And life has no time to spare.
By gaining familiarity with this,
Attraction to the appearances of this life is reversed.
By thinking over and over again
That actions and their effects are unbetraying,
And repeatedly contemplating the miseries of cyclic existence,
Attraction to the appearances of future lives is reversed.
When, by having trained in that way,
There is no arising, even for a second,
Of attraction to the perfections of cyclic existence,
And all day and night the intention seeking liberation arises –
Then the thought of renunciation has been generated.
That is the measure of having the generated renunciation. In order for this uncontrived renunciation to arise, first one must have aversion to true suffering. In short, one has completely given up all hopes on anything to do with samsara or any samsaric perfection. One has no interest in anything that is included within samsara as one completely sees it is pointless. 
In the first place, one must have that. But that alone is not sufficient. On top of that, one must know what are the causes or the origins of the suffering that one is so averse to. One must know what the causes that give rise to true suffering are and one must have the conviction, understanding and aspiration for true cessation. Upon which then one must have an understanding of how such true cessation is to be achieved on the basis of meditating on the true paths. When put all these together, day and night, one is only interested in liberation and nothing else in life. This is what drives ones thinking and looking for liberation; as says here “All day and night the intention seeking for liberation arises.” That is the measure of the uncontrived renunciation has arisen. 
As says here “And all day and night the intention seeking liberation arises”, so it has to arise spontaneously all the time at the back of our head and in the depths of our heart. That is what that drives us i.e. we have no other goals in life but only this. If the thought of renunciation arises spontaneously and effortlessly all the time from the depths of our heart, whether we are walking, eating, sleeping, doing prayers or recitations, then all these activities are said to be conjoined with renunciation. If that is the case, those activities that are conjoined with renunciation will become the cause for liberation. Otherwise, if it is not conjoined with this renunciation, it doesn’t matter what we do, then it will never become a cause for liberation at all. 
When the uncontrived renunciation arises in one’s heart, then one enters the path. There are 5 paths, and it could be the 5 Hinayana paths and the 5 Mahayana paths. Whether one enters the Hinayana path or Mahayana path, one enters from the Path of Accumulation. If one enters the Mahayana path, then it is the Mahayana Path of Accumulation. If one enters the Hinayana path, it is the Hinayana Path of Accumulation. They both have the same name. Somebody whose mind a path has arisen is somebody who can accumulate the collections easily. That person is only very enthused about accumulating the collections and whatever the person does is only the cause for liberation.
As for the individuals entering the path or whose mind a path has arisen, there are some who enter the Hinayana path first. After they have completed the Hinayana path, they enter into the Mahayana path. On that basis they achieve enlightenment. There are also others who enter the Mahayana path from the very onset.
Remember there was a question in the last class about whether renunciation and bodhicitta arise together or not, the point is that even if someone who enters the Mahayana path from the onset, and before he can enters the Mahayana path, he first must have abandoned the attachment to this life and have abandoned the attachment to the entire samsara. Technically speaking, that person must have reversed all attractions to the appearances of this life and must have reversed all attraction to the appearances of future lives. He must has aversion to true suffering, and must see that anything that is included in samsara is meaningless and essenceless; in particular, that person must realizes that as long as one appropriates the contaminated, physical and mental aggregates, then whatever existence that involves that does not transcend suffering. This is indispensable. 
As for the person who enters the Mahayana path on the onset without entering the Hinayana path, even for that individual, he has to train the mind gradually. On the basis of having trained in the way that we have just looked at, then that person has complete aversion to his personal true suffering in his existence in samsara. Then on that basis he empathizes with others and seeks to develop the same level of aversion for other people’s sufferings in relation to other people’s suffering. So in order to enter the Mahayana path, he has to train in developing bodhicitta right from the beginning recognizing all sentient beings as one’s mother, recognizing the kindness of mother sentient beings, repaying their kindness, affectionate love, great compassion, extraordinary intention and bodhicitta.
The person who is aspiring to enter the Mahayana path has to become a person who sees and feels the need to eliminate the suffering of others, just as he feels the urgency to eliminate his own suffering in samsara. He has that same level of feeling of urgency and also sees the need to do it for others. 
Here, when we talk about nirvana, we are talking about the higher nirvana - the non-abiding nirvana or full enlightenment. He seeks to achieve non-abiding nirvana in order for him to accomplish what he has set out to eliminate the suffering of others. Come the time when this individual develops an uncontrived aspiration to achieve the non-abiding nirvana, and that is when he has developed the mind of enlightenment (bodhicitta), and that is when he enters the Mahayana path. As we have said earlier, the criteria for positing the entering of the path is the development of uncontrived renunciation - the wish for liberation. So, the person who is entering the Mahayana path and wish for non-abiding nirvana is the mind of enlightenment. We could also say that is also the time when renunciation is also generated. Therefore, we could say that for any individual entering the Mahayana path, renunciation and the mind of enlightenment are generated together.
Khen Rinpoche: You must understand the question that I asked you in the last lesson. Now I am giving you the answer. Don’t forget your question. I gave the question. If you have used your brain and have done that thinking, and now I give you the answer. If you have not used your brain, the answer doesn’t work anything for you. You must pump your brain a little bit. So that is the answer. If you think the answer is not correct, then you must say “What you have said is not correct because of this this this,…”  and you must give reasons. Especially studying Buddhist philosophy, your brain must be active; not sitting like that and nothing go inside. 
Question: For the person who is entering the Mahayana path from the onset, that individual generation of the mind seeking liberation and the mind of enlightenment, are these two minds generated serially or together? 
If you hold the position that they are generated serially, then there would be problem.  If you assert that they are generated together, then you will not have any difficulties. 
Question: For someone who enters the Mahayana path from the onset without going through any other path, does he has the wish for liberation or not? Does he need to generate the wish for liberation? Yes or no? 
If you say yes, this person who is entering the Mahayana path from the onset is seeking the great nirvana, the non-abiding nirvana. Such an individual has no interest in seeking nirvana for himself -the lower nirvana. 
When does he enter the path? 
He enters the path when uncontrived mind of enlightenment (bodhicitta) arises. 
When does the uncontrived mind of enlightenment arise?  
The uncontrived mind of enlightenment arise arises effortlessly always thinking “I must achieve full enlightenment in order to accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings.” That is defined as the mind of enlightenment. When the uncontrived mind of enlightenment arises effortlessly, that is when he enters the Mahayana path. That is also when he develops the uncontrived wish for the great liberation. As such, they are generated simultaneously. Hence, this addresses the question that was posed in the last lesson. 
When the uncontrived mind of enlightenment arises, day and night, the individual effortlessly has the motivation to achieve the non-abiding nirvana (full enlightenment) in order to accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings.
When that uncontrived mind of enlightenment arises simultaneously, the path arises in his mind. Here the path is the Mahayana path. Of the 5 Mahayana paths, it is the Mahayana Path of Accumulation that arises in his heart. As such, he enters the Mahayana Path of Accumulation. Such an individual has great courage and determination to achieve the state of full enlightenment. As such, he has the great courage and determination to accumulate the collections in order to achieve his goal. He has no difficulty accumulating the collections. As such, the first of the 5 paths is called the Mahayana Path of Accumulation.  
As you remember from the last module, there are different achievings, and one of the achieving is called the achieving through armor, which refers to that bodhisattva’s unbelievable courage and determination to accumulate the collections. Through the practice of the perfections, he has this tremendous determination to practice all the perfections together. 
When divided, the Mahayana Path of Accumulation is divided into three: 
Small Mahayana Path of Accumulation
Middling Mahayana Path of Accumulation
Great Mahayana Path of Accumulation
He enters the Mahayana Path of Accumulation through the small Mahayana Path of Accumulation. (Generated mind, sometime is translated as mind generation which seems to refers to a process; whereas the generated mind refers to the result) 
As the bodhisattva progresses, his mind generation acquires different name. On the small Path of Accumulation, his mind generation is called the mind generation like the earth. Why? Just like the ordinary earth which is the basis for crops to grow and to reap the harvest, likewise the mind generation on the small Path of Accumulation is the basis for the entire Mahayana path up to enlightenment. 
As for the individuals who enter the Mahayana path, there are two types:
Sharp facultied 
Dull facultied
It is said that the sharp facultied trainees who enter the Mahayana path are those who realize emptiness first before entering the Mahayana paths.  
As for dull facultied trainees, they generate bodhicitta first and then emptiness. 
((Sharp facultied trainee: Realize emptiness  Generate Bodhicitta)
Dull facultied trainee: Generate Bodhicitta  Realize emptiness)
Question: For the sharp facultied trainees, why do they realize emptiness prior to developing the generated mind (bodhicitta)?
Khen Rinpoche: That is question. There is a reason why I ask questions. This is something that you have to think about, and keep it at the back of your head and is something that you just have to figure out overtime. When somebody asks you: Why? you cannot just going to sit there and keep quiet.
Student 1: The self cherishing is stronger than the self grasping, that is why they develop a realization of emptiness first before they realize bodhicitta. The self cherishing is stronger than the self grasping. 
Khen Rinpoche: Self cherishing is stronger than self grasping, therefore sharp facultied trainees have to realize emptiness before the bodhicitta? This doesn’t make any sense.
At the time of generating bodhichitta, the dull facultied trainees have no more self-cherishing. He only has the thought of cherishing others. Then what happens to the wisdom realizing emptiness? Why he is not able to realize that wisdom? 
They don’t have self-cherishing, there is only thought of cherishing others. Then what happens to the wisdom realizing emptiness? Then the dull facultied has to be the reverse of what you said, right? 
All of you are students coming here to learn. If you are here to learn then you need to be able to answer questions and also want to answer questions. Otherwise, when somebody asks you a question, “It is said that the sharp facultied trainee realizes emptiness prior to realizing bodhichitta, why?” and you cannot just sit there and keep quiet or say you don’t know. This cannot be the result of having studied for four, five years. 
Khen Rinpoche: So must answer. Somebody said why?
Student 2: I think the sharp facultied trainees are the people that follow reasons. They have to see the reasons whether it is possible to achieve emptiness first, then having the aspirations with the reason to achieve liberation and enlightenment. Then they will proceed to achieve the wisdom realizing emptiness before achieving bodhichitta. They will follow reasons. 
I think the dull facultied trainees are followers of faith. That is the reason they will achieve the wisdom realizing emptiness later on. They will develop bodhichitta first. Is the line of reasoning correct? 
Khen Rinpoche: Correct. It is not sufficient just to say the followers of doctrine or the sharp facultied ones are the ones who follow reasons. You need to show the reason why they have to realize emptiness first. Why?
Student 2: The wisdom realizing emptiness is the antidote to eradicate ignorance. So by eradicating ignorance, one will be able to achieve enlightenment. So when they see that is possible, they will proceed to achieve the wisdom realizing emptiness. 
The root of samsara is ignorance. So they have to explore to see. They know that wisdom realizing emptiness is the only antidote that can eradicate the ignorance; the root of samsara. So having realized that it is the only antidote, they then proceed to practice and attain the wisdom realizing emptiness first. That is through various reasons. Correct? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, good. 
Student 3: My understanding as to why they want to realize emptiness first is because when they realize not only the selflessness of persons but selflessness of all phenomena, then that person becomes really brave and has the courage to save all sentient beings. If they don’t realize emptiness first, that all phenomena are empty of inherent existent, I don’t think they will have the courage to take on the suffering of all sentient beings and liberate all sentient beings from their sufferings. I think it is necessary that the mind of Mahayana practitioner should realize emptiness of phenomena first, after that then develops the courage to take the Mahayana path to free all sentient beings from their sufferings. That is my understanding why they do that first. 
Khen Rinpoche: This courage is not exclusive to the sharp facultied bodhisattvas. Are the dull facultied bodhisattvas who enter the Mahayana path without wisdom realizing emptiness courageous or not? 
Student 3: We can say they are. 
Khen Rinpoche: In fact, you have proven that you don’t need the wisdom realizing emptiness to be courageous. 
Student 3: Okay. I can’t think of any other reasons why they would have to realize emptiness first. To me it would be a logical step that they would realize the emptiness of phenomena, then whatever hardship and whatever suffering that comes with it, they can just think the nature of emptiness,  then they just have the courage to enter Mahayana path to do that. That is my logical thinking. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay.
In general,
The sharp facultied trainees are those who make promise and set out to do something only after seeing the valid reasons for doing so
The dull facultied trainees are those who don’t see any reasons but they just go with some kind of faith, and make a promise to achieve enlightenment. 
What Student 2 said essentially was the answer. The sharp facultied ones are the ones who have to see that enlightenment can be achieved before they generate the thought that enlightenment must be achieved. 
The sharp facultied trainees are somebody who has to be convinced that they can achieve enlightenment before then go on to actually develop the wish to do so. First, they have to see that they can achieve enlightenment i.e. they must be convinced that enlightenment can be achieved, in particular, they themselves can achieve enlightenment. This means they have to see that the non-abiding nirvana can be achieved. In order to achieve nirvana, first, they must see and convinced that samsara can be abandoned. In order to be convinced that samsara can be abandoned, they have to be convinced with valid reasons that the root of cyclic existence can be abandoned. In order to be convinced that the root of samsara can be abandoned, they must realize emptiness. There is no other way out. 
When we say the root of samsara can be abandoned, we basically are saying the person must see that he can abandon ignorance. In particular here, the individual must see that he can abandon and destroy the apprehension of true existence - the grasping at true existence. He must see that that is possible “My ignorance, the apprehension of true existence, can be destroyed”. In order to see that the apprehension of true existence can be destroyed, first one must see that the conceived object of the apprehension of true existence does not exist in whatsoever. If one doesn’t see that, there is no way one can see everything else that comes after. 
In order to see that the apprehension of true existence can be abandoned, he first must see that what this apprehension of true existence is grasping at does not exist in whatsoever. This means that if one doesn’t realize the apprehension of true existence is an erroneous conception, a wrong consciousness, and he does not see that the apprehension of true existence is a mind that views reality in a distorted way, apprehending reality in such a way that has never existed, then there is no way to convince himself that ignorance or the apprehension of true existence can be abandoned. 
When we are studying Buddhist philosophy, we must really think about stuffs all the time. When we say think about stuff, we have to be actively thinking about stuffs, wondering why. Otherwise, you just come here, sit down and listen. That’s about it. You are not going to get anything much and it will not go in. So you must think about stuffs actively. That is the reason why I give questions and then you think about stuff. From your own side, if you have tried thinking about stuff, and when the answer is given then the answer will has an impact. Then it makes you interested and gives you some energy. Otherwise, you just sit around, be happy and listen without thinking, then probably you get bored, and find it difficult, and you probably are not going to learn. 
Student 4: For the sharp facultied bodhisattva, when you talk about realizing emptiness before the Path of Accumulation, that is actually inferential realization of emptiness, right? 
Ven Gyurme: Somebody who enters the Mahayana path first time on the onset?
Student 4: Correct. Before that that is inferential, and you are not talking about direct realization of emptiness, right? For dull facultied bodhisattva, in order to actually have uncontrived bodhichitta, there should be a minimum criterion for the understanding of emptiness as well as enlightenment. What will it be? Is it correctly assuming consciousness? It can’t be a doubting consciousness of enlightenment and yet want to have uncontrived bodhichitta. Is it a correctly assuming consciousness?  
Ven Gyurme: Only to achieve the object of doubt. 
Khen Rinpoche: Here you are talking about the dull facultied bodhisattvas, those who generate bodhichitta prior to realizing emptiness.  I guess the minimum kind of mind they have in relation to the object of emptiness would probably be the doubt tending towards the factual. If they have the doubt that is tending towards the non-factual, how can they even conceive of wanting to achieve something that they are so doubtful of? Of the three kinds of doubt, doubt that tends towards the factual maybe could be the minimum. The best is that person could reach is the correct belief or correctly assuming consciousness with regards to emptiness. 
Student 5: What would be the difference between the attainment of the path of a person shared with a medium capacity and uncontrived renunciation seeking the liberation of non-abiding nirvana? 
Is it the case that one can generate the wisdom realizing emptiness first without uncontrived renunciation? 
Khen Rinpoche: There are individuals who enter the Hinayana path or the Mahayana path after realizing emptiness. So if you are talking about someone who is sharp facultied, even for someone who is seeking individual liberation, in order for the person to develop the uncontrived renunciation that seeks his personal liberation, he must see that his samsara can be abandoned. In order to see that his samsara can be abandoned, then he must see that the root of samsara can be abandoned, and so forth. There are smarty pants who realized emptiness before developing the uncontrived wish for the Hinayana liberation. Whatever we have said in relation to the sharp facultied individuals who enter the Mahayana path (with regards to them having the need to see that nirvana that they are aiming for can be achieved) can also be applied to those sharp facultied individuals who are entering the Hinayana path. 
The path that is shared with the person of medium capacity, the spirit of which is basically encapsulated in the line in The Three Principal Aspects of the Path: “When, by having trained in that way, there is no arising, even for a second of attraction to the perfections of cyclic existence.” That is essentially encapsulated in the spirit of the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity - one who has no interest at all in samsaric perfections - can arise prior to realizing emptiness. The spirit is about not having interest in samsaric perfections. Only then will this person seriously investigate what is the cause of samsara. He to gradually come to understand its true origins then wonders “If I want to stop cyclic existence, I have to stop the true origins”. When we talk about true origins, all the way down to the real source of entire samsara, it is the apprehension of true existence. Again we are addressing the same issue: whether the apprehension of true existence can be abandoned or not? Then the person will sorts that out and develops the wish to achieve liberation:
If the person is wishing for the lower nirvana, he enters the Hinayana path. 
If the person is looking for the non-abiding nirvana, then the person enters the Mahayana path. 
Student 5: For the person who is entering the Hinayana path, at that time he would have generated uncontrived renunciation whereas for the person seeking non-abiding nirvana, at that point in time, he generated the path shared with the person of medium capacity yet he has not generated uncontrived renunciation. At the point when one generates the path shared with the person of medium capacity, that path is not uncontrived renunciation, am I right to say? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student 5: But the path of the person of medium capacity, the moment he generates the path of medium capacity, not shared, that means the Hinayana aspect, that person has generated uncontrived renunciation in order to enter the path. 
Khen Rinpoche: Earlier I have said: “What is the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity?” By having trained in that way, reversing both the attraction to the appearances of this life and future lives, then there is no arising even for a second of attraction to the perfections of cyclic existence. Up to that, this is the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity. Such a person is not someone who has necessarily entered the path.
Khen Rinpoche: What is your question?
Student 5: Inaudible
Khen Rinpoche: Contrived, uncontrived, nothing to do with that. 
By having trained in that way, there is no arising even for even a second of attraction to the perfections of cyclic existence. Up to here, this is the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity. Come the day that one is so sick of anything that has to do with samsara, but have not thought anything about liberation yet. That is the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity. But this doesn’t mean that one has entered the path. 
If on the basis of that, day and night, all the time, when the intention seeking liberation arises, then one enters the path. The uncontrived aspiration for nirvana is not the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity.
Student 6: (Summarized by Ven Gyurme): When do a dull facultied and a sharp facultied bodhisattva becomes equal on the path?
Ven Gyurme: The word in Tibetan literally means sharp (facultied) and not sharp (facultied)
The sharp facultied trainees are those who, with regards to whatever subject it is, you tell them and they will able to understand what you are trying to say and see all the reason. In fact, they are those who are able to think: “It is like this and it is not like this”. 
As for the dull facultied trainees, they are those that no matter what you are trying to say to them, they would never ever understand. They don’t gain an ascertainment. They are not able to think. 
There are Perfection of Wisdom Sutra of different lengths:
- The short Perfection Wisdom Sutra of 8,000 stanzas in one volume. 
- The middling Perfection of Wisdom Sutra of 25,000 stanzas in three volumes. 
- The long Perfection of Wisdom Sutra of 100,000 stanzas in twelve volumes (in the Tibetan canon)
These are the three versions of Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. All of them have the same subject matters. If they all are talking about the same thing, why Buddha has to talk so much? 
When sharp facultied trainees hear the Sutra, they understand it right away. As for the dull facultied trainees, they don’t get anything even after hearing it for three days.
Khen Rinpoche: I am talking about one topic. Whether you are learning art or you are learning some dance or whatever you are learning.
Anyway, these are all relative. You posit someone as sharp facultied only in relation to someone who is not as sharp and vice versa. If you compare a human being to an animal, generally human is of sharp facultied. I can go back and get more reference materials. I don’t think they become equal even on the Path of Seeing onwards because there are discussions of sign irreversibility, sign of achieving and so forth. Some bodhisattvas only achieve the signs on the Path of Seeing and some don’t achieve it on the Path of Seeing. Some only achieve it on the Path of Meditation. And even on the Path of Meditation, some only achieve it on the 8th grounds and so forth. That means there is a difference between sharp facultied bodhisattvas and dull facultied bodhisattvas.
Student 6: The sharp facultied bodhisattvas are able to realize emptiness first or earlier than the dull facultied bodhisattvas. Could that be attributed to the method the sharp facultied bodhisattvas develop bodhicitta?  The sharp facultied bodhisattvas develop bodhicitta through the methods of exchanging self for others which is based more on the understanding of emptiness whereas the dull facultied bodhisattvas develop bodhicitta through the method of the seven-fold cause and effect. Could that be the reason why the sharp facultied bodhisattvas are able to realize emptiness first?
Khen Rinpoche: What you have alluded and as to whether that can stand as a reason or not remains to be analyzed. As for the question to about why the sharp facultied trainees realize emptiness prior to bodhicitta, that has already been addressed. The sharp facultied trainees are generating renunciation and the mind of enlightenment simultaneously and then enter the path. Sharp facultied trainees are those who realized emptiness prior to developing that renunciation or that mind of enlightenment. Once such an individual enter the Mahayana path, we could say that it is certain that they will not fall to the lower path.
For sharp facultied bodhisattvas after entering the path, we can posit that their wisdom realizing emptiness and their mind generation will never degenerate. 
For the dull facultied bodhisattvas who generate the renunciation and the mind generation, then they enter the path. Probably we can say that their mind generation (bodhicitta) can degenerate.
So it is possible for these dull facultied bodhisattvas on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation to lose their bodhicitta. That is the small Mahayana Path of Accumulation. Next is the middling Mahayana Path of Accumulation. That bodhisattva’s mind generation is called mind generation like gold. Why? Just as gold in whatever form it takes, it is still gold and it doesn’t change its entity. Likewise, the mind generation in the continuum of the bodhisattva on the middling Mahayana Path of Accumulation will never degenerate. Henceforth, it is not possible for the bodhisattva to lose his mind generation.
Question: For the bodhisattva on the middling Path of Accumulation, is it necessarily for him to realize emptiness?
That is something to think about. But if you say yes and definitely, then on the middling Path of Accumulation, the bodhisattva definitely realizes emptiness. Because of having realized emptiness, his mind generation becomes like gold henceforth he will never lose his bodhicitta. Can we posit this or not?
This is something to think about: Is it alright to say the bodhisattva on the middling Path of Accumulation would have necessarily realizes emptiness? If we say that, is there any fallacy?
In the Five Mahayana Paths chart, there is a milestone on the middling Path of Accumulation - note C - Point where it is not possible to fall to the Hinayana, and this is something that is commonly accepted and can be found in major treatises. There is no argument about not falling into the Hinayana path after having achieved the middling Path of Accumulation. By saying this, at the same time, we are also saying that it is possible to fall into the Hinayana prior to that such as on the small Path of Accumulation. 
You need to understand what the argument is about. I am not saying that on the small Path of Accumulation you definitely will fall back into the Hinayana. I never say that! What I am saying is that there exists a possibility. 
I can say the bodhisattvas on the great Path of Accumulation have necessarily realized emptiness. I can safely say this is the case. Why? Because on the great Path of Accumulation, the bodhisattvas would necessarily have the calm-abiding focusing on emptiness. In order to have the calm-abiding focusing on emptiness, the bodhisattva must first have realized emptiness. So, if I say that once the bodhisattvas enter the great Path of Accumulation, he would have the calm-abiding focusing on emptiness. But by saying this, what does this imply? Obviously he must already realize emptiness prior to the middling Path of Accumulation. 
Khen Rinpoche: Are you thinking or not?
Student 7: Inferential realization of emptiness does not needs the union of calm abiding and special insight. The definition of Mahayana mind generation is Mahayana main mind distinguish by abiding in the type of path that acts as an entry of the Mahayana concomitant with the aspiration to attain the non-abiding nirvana for the welfare of sentient beings. As for the Mahayana mind generation, what exactly is the object of observation? I am not sure what is the actual observed object condition of this main mind? Is it enlightenment or sentient beings or what?
Khen Rinpoche: The mind generation (bodhicitta) is a main mind and there is a mental factor of aspiration that is concomitant with this main mind. That is this aspiration that is seeking to achieve full enlightenment. The focal object or object of observation is focusing on enlightenment (jangchub). 
The individual is focusing on his own enlightenment that is to be achieved for the benefit of others observing one’s own object of attainment - the enlightenment which is one’s own object of attainment.
Student 7: That enlightenment has not been achieved yet, so, it is not an existing object yet. 
Khen Rinpoche: This enlightenment is yet to be achieved. It is a phenomenon of which is possible; that means can exist.
Student 7:  Is this uncontrived Mahayana mind generation direct realization or a conceptual consciousness?
Ven Gyurme: Whether bodhicitta is conceptual or non-conceptual?
Khen Rinpoche: Conceptual.
Student 7: For someone who is on the small Path of Accumulation, it is possible for the person to lose bodhicitta. When the person gives up bodhicitta, does the person still have uncontrived renunciation?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student 7: Can anyone, either in the Hinayana Path or Mahayana path, abandon uncontrived renunciation?
Khen Rinpoche: No. It is clear that the path does not degenerate.
Student 7: In other words, the person of definite Mahayana lineage is necessarily has never ever in any of his lifetime before that ever generated a path? That is really the criteria for saying that this person is for definite Mahayana lineage. 
Khen Rinpoche: Correct.