Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L40.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:03.841764
================================================================================

In the Buddhist tantra, the body, this physical support of ours, can be looked in terms of three levels:
Coarse, 
Subtle 
Extremely subtle.
The coarse body refers to this physical support of ours which we can see with our eyes. The coarse body is established from the 4 elements (earth, water, fire, wind).
The subtle body refers to the channels, winds and drops that abide in the coarse body.
The extremely subtle body refers to the winds that are the mount of the four empties.
These are the three levels of the body.  Likewise there is a similar division for the mind.
The 5 senses consciousnesses can be posited as the coarse mind.  
Then the 6 root afflictions and the 20 secondary afflictions can be posited as the subtle mind.
The set of minds that are called the 80 indicative conceptions are also posited as the subtle mind.
So the 6 root afflictions, the 20 secondary afflictions and the 80 indicative conceptions are primarily mental consciousnesses.
The consciousnesses which are in the entities of the four empties essentially are posited as the extremely subtle mind. The four minds which we call them as four empties are:
The mind of appearance, 
The mind of increase, 
The mind of near attainment
The clear light of death.
In the division of consciousnesses or minds into the 3 levels:
The sense consciousnesses are coarse, 
The mental consciousnesses are obviously more subtle than the sense consciousnesses. 
Within the categories of mental consciousnesses there are also many different levels of subtleties, with the minds of the four empties which are posited as the extremely subtle mind
The four empties are mental consciousnesses and are much more subtle than the other mental consciousnesses.
You need to memorize these 3 levels of body and mind
Another way of classifying or dividing the body into:
the temporary coarse body or temporal coarse body 
the fundamental subtle body.
The body that has to be discarded at death and which we cannot carry with us to the next life, such a body is called the temporal coarse body.
The fundamental subtle body is the extremely subtle life sustaining wind.
Likewise, the mind is divided into:
the temporal mind
the fundamental mind.
The temporal mind basically includes everything else except clear light of death: 
the 5 sense consciousnesses, 
the 6 root afflictions, 
the 20 secondary afflictions 
the 80 indicative conceptions
the mind of appearance, 
the mind of increase, 
the mind of near attainment
All these are temporal minds.
There is this mind that is one entity with the extremely subtle wind is also referred to as the fundamental subtle mind or the fundamental mind.
Here in the unsurpassed yoga tantra, all the minds with the exception of clear light are considered to be temporal mind; these includes the 5 sense consciousnesses, the 6 root afflictions and 20 secondary afflictions, and even including the mind of appearance, the mind of increase, and the mind of near black attainment.  
The extremely subtle mind that is one entity with the life sustaining wind is the fundamental mind.
The fundamental wind and the fundamental mind are one entity and existed since beginningless lifetime. There is no beginning and this very thing that goes to enlightenment.  In terms of its entity, it will never change.
This extremely subtle mind that has no beginning and which goes to enlightenment is called by different names i.e. it is called the fundamental mind, the basic mind, and the enduring mind.
The sense consciousnesses, the afflictions and including the 80 indicative conceptions, and even including  the mind of appearance, the mind of increase, and the mind of near black attainment - are all considered to be temporal mind because they don't go beyond one specific life.
As I mentioned earlier on, sometimes the mind is divided into 3:
Coarse,
Subtle
Extremely subtle
The coarse mind being the 5 senses consciousnesses.
The subtle mind being the mental consciousnesses which includes the 80 indicative conceptions, the mind of appearance, the mind of increase and the mind of near attainment.
The only extremely subtle mind is the clear light.
There are different ways of classifying the different levels of mind and body.
Student 1: How does one understand the clear mind of death and the life sustaining wind as one entity and not contradictory?  One is death, one is life but they are one entity.
Khen Rinpoche: The extremely subtle life sustaining wind is the wind that is one entity with the clear light. The extremely subtle mind cannot exist without depending on the body.  When the extremely subtle mind leaves the body, then that is when the body starts to smell.
All the minds up to the mind of appearance, the mind of increase, and the mind of near attainment are considered to be coarse or temporal mind. 
Having said that, when imprints are come into being, where are they deposited? As to my personal opinion, of the two - the sense consciousness and the mental consciousness - the imprints are deposited on the mental consciousness. Since mental consciousness is considered to be temporal mind, as such the mental consciousness is the depository of the temporal imprints.
At the time of death, the coarser level of consciousnesses will dissolve. The mind becomes increasingly subtle.  As the mental consciousness dissolves into the mind of appearance and so forth, then the imprints that were deposited in the mental consciousness will also follows.
As the mental consciousnesses including all the conceptual thoughts, the 80 indicative conceptions, dissolve into the mind of appearance, then these consciousnesses abide in the entity in the form of potential. 
As the coarser level of consciousness dissolve into the mind of appearance, the imprints that were deposited in that mental consciousness also dissolve into the mind of appearance.
The mind of appearance which holds the imprints then dissolve into the mind of increase and then the imprints follows so on and so forth. It goes all the way culminating in the clear light.
At the end of the day all the predisposition or the imprints go into the extremely subtle mind.
Since this extremely subtle mind is the thing that goes to the next life, it has to be the carrier of the imprints.  As a person arises from this clear light of death and enters into the intermediate state, then the mind of near attainment of the reverse order become manifest. The substantial cause of that is the potential for this mind of near attainment which exists after the mind of near attainment of the forward process dissolve into the clear light.
From the clear light, again he arises from the clear light into the mind of near attainment of the reverse order.  The substantial cause of this mind is the mind of near attainment of the forward process that has dissolved earlier into the mind of clear light.
Khen Rinpoche: You have to squeeze your brain otherwise nothing goes inside. You have to squeeze harder.
Just before the clear light manifest, the mind of appearance, increase, near attainment dissolves into the extremely subtle mind. Those minds exist in the form of a potential (imprint) on the extreme subtle mind. All the imprints for the arising of those minds exist in the form of imprints carried by the extremely subtle mind. Because of those imprints are there, therefore you can have the mind of near attainment of the reverse order, follow by the mind of the increase of the reverse order, followed by the mind of appearance of the reverse order.
 If the potential (imprint) for arising of those minds did not exist in the first place, how could those minds arise? Where are those imprints stored? Where does the potential lies? You have to account for it. So we say that it exists in the clear light mind.
Khen Rinpoche: I am just saying my own idea. I don’t see anything in the text. I just let you know what I think. If you think is not correct and have a better idea, then must share that. Maybe if you have a better idea, we can learn more. That is wonderful. Doesn’t mean everything I say is correct. 
If we accept the placement of imprints, and the CMWS also accepts the imprints as well. If they accept, then there must be a place where the imprints are stored; the basis of infusion. In tantra, we talk about depositing of imprints as well. If there is such a thing for depositing imprints, there must be a basis of infusion. So it has to be mind. It has to be a consciousness. Between sense consciousness and mental consciousness it has to be mental consciousness. If you pursue the question, at the end of the day, what exactly is this basis of infusion? It either has to be coarse mind or subtle mind. There is quite a lot of stuffs to sort out.
Do you find any faults in what I have just said with regards to my own views about how the extremely subtle wind-mind is the basis of infusion?
Ven Gyurme: After you die, the imprints have to be transferred back to the mental consciousness, right?
Student 2:  In a way, it sounds similar to the mind-basis-of-all. Everything comes from there in the extremely subtle mind. Maybe you can clarify more on the differences. Of course the CMWS say that you cannot point and find it, whereas the MOS say you can still find the mind-basis-of-all. Besides that causality, is there any other difference? One that is more subtle. Can you shed more light on it? 
Khen Rinpoche: According to those proponents of MOS who assert foundational consciousness of mind-basis-of-all, between the sense and mental consciousness, the mind-basis-of-all is a mental consciousness. Within the mental consciousness, the mind-basis-of-all is slightly more subtle than the mental consciousness. This is just a philosophical assertion of the MOS; not that it exists inherently. It is a philosophical construct of that school. From that perspective, if you say that there is a mind-basis-of-all, still it is a coarse mind and not a subtle mind. Whereas in unsurpassed HYT we talk about the extremely subtle mind, and this is completely different. Even if you accept the existence of the mind-basis-of-all, the foundational consciousness as asserted by the MOS, still it is a coarse level of mental consciousness. It is a mental consciousness but it is coarse. If you compare that with the presentation of unsurpassed HYT, after the coarse mental consciousness there is still the mind of appearance, mind of increase, mind of near attainment. We have not reached the clear light yet. These minds are even more subtle than the general mental consciousness. After the mind of near attainment, only then is clear light, because the clear light is extremely subtle. This is something that is not explained in sutra. 
Student 3: The difficulty I have is the explanation about the clear light mind which is the extremely subtle mind that has the capacity to hold the imprints which then give rise to gross mind. It sounds like dharmakaya with stains.  So there must be something that is gross in the clear light mind for it to hold the imprints and then give rise to gross mind. This is my difficulty in accepting the explanation.
Khen Rinpoche: You have to remember that the fundamental mind, the clear light, is the root of samsara and nirvana. If you remember, then it is clear.  
When we talk about the clear light holding on to the imprints, the manner of holding on the imprints is that. The imprints are obviously coarse relative to the subtlety of the clear light mind. We will not say that the imprints abide in the nature of the clear light mind. Obviously not! The imprints are of different nature and are of separate in nature from the clear light. 
The thing that moves from life to life is the mind. Within that is the extremely subtle mind. What is the main cause of having experiences? It is because of the ripening of imprints. When imprints ripened then we get experiences. In order for the imprints to ripen, the imprints must be there in the first place. It must be carried from life to life. So what is it that carries the imprints?
It cannot be the body. Then it has to be the mind. Within the mind, which mind are you going to say is the carrier of the imprints? If you say that it is not the extremely subtle mind, then how do you account for the carrying of the imprints since it is the extremely subtle mind that moves from life-to-life.?
Why the minds of appearance, increase and near attainment arise again in the first place? Because the imprints for them exist as it has not been abandoned. If they are being abandoned, there is no more arising from the clear light. Why the minds of appearance, increase and near attainment manifest when the imprints are still there? The imprints are still there. Then the imprints are stored where? In the clear light mind! The minds of appearance, increase and near attainment are mental consciousnesses. They are subtle mental consciousnesses and are conceptual. Since they are conceptual, they possess the appearance of true existence. 
These are the minds of appearance, increase and near attainment. At the end of the day they are the subtle dualistic appearances. They cannot be abandoned until the extremely subtle mind is made to realize emptiness. So in order to overcome or to abandon these subtle dualistic appearances or true existence, the extremely subtle mind must be made to realize emptiness. That extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness is the antidote to the subtle dualistic appearances. This is one of the distinguishing or special features of unsurpassed HYT. 
Student 4: What are the functions of the mind of 80 indicative conceptions, the minds of appearance, increase and near attainment?
Khen Rinpoche: At the moment just the terms. For the time being, we just talk about the terms of the 3 minds and the 80 indicative conceptions.
Student 4: When the wisdom that directly realizing emptiness manifest, there is no appearance of inherent existence to the mind. During the post-meditative equipoise when wisdom directly realizing emptiness is not manifest, then the mind has the appearance of inherent existence. So when one manifests, the other does not manifest. Can you explain on this?
Khen Rinpoche: When you are asleep, nothing appears. When you wake up, everything appears. What is the difference? 
Student 4: In terms of strength, the wisdom that directly realizes emptiness alone or even if its accompanied by bodhicitta is not strong enough to eliminate this mind that has the appearance of inherent existence.
Ven Gyurme: Not strong enough?
Khen Rinpoche: What is other mind stronger than that?  Can you see any other mind which is stronger than that? Not possible. 
The question to think about is: 
The imprints are deposited on the clear light. If you say yes, is there any fault? 
How are the imprints deposited on the clear light?
If you say that it is not the clear light mind the basis of infusion, then what is?
Do imprints deposited on the sense consciousnesses or not? 
You have to think about it? Don’t just say yes or no.  
Can sense consciousnesses carry imprint or not? Why cannot? 
At the end of the day if we say the basis of infusion of all the imprints would be the clear light mind, is there any fault or not? Because that is the thing that moves from life to life. 
If you don’t posit the clear light as basis of infusion of all the imprints or the carrier of all the imprints, then what are you going to assert?
Having said that, what would be the manner of the depositing of the imprints?
As to the manner how the imprints are deposited, earlier on I have offered you my opinion. Is it ok or not? 
Our kind guru the founder Shakyamuni achieved enlightenment in Akanishta support. How did that happened? One way of explaining is that enlightenment is possible without necessarily possessing a support that has the white and red bodhicitta.
Let’s take the ‘no’ position that it is not necessarily to possess the white and red bodhicitta in order to achieve enlightenment. If we say yes, then we can say bodhisattvas in the last life before enlightenment have achieved the mastery over the four elements, so you can argue that they can come to possess the white and red bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: Anything you can say. How you like it. You must say correct otherwise is also difficult.
There is a kind of form called imputed form. Example would be the form that appears to the meditator who is viewing the whole world as being filled with skeletons. So that appearance of skeletons is posited as imputed form. 
In the Abhidharma-samuccaya  (Compendium of Knowledge), such a form is said to be a phenomenon-source form. The dream elephant that we see in our dream is also posited as phenomenon-source form. In the tantric practice, in the context of the generation stage practice, when a person who is on the generation stage makes offerings, he visualizes the offerings. There is appearance of the offering to the meditator’s mind. The meditator then emanates those offering. It exists as it appears to the meditator’s mind. So these are imputed forms. It is good to know this. Some people may think it is just fabrication and what is the point of doing the visualization.
Khen Rinpoche: People think it is non-existent. I am trying to prove it exists through the dream elephant. 
In the perspective of that person who is doing is visualization of the offering, there is something appearing to that person mind. It is a phenomena source form and it exists. It is form and it has to be phenomenon source form. If you think about this form, it is a fabrication of the mind. It is an imputation of though i.e. something imputed by thought. The appearance of those offering is something that can only posited in relation to a mental consciousness. It can only appear to mental consciousness. It doesn’t appear to our sense consciousness.
Dream elephant exist or not? Exist, right? 
Khen Rinpoche: Exist? Or doesn’t exist?
Student 5:   Let’s talk about the offering. The bodhisattva visualizes the offering and the offering is the phenomena source form. But before that bodhisattva has that ability to actually has that clear appearance of that offering, this person must have trained conceptually i.e. has a conceptual consciousness apprehending this beautiful offering. For that conceptual consciousness, there is a meaning generality. Is there also a phenomena source form of that offering? This person actually thinks these two are the same. That is why there is a mistake. Is this what it means by conceptual consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche: I think so.
Student 5: If the person is actually having conceptual consciousness apprehending, says, beautiful flower, then there is a phenomena source form of flowers and also a meaning generality of the flower. This person actually thinks these are the same therefore there is a mistake. 
Let’s say, this person now change the object of apprehension, which is a permanent phenomenon, for example, emptiness. So there is a conceptual consciousness apprehending emptiness. So there is a meaning generality of emptiness. Is there emptiness? Because emptiness cannot be phenomena source form, right? So there are two phenomena appearing to this conceptual consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche: The emptiness and the appearance of emptiness are not the same.
Student 5: I was just thinking in term of conceptual consciousness on emptiness, the emptiness does appear, right? There is a meaning generality of emptiness. So this person think these two are the same, that is why is mistaken. Just now I talked about flowers and emptiness. Now if it is the horns of a rabbit.
Ven Gyurme:  It is non-existent.
Student 5: Yeah, it is a non-existent. The meaning generality is the meaning generality of a horn of a rabbit. That one is existent. But is a phenomenon source form of the horn of a rabbit. There is. So I can actually make horn of a rabbit happen.
Khen Rinpoche: It is clearly mentioned in the text the dream elephant is a phenomena source form. If you can accept that then?
Student 5: Is dream is necessary non-conceptual?
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah.
This discussion of the phenomena source form and imputed form using the visualized offerings as an illustration might be helpful to help us to overcome that fault of thinking that all these visualizations are just kind of visualizations and it doesn’t accumulate merit.
The visualized offerings are phenomenon source form and it exists in the perspective of that mind. It is something that is created by the mind. So when you create it comes into being. So the more you create then the more you have. So the more you visualize the more benefits.  I seems to remember that it is mentioned somewhere in the Lamrim that the visualized offerings are the offerings of the sharp facultied bodhisattvas.
Khen Rinpoche: You saw that? I think somewhere in the Lamrim. You don’t have energy then you ask question. If you have energy then I talk more. Actually these few classes I really didn’t talked much from the text book. If you have energy, then you listen another twenty minutes. No energy then asks questions. Whatever you must have some energy there otherwise I read, you feel boring also no point.
Student 5: At the point of clear light of death, this subtlest mind actually manifest for ordinary people like us. What is the mind aware of?
Khen Rinpoche: It is said that there is appearance of vacuity to the clear light of death.  There is debate as to whether the person ascertains the vacuity or not. Most people say that is an awareness to which an object appears but not ascertained. 
That experience is somewhat similar to direct perception of emptiness. Because in the direct perception of emptiness, the appearance wise of that mind directly perceiving emptiness is just an appearance of space. That is why it is called space-like meditative equipoise. So it is an appearance of vacuity. In that sense the clear light of death is like experience what is appearing to it.
In the clear light of death all the dualistic appearances have subsided. There is only appearance of vacuity. There is no feeling of pleasure or pain because feelings are considered coarse and have already been dissolved much earlier on. Even the minds of white appearance, red increase and black near attainment have completely dissolved. So it is an appearance of vacuity.
So there is an appearance of vacuity, you can say that there is an appearance of a truly existence vacuity. There are some people who assert that emptiness appears. But majority says that it is an appearance of vacuity and there is no appearance of emptiness. This vacuity appears as truly existent. 
Student 6: In tantra it always mentions to utilize bliss to help us to ascertain or better understand emptiness. It is also says that bliss is also a feeling, a coarse mind. How is that we are using the coarse mind to try to understand something that is very subtle? Does that mean that the whenever there is clear light or when you directly perceive emptiness you will naturally develop blissfulness? In that sense, how to explain when the coarse and subtle come together? 
Ven Gyurme:  I think the question arises because of not being exactly sure what exactly the wisdom of bliss.
Basically bliss or joy need not be something that is coarse. This will come later on in the text. There is the explanation of the mind of the four empties:
Empty 
Very empty 
Great empty 
All empty
The mind of the four empties correspond to the mind of  appearance , the mind of increase, the mind of near attainment and the mind of clear light respectively. They are all empty. That is why it is sometimes called the all empty clear light. 
Likewise there are the four joys. The four joys are subtle, and are not coarse level of feeling. 
The four joys are:
Joy
Supreme joy 
Exalted joy 
Simultaneously born joy
You need to know these things in the future.
For the meditator who at the very advanced level, there is an explanation of generating these four joys and then connecting it to the mind of the four empties.
We will do the death dissolution process on the stages of the dissolution at the time of death on next lesson.
Student 6: How does vacuity look like? 
Khen Rinpoche: At death time you see. 
Student 6: That is something very fearful because that is something unknown which I only see upon death. If I don’t recognize, then it will be AAA then go to rebirth. 
Khen Rinpoche: In the text, this appearance of vacuity is likened to an autumn sky at the time of dawn. It is the sky at the time of dawn in autumn that is not polluted by moonlight, sunlight or the pitch black darkness.  
They say it is like the sky at the time of dawn that is not polluted by sunlight, moonlight or pitch black darkness when you looked at it on the 29th day of the 9th Tibetan month. 
Khen Rinpoche: I think Singapore has but you don’t see. You see only inside the room, outside you don’t see.
Student 6: As you mentioned the best of offerings is by visualization but people like me who have a lot of obscuration can’t visualize anything clear at all. What is the best thing to help us to have a clear visualization so to make a good offering? Basically when I close my eyes and try to visualize, it is pitch dark. 
Khen Rinpoche: I think the main problem is obscuration. Obscuration is an unfavorable condition. So putting effort into purifying the negativities and obscuration are very important. There are other things like lifestyle and the kind of food that you eat. If you eat food that makes the mind and body heavy then it would have an effect on the mind ability. It will hinder the visualization or thinking. You must also pretty much rested and the body has to be in good shape. If you try to do these things after a whole day of work and you are tired, then it is not going to work. 
Khen Rinpoche: So many things needed. 
Student 6: What sort of food? To be more specific so that can help us.
Khen Rinpoche: That is why in the lower tantra, the vegetarian diet is very much emphasized. If you adopt a vegetarian diet definitely helps to make the mind clearer. Of course no binge eating as well i.e. no sense of control over the amount of food that you eat. It is advised in the teaching that we should only eat the stomach to be two third are filled and one third empty.
So lifestyle and all of these matters. If you have practiced to a level where your mind has gained mastery over the body, then is a different thing. For us, our body governs our mind. Since our coarser level of consciousness has to depend on the coarse body therefore the food intake and having sufficient rest and so forth make a huge difference to the quality of our mind.
Another thing to be done is the bath offering with the appropriate visualization. It is mentioned briefly in the Lamrim that this will helps to make the mind clearer. If the bath offering practice is done with the appropriate visualization and done repeatedly, then over a period of time definitely you can experience the benefit.
Having clarity of visualization is difficult for everyone. There is no exception and nobody starts with clear visualization. The mind can progress if you keep at it provided all the conditions are there. You have to sustain the conditions over a period of time together with the effort then you can see change. Then you have to change your lifestyle, the food intake, sleep, rest, visualization, purification, all these sustained over a period of time then we can talk about change.
In the teachings that is why they do explain taking the one’s breathing as an object of focus. When you are trying to develop concentration you need to still the mind. If you focus on the breath and be mindful, it helps to calm the mind.
Student 6: Can I request Khen Rinpoche to give us a teaching on bath offering? Please? Thank you.
The thing to think about is in tantra, what is the basis of infusion of imprints? How are the imprints are deposited?
Khen Rinpoche: This is your homework to think.