Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L41.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.947178
================================================================================

A human being of the Southern Continent who is born from the womb possesses the six constituents is the basis for practising unsurpassed yoga tantra. 
There are different ways of enumerating the six constituents. 
[ • One way of counting them is the four elements (earth, water, fire and wind), the channels and drops. 
  • Another way of positing:  the three that we receive from the father (bone, marrow and semen) and the three received from the mother (blood, flesh and skin). 
Besides the four elements (earth, water, fire and wind), there is also the presentation of the channels and winds and drops.
It is said that the human being who possesses such a body with the channels and winds and drops is a special support for the practice of tantra.
With regards to the channels possessed by such a human being, there are the three main channels:
the central channel 
the left channel
the right channel
From the three main channels, it then breaks down into more channels. So it is said that we possessed 72,000 of these channels.  
How does a person who possesses these six constituents die? 
When the death process starts, all the winds in the 72,000 channels of the body gradually gather into the right and the left channels. 
Then the winds in the right and left channels then gather into the central channel. 
Even then, death has not yet occurred. 
Death only occurs after the winds in the central channel gather and dissolve into the indestructible drop (that is made up of the very fine white and red bodhicitta) in the center of the heart chakra.
When the winds are dissolved into the indestructible drop, the clear light of death occurs. 
If you remembered what we have talked about in the previous lesson, the minds can be divided into:
the temporal mind 
the fundamental mind
When all the winds dissolve in the indestructible drop, only then will the coarser levels of consciousnesses, the temporal minds, cease.
Only when the temporal minds are ceased, the fundamental mind can manifest, which is the clear light of death.
When the mind of death is manifest that is when the basis dharmakaya is manifest. 
We talked about this recently. The clear light of death is also given the name the basis dharmakaya or the basis of purification.
If this fundamental mind, the clear light of death, is not transformed into the entity of the path, i.e. when it remains as ordinary, after that the intermediate state will come into existence. Once you have the ordinary intermediate state, then you are going to have rebirth in samsara.
For that advanced yogi or meditator, at the time of death, there is the mixing of the mother and son clear light. When the clear light of death is manifest, that mediator is able to transform into the entity of the path in that he manages to ascertain emptiness with that fundamental mind. When that happens, then in place of the intermediate state, he arises instead as the illusory body.
It is said that the person who is able to ascertain emptiness with this extremely subtle mind will definitely achieve enlightenment in that support. As such, you can understand how this extremely subtle wind mind is the root of samsara, and it is also the root of nirvana (full enlightenment).
What is meant by the mixing of the mother and son clear light? 
The mother clear light refers to the extremely subtle mind.
The son clear light refers to emptiness.
So the mixing of the mother and son clear light means when the extremely subtle mind ascertains emptiness.
If you look at the sutra, the very essence of the entire sutra path or teaching is about delineating the object emptiness, or what exactly emptiness is and coming to settle on the view of that. This basically what the son clear light is referring to. 
The object emptiness is essentially the objective clear light. Of the two - objective clear light and subjective clear light- the primary focus of sutra is to delineate the object emptiness which is the objective clear light.  However, the main focus of tantra is the subjective clear light i.e. the subject, the extremely subtle mind.
[BP1: When we talk about clear light, we have to understand that we can look at clear light in terms of it being an object or a consciousness: 
• The objective (object) clear light refers to emptiness which is the mere negation of true existence. 
• The subjective (subject) clear light refers to the subtle wisdom which has emptiness as its object. ]
Human body of the Southern Continent essentially is made up with the nature of the four elements. Since it is a product of the aggregation (coming together) of the elements, so at the time of death i.e. when death happens, it involves a breakdown of the elements i.e. dissolving of the elements, so to speak. 
It is important to know the death process i.e. the cumulating in the clear light of death because the whole purpose of meditating on taking death as the path of the dharmakaya is to overcome ordinary death. Such a meditation involves meditation on the aspect that is concordant with death. As such, without knowing the death process, there is no way to do the practice of taking death as the path of the dharmakaya.
How does a human being born from the womb possessing six constituents actually die? 
Death occurs through the dissolution of the 25 coarse phenomena.
The 25 coarse phenomena are:  
First, there are the five aggregates - form, feeling, discrimination, compositional factors and consciousness. 
Second, there are four elements - earth, water, wind and fire. 
Third, there are the six sources (or six sense powers) - the eye sense powers, ear sense power, nose sense power, tongue sense power, body sense power and mental sense power
Fourthly, there are the five objects - form, sound, smell, taste and tactility. 
Fifth: There are the five wisdoms. Generally, when we talk about the five wisdoms, we mainly are referring to the five wisdoms of enlightenment. In this context here we are talking about the five wisdoms of the basis. They may have the same name but they are not the five actual wisdoms but are the five wisdoms of the basis. 
The five wisdoms of the basis - Mirror light wisdom, wisdom of equality, wisdom of investigation, wisdom of accomplishment and the wisdom of the sphere of the reality (dharmadhatu). 
When these 25 coarse phenomena are dissolved, only then will death occur.
First stage of dissolution:
The aggregate of form dissolves. Together with it, there are four other phenomena that are dissolved. 
So, at the beginning in the first stage of dissolution, there are five factors or five phenomena that are dissolving. 
Of the five aggregates, the first that dissolve is the aggregate of form. 
Of the four elements, the first to dissolve is earth element. 
Of the six sense powers, the first to dissolve is the eye sense power. 
Of the five objects, the first to dissolve is form. 
Of the five wisdoms, the first to dissolve is the mirror like wisdom.
So these are the five factors that are dissolved during the first stage of dissolution. 
When the aggregate of form starts to dissolve, what are the external signs of such dissolution? 
The body feels heavy, the hands and the legs starts to become thinner, and the ability to move is very much reduced i.e. you are not able to move the body. 
Of the five wisdoms, the mirror like wisdom also dissolves here. What is this mirror like wisdom? 
There is an explanation for it but in this context here, it primarily refers to the sense consciousnesses in that the sense consciousnesses are like a mirror, just as how all objects are reflected in the mirror. A variety of objects appear to the mirror like wisdom or basically to the sense consciousnesses. 
Here, we are talking about the eye consciousness - visual forms. It is said that at this stage, one’s vision becomes unclear as visually things are not so clear. 
Due to the dissolution of the earth element, it is said that the body becomes thinner. Experientially wise this person might feel very heavy and as if he is sinking into the ground. This is what the person is said to experience at the time of death.
Of the six sense powers, the eye sense power dissolves. When eye sense power dissolves, then one loses the ability to blink i.e. one doesn’t have the leisure or freedom to open and close the eyes. So when the process start, the eye either open or close.
Of the five objects, form is dissolved. The form that is included in one’s continuum dissolves. When that dissolves one’s body loses that vitality.
So these are the external signs that are related to those factors or phenomena dissolving. 
Internally, the sign of the dissolution is that one experiences the vision of a mirage.
As for the meaning of earth element dissolving into water element, then the next element to dissolve in the 2nd stage is the water element. So the earth is dissolving into the water and the earth loses its potential (capacity). In relative to that, the water acts kind of a support for consciousness that comes to the forefront. 
Since the eye sense power is the empowering condition for an eye consciousness, so when the eye sense power dissolves, the eye consciousness becomes inability to function. In order for these elements and the sense powers to act as the basis for the production or arising of consciousness, we must have accumulated the karma. When the karma for these factors to act as support for consciousness is exhausted, then the consciousnesses that exist in dependence on these supports will also cease to exist. 
What you have to be certain is to memorize the internal signs of dissolution. The internal sign of dissolution for the 1st stage of the death process is the vision of a mirage. 
Second stage of dissolution 
The next five starts with the aggregate of feeling and those phenomena that are included in it. 
When the aggregate of feeling dissolves, between the two - the mental factor of feeling in the retinue of a sense consciousness and the mental factor of feeling in the retinue of a mental consciousness - here it is the mental factor of feeling in the retinue of a sense consciousness that is dissolving. When the aggregate of feelings dissolves, one’s mental consciousness cannot experience the feelings of pain, pleasure or equanimity in the retinue of the sense consciousness. 
The wisdom of equality refers to the mind that is mindful or that know the feelings of pain, pleasure and equanimity. So when the wisdom of equality dissolves, one is not able to recognize or remember the feelings of pain, pleasure or equanimity in the retinue of the mental consciousness. Those are the external signs with regards to the dissolution of the wisdom of equality. 
As for the four elements, the water element is dissolving. The external sign is the bodily fluid dry up but not completely such as very much lessening of saliva and the bodily fluids like semen, blood, urine and so forth are essentially dry up. 
Of the 6 sense powers, the ear sense power also dissolves. When that happens, one cannot hear any external or internal sounds. 
Of the 5 objects, the sound which is included in one’s continuum dissolves. When the sound dissolves, the internal buzz (sound) in the ear is gone.
So those are the external signs of dissolution associated with those 5 different factors. 
Internally, the sign is that one experiences the smoke like vision. It is not that there actually smoke is arising but it is just that it is the appearance to the consciousness. It is just like certain fire produces a lot of smoke and is smoky kind of vision to the mind; not the eye.
Third stage of dissolution 
We start with the aggregate of discrimination and the factors that are connected with it. 
When the aggregate of discrimination dissolves one cannot remember one’s close relatives, friends, or parents. 
Of the five wisdoms of the basis, the wisdom of individual investigation of the basis is the mind that is mindful of “this is my so and so, this is his name” and so forth.  When this wisdom of individual investigation of the basis dissolves one is not able to remember the names of the people who are close to you in that life, your friends, close friends, relatives, parents.
Of the four elements, when the element of fire dissolves the bodily heat dissipates. It is said that all the capacity to digest food and drinks is lost. 
Of the six sense powers, it is the nose sense power that dissolves at this time. When that happens, the inhalation becomes weak. In terms of frequency, inhalation is lesser than exhalation, i.e. one exhales more. Also exhalation is more forceful and inhalation is very weak. 
Of the 5 objects, the smell included in one’s continuum dissolves. Due to that, one is not able to experience the smell, i.e. not able to smell literally. 
Internally, the sign of dissolution is said to be a vision of fire sparks. Sometimes it is said it is like the vision of fireflies. How the text describes is like seeing sparks and fireflies. I guess when the fireworks explode in the sky, you see all the sparklers. So the internal sign of the vision of sparks actually do occur at the time of death. 
What you should memorize are the internal signs. 
Fourth stage of dissolution 
Next you have the aggregate of compositional factors and four other things that dissolve. 
When the aggregate of compositional factors dissolves, you cannot do any physical action with your body as there are no way you can move.
Of the 5 wisdoms of the basis, the wisdom of activities or accomplishments dissolves. The wisdom of activity (or accomplishment) of the basis is the consciousness that is mindful of general activities of life “I need to do this. I’m doing this activity. I’m doing this for this purpose” and so forth.   When this wisdom of activities of the basis dissolves then one will not be mindful or one will not be able to remember “There are these activities. I’m doing for this purpose” and so forth. 
Of the 4 elements, the wind element dissolves. The explanation of the winds is in terms of:
the 5 root winds 
the 5 branch winds.
One of the root winds is the life sustaining wind. Of the life sustaining wind, there are two:
Coarse
Subtle
There are these 10 winds: 5 root winds and 5 are branch winds. 
The 5 root winds are:
Life sustaining wind (coarse and subtle)
Downward voiding wind
Upward voiding wind
Pervading wind
Equally-abiding wind
As for the place where the winds are primarily abides at,
the life sustaining wind is at the heart, 
the downward voiding wind is at the navel, 
the upward voiding wind is at the throat
the pervading wind is at the joints
As for the downward voiding wind and the equally abiding wind, I need to sort out which one is at the navel and which one is at secret place. I will check. 
Then there are the 5 branch winds which essentially are the winds that cross through the five sense doors (sense powers). 
The five branch winds are:
The moving wind
The intensely-moving wind
The perfectly-moving wind
The strongly-moving wind
The definitely-moving wind
At the time of death, when the wind element dissolves, these winds are transferred to the heart chakra. Externally, there is no breathing anymore i.e. the person stops breathing. 
Then the tongue sense power dissolves. When that happens, the tongue will thicken and become shorter as well. One is not able to experience any taste. 
At the same time, the body sense power also dissolves. 
In term of the object, the touch or the tactility also dissolves. 
For the 4th stage dissolution, there are 7 factors instead of just 5 factors. In the first three stages, there has 5, 5, 5 and here there are 7.
The internal sign is said to be the appearance of a flame. Some texts explain it is the appearance of the sputtering flame of a butter lamp when the flame of the butter lamp is about to goes out. Sometimes it is described as the sputtering flame of a butter lamp but another explanation is about the glow; just like a big container with the wick near to its end which you don’t really see the flame but seeing the glow emitting from the container.
When the earth element dissolves into water, the ability of the earth element to acts as the support for consciousness deteriorates. Then the water element comes to the forefront and acts as the support for the consciousness. 
When the water element dissolve, its ability to acts as the support for consciousness deteriorate. Then the fire element acts as the support.
When the fire element dissolve, its ability to acts as the support for consciousness deteriorate. Then the wind element acts as the support.
When the coarser wind dissolve, the coarser consciousness that it support also dissolve.
At this time the sense consciousnesses dissolve.
Within the mental consciousnesses, the coarse mental consciousnesses such as the 6 root afflictions and 20 secondary consciousnesses dissolve. 
At the 4th stage dissolution, of the four elements, the wind element dissolve, but by this time, there is no sense consciousness. Also within the mental consciousnesses, the 6 roots and the 20 secondary afflictions are dissolved. Perhaps, I would think at this time the 80 indicative conceptions also dissolve. 
From the worldly secular point of view, this is when death occurs because there is no more breathing. We call it clinical death.  At this time, people would associate this is death because the person is not moving and is not breathing anymore. As such the person is considered to be dead. However, from the tantric perspective, in particular the unsurpassed yoga tantric perspective, the person is still not dead but is dying. At this point in time, the coarser mind has been dissolved including the 80 indicative conceptions. But this is still not the end as there are other subtler levels of mind that are yet to dissolve. What are there? They are the mind of white appearance, the mind of red increase and the mind of black near attainment.
Fifth stage of dissolution 
At the 4th stage of dissolution, when the wind element dissolves, all the coarser levels of mind up to the 80 indicative conceptions are dissolving. These 80 indicative conceptions dissolve into the mind of appearance. Internally the person is said to experience whitish appearance. At this stage anymore, there is no more external sign. There is only internal sign which is the whitish appearance. 
Sixth stage of dissolution 
When the mind of appearance dissolves into the mind of increase, internally the person experiences reddish appearance. 
Seventh stage of dissolution 
When the mind of increase dissolves into the mind of near attainment, internally the person experiences pitch black darkness. This pitch black darkness is experienced during the period when the person is conscious because when the mind of black near attainment is manifest, it is said to consist of two periods:
Conscious period - During the conscious period, there is this pitch black darkness.
Unconscious period – When the conscious period subsides, then one becomes really unconscious and is not even mindful of any appearance of this darkness.
Eight stage of dissolution 
When one regains consciousness from that unconscious state, then the clear light of death manifests. By this time, only the extremely subtle life sustaining wind is present. Other than that all the other levels of wind and energy have completely dissolved. 
This clear light of death does not possess any coarse dualistic appearances and is completely devoid of any whitish appearance, reddish appearance or pitch black darkness. It is just an appearance of vacuity. The appearance is similar to what appears in the perspective of the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness. 
It is said that some individual who has understanding or realization of emptiness are able to enter into meditation on emptiness when the clear light of death is manifest. 
What you have to remember is the internal signs of the dissolution. 
When the earth element dissolves, there is the vision of mirage. 
When the water element dissolves, there is the vision of smoke.
When the fire element dissolves, there is the vision of sparks.
When the wind element dissolves, there is the appearance of the flame of the butter lamp.
Then follow by white appearance, red appearance and the appearance of pitch black darkness
Then culminating in the appearance of vacuity 
So, these are the 8 visions or appearances.
When the mind of death, the clear light of death, manifests, that refer to as death. Death is that mind. It is said that generally for most ordinary people, while it is not necessarily so, can remain in that state for up to 3 days. Some consciousnesses seem to abide in the body for a longer period of time. However, the text says that generally ordinary people may stay up to 3 days.
Student 1: Regarding the five resolutions of the elements, can the dissolution of the elements be reversed or stopped? The reason I asked this question is because I heard a story many years ago that one of the Kopan monks was experiencing the vision of the mirage. Khensur Rinpoche Lama Lhundup heard about it and gave advice for pujas to be done and the monk recovered. I wonder whether there is a point where the dissolution of the elements can be stopped. Related to this, we hear of people experiencing near death experiences such as on the operating table, they stop breathing. They report that they have this experience of going into the clear light; not clear light according to the Dharma but the experience of going into the light and then they come back. They actually see themselves going back to their body. In term of the dissolution of the elements where does such an experience fit in?
Khen Rinpoche: I will talk about that next class. 
QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION ON SUNDAY, 24 SEPTEMBER 2017
What are the Causal Ripening Empowerments and Path Liberating Empowerments?
(a)  It is said that, all unsurpassed yoga tantras are tantras of non-dual method and wisdom. What does that mean?
(b) When divided, there are father and mother tantras. How are they divided into father and mother tantra?
(a) In unsurpassed yoga tantra, what is posited to be the coarse, subtle and extremely subtle minds? 
(b) Among these bases of the three levels of minds - the coarse, subtle and extremely subtle minds - which are the minds in which imprints are deposited? Are the imprints deposited on all these levels of minds or just some of them?
(a) How is the extremely subtle wind-mind the root of samsara?
(b) How is the extremely subtle wind-mind the basis for achieving enlightenment?
\