Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L42.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:19.798711
================================================================================

In the last session, we looked at how the 25 coarse phenomena dissolve in stages during the time of dying. At the time of death, 8 signs will arise and the signs occur due to power of karma. 
The death process begins with the dissolution of the earth element into the water element. When that happens the earth element loses its ability to act as a support for consciousness and its ability to support the consciousness is moved to the water element.  
When the earth element dissolves into the water element, internally the person experiences a mirage-like vision; just like seeing a body of water where in fact there is no water there.  
Next the water element dissolves into the fire element. When that happens, the water element loses its ability to act as a support for the consciousness, whereas the ability to support consciousness for fire element is manifested.  
Internally the person experiences a smoke-like vision, just like a lot of smoke coming out of the chimney at the top of the house.
Khen Rinpoche: You don’t have smoke here so you don’t know. 
It is said in the teaching that these internal signs will appear when we die.
When the fire element dissolves into the wind element, the fire element loses its ability to act as a support for the consciousness.  Then it will come a time when the wind element acts as a support for the consciousness.  When that happens, internally it is said that the person will experience firefly-like vision; just like bugs with glowing bodies hovering in the sky at night.
When the fire element dissolves into wind element, the body heat dissipates. The warmth in the limbs such hand and leg and the rest of the body disappear.
When the wind element dissolves into consciousness, the normal inhalation and exhalation starts to stop i.e. the person stops breathing. Internally the person will experience the vision of the butter lamp flame. Sometimes it is being described as the person will have the vision of the glow of the butter lamp, i.e. one doesn’t see so much of the flame but glow.
During this phase of dissolution, the sense consciousnesses have already stopped. The mental consciousness such as the 6 root afflictions and the 20 secondary afflictions are not manifested but are stopped. From the tantric perspectives, there is a set of what we called the 80 indicative conceptions are also ceased during this phase.
If we divide consciousness into coarse and subtle,
Course consciousness - all the senses consciousness, mental consciousness, the 6 roots afflictions, the 20 secondary afflictions and the 80 indicative conceptions
Subtle consciousness - mind of appearance, mind of increase, mind of near attainment and clear light.
One is considered to be dead by the world during the phase when the wind dissolved into the consciousness in which all the breathing stop.  
During this phase, all coarse consciousness would have started to cease.
At this phase the 80 indicative conceptions are also dissolved, which means that the ability to engage with object disappear. These 80 indicative conceptions which essentially is the coarse mental consciousness dissolve into the mind of appearance. This mind of appearance is much more subtle when compared to the 80 indicative conceptions and the coarse consciousnesses.
When the consciousness dissolves into the mind of appearance, internally the person will experiences a whitish appearance; likened to the clear autumn night sky that is pervaded by white light or moon light. 
It is said that to this mind of white appearance, only this vacuity is filled with white light appears and nothing else appear. Such a mind is given the name of the mind of white appearance and is also referred to the mind of empty.
We have the 3 main channels:
Central channel
Left channel
Right channel
The winds in all the other channels in our body enter into the left and right channels. 
Then the winds from the left and right channels enter into central channel starting from the upper end channels. 
As the winds enter into the central channel from the upper end, the white bodhicitta which we inherited from our father, which mainly resides in the crown, start to descend in the central channel to just the point above the heart chakra where there is a channel knot. 
Due to the flow of the white bodhicitta down the central channel, internally one will experience the whitish appearance.  This whitish appearance does not exist outside but rather it is a just appearance to the mind.
At the time of death, the process happens due to the karma. The winds from the left and right channel enter the central channel from the upper point. When that happens, the white bodhicitta (in the nature of liquid) at the crown flows down the central channel to the point just reaching channel knot above the heart chakra.  This is the condition for experiencing the whitish appearance internally.
Then the mind of appearance dissolves into the mind of increase; which is a more subtle mind compared to the mind of appearance.
When this happen, internally one experience the red appearance; which is likened to a clear autumn sky that is pervaded by sunlight. It is said that this experience is more intense than the earlier white appearance.
There is a greater sense of feeling or appearance of vacuity and more clarity as regards to the red appearance.
What is the condition for this reddish appearance?  
The winds below the heart chakra enter into the central channel from the chakra at the secret place. 
As the winds enter, the channel knot at the secret place is untied and released. The wind flow up to the navel chakra and the channel knots there are untied.
Inside the navel chakra, there is a red bodhicitta which we inherited from our mother. So the navel chakra is the main place where this red bodhicitta is located. The red bodhicitta is said to be in the nature of fire. 
With the release of the channel knot at the navel chakra, this red bodhicitta moves up to the central channel just to the point that is below the heart chakra. This is the condition for the internal sign of this red appearance.  This appearance is likened to clear autumn sky pervaded by red light. This is just to convey the experience via an example.  It is just an internal appearance to the mind, not as if that someone is looking something at the outside. 
By now all the coarse conventional appearances have already dissolved.  To the mind of increase, nothing else appears except the vacuity that is pervaded by this reddish light.
The mind of white appearance is sometimes referred to as the mind of empty or empty mind. 
The mind of red increase is the mind of the very empty or the very empty mind.  
Here we are talking about the 4 empties.
Then the mind of increase dissolves into the mind of near attainment; which is a much subtle mind. When that happen internally there is this appearance of darkness.  This is likened to a clear autumn night sky that is pitch black darkness.
Prior to this, the white bodhicitta and red bodhicitta have arrived at just above and below the heart chakra inside the central channel. There are channel knots there. Due to force of karma, when the channel knots are untied, the winds move into the heart chakra and inside the heart chakra. Then there is the appearance of pitch black darkness.
It is said that during the initial phase of the arising of this appearance of pitch black darkness, there is still some awareness of that appearance.
There is white and red bodhicitta just above and below the heart chakra. As the white and red bodhicitta on top and below at the central channel touches and dissolve into the extremely subtle wind indestructible drop at the heart, I think that is where the phase of the mind of near attainment starts. It is said it is like when you are faint, you are completely unconscious. This is when the red and white bodhicitta touch the indestructible drop. 
The mind of the near attainment is composed of two phases:
The earlier part is the phase when one is still aware or conscious.
The latter half is when one is unconscious. As to how long this phase last, it is not clear.  
It is mentioned in some texts that the longer this phase of unconscious near attainment is then the clear light that one arises into thereafter experience is more powerful and clearer. 
Khen Rinpoche: Maybe like that you sleep very deep, 10 hours, wake up maybe more fresh mind or not. Or still the same? Normally when one sleeps well, the mind is more fresh. 
Within this unconscious state, then the extremely subtle wind is stirred. As such, the extremely subtle mind manifests and functions; so to speak. That is the clear light of death and that is death. 
At the time of the basis, the subsequent clear light of death only happens during death; at the end of the death dissolution process. This means that the only time when the mind of the clear light is manifest, the time of basis is during death. Otherwise, it doesn’t manifest and doesn’t function. 
What appears to it when this mind is manifest? It is vacuity that is very clear likened to a very clear autumn sky that is not pervaded by moonlight, sunlight or darkness and is not covered by clouds. It is very clear. Prior to the clear light manifesting, the minds of appearance, increase, and near attainment is already dissolved. This means that the appearances that are associated with those minds will not exist.
There is a very clear appearance of vacuity that is not polluted by those three appearances. It is also likened to the experience of someone who is realizing emptiness directly.
The clear light of death manifests because the white bodhicitta which resides primarily at the crown and the red bodhicitta primarily resides at the navel are already met at the heart and dissolve into the indestructible drop at the heart. Together with that, all the winds in the body have already dissolved into the extremely subtle life sustaining wind. As a result of that, the clear light of death manifest. With this, there is this experience or appearance. 
The mind of near attainment is also called the great empty mind or mind of great empty. 
This clear light of death is the mind of death. It is clear light and it is also called the all empty. 
In the expression empty, very empty, great empty and all empty, in the context of these four expressions, the word empty does not refer to the emptiness of the object of negation, true existence. But rather the word empty refers to the absence of the coarse appearance which precedes it. 
As one goes through the empties, each is more subtle than the earlier one.
It is the absence of the coarser appearances that comes with those coarser levels of mind. So you have to understand empty in this context to mean empty of those coarse appearances.
When we talk about death, death refers to the mind of clear light –the clear light of death. This is what the actual death is. This clear light of death is the basis dharmakaya. 
Then there is this appearance of vacuity to this clear light of death. This appearance of vacuity to this clear light of death is given the name the basis nature body.
The mind that takes this vacuity as an object is given the name the basis wisdom truth body. 
You need to be clear and understand the stages of dissolution, the manner in which the winds are gathered, and the appearances which arise in the whole process, in particular you have to memorize the 8 internal signs. 
From the 25 coarse phenomena there are the 5 wisdoms of the basis.
1st stage of dissolution, the mirror-like wisdom refers to the sense consciousnesses to which a variety of appearances arise to. 
2nd stage of dissolution, the wisdom of equality of the basis refers to the mind that is mindful of pleasure, pain and unspecified feelings as feelings. I have talked about it in the previous session. 
3rd stage of dissolution - the wisdom of individual investigation of the basis refers to the mind that remember the names of one’s parents, people who are close to, one’s relatives and loved ones. 
4th stage of dissolution - the wisdom of accomplishment of the basis is the mind that is mindful what needs to be done “This to be done. This shouldn’t be done”. 
At the time when the wind dissolves into consciousness which is the 4th stage, the mirror-like wisdom, wisdom of the quality, wisdom of individual investigation, the wisdom of activity or accomplishment have already ceased.
Out of the 5 wisdoms, 4 have dissolved. 
5th stage of dissolution - the wisdom of the sphere of reality (or dharmadhatu) is the mind or the consciousness that is suitable to be transformed into the dharmakaya. 
I think we could say almost for sure that the minds of appearance, increase and near attainment are conceptual. 
Then what about clear light? Do we have to classify it either in conceptual or non-conceptual or that could be both? 
You could probably talk about clear light in term of some being conceptual and some being non-conceptual. The reason being that at the end of the final mental isolation when the meditator achieves the example clear light, which essentially the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness. 
Does he realize emptiness directly? No. So this means it is conceptual.
So is extremely subtle mind of clear light realizing emptiness? Not directly. 
The clear light of death which arises the clear light of the basis. That is called the mother of clear light. There is a discussion or debate as to whether this is a fully characterized or fully qualified clear light or not? There are different positions. 
If you say it is not, then you are going take the position that in order for it to be fully qualified or fully characterized clear light, it has to be extremely subtle mind of clear light realizing emptiness. 
The clear light can be divided into:
Objective clear light refers to the object emptiness and subtle emptiness
Subjective clear light (the extremely subtle mind of clear light) is the mind that takes the subtle emptiness as its object
If that is the case, it follows that in order for it to be a fully qualified clear light it has to be clear light that realizing emptiness. 
An ordinarily a person is pronounced dead when the person stops breathing. For us the actual death is when the clear light of death manifests. 
How long does the extremely subtle mind remains in the body? It depends. If you are talking about a person who dies ordinarily, not in an accident or not because of some heavy sickness, but with the death process is normal and proceeds nicely, it is said that the consciousness may stay up to 3 days for us ordinary folks. If death occurs suddenly due to accident, then the dissolution happens very quickly and all the appearances arise quickly. As such, the clear light will not remain for a long time in that body. 
As to the earlier question (by a student) about how people having near death experience and seem have been revived after they have stopped breathing. It all depends how far into the death process the person has already experienced. If you are talking about revival, coming back from death, then where is the demarcation after which there is no return? Is it appearance? Can it even go up to near attainment? That is the question you have to think about.
We are not exactly sure but I doubt that one can come back from dead if you are already dead in that the mind of clear light has manifested. I don’t think one can return from that. What if we say one still return from the dead, even when the minds of appearance or increase or near attainment have set in? I am not sure.  How far can one go before one can go before the point of no return? It is difficult to say, right?
Khen Rinpoche: Anybody has idea when to come back?
Ven Gyurme: The brain dies 2 minutes after the blood flow. If it is damaged, I think cannot come back as the brain has destroyed.
Khen Rinpoche: The brain is dead but the heart is not dead.
The reason why we are circling in the cyclic existence is because we are not able to realize emptiness with the extremely subtle mind. That means to be free from samsara then we have to realize emptiness with the extremely subtle mind. It is an extremely difficult feat to realize emptiness with the extremely subtle mind. It is an extremely difficult thing to achieve because prior to that many things have to fall in place. One of which is having the realization of the generation stage. Before one can even understand or do anything about this meditation, one must first understand the generation stage and achieve it. That is why there is this presentation of the path of the generation stage. 
In the first place, one must have experience those 8 signs of dissolution; not intellectual and not imagining but must experience it. In order to be able to utilize the extremely subtle mind to realize emptiness, first of all one must be able to engage and be successful in sleep yoga. In the yoga of sleep, when one falls asleep, in reality we do experience a similitude of those 8 signs of dissolution at the time of sleep. 
In the first place, we are not even able to recognize those 8 signs that are similar to the death process. They do actually occur at the time of sleep. Then there is no way that you can do it with the actual clear light. 
Before one can do it in sleep, one must be able to do it when one is awake. When one is awake, one must be able to do it at the level in term of imagination first. That is why there are three mixings of the waking state. That is why in the generation stage practice, there are:
taking death as the path of dharmakaya,
taking intermediate state as the path of sambhogakaya
taking rebirth as the path of nirmanakaya
Thorough familiarity with that then one moves to the completion stage. Then at the time of the completion stage, at the lower level of the completion stage, through the power of meditation the winds do actually enter into the central channel. As the winds enter into the central channel they then abide and dissolve. 
With the dissolution of the winds in the central channel, the similitudes of those 8 signs actually occur; not just imagination like at the generation stage. On the completion stage, the similitudes of those signs actually occur. 
We are still just talking about the lower level of the completion stage. So there is still a long way to go before one can actually utilize the extremely subtle mind to realize clear light. It is an extremely difficult feat. What we can do here is to gain an understanding of the technology on the essential points and the purpose of the unsurpassed yoga tantra. From the unsurpassed yoga tantra perspective, because we are not able to stop ordinary death, that is why we have to enter into the intermediate state. As long you are in the ordinary intermediate state then you have to take rebirth. That is how we circle in cyclic existence.
So in order to stop rebirth, you have to stop the intermediate state.
 In order to stop the intermediate state, you have to stop ordinary death. 
When ordinary death is overcome, instead of leaving the clear light in its ordinary state, you will be able to transform the extremely subtle mind of clear light into the entity of the path; that means realizing emptiness with that. Then there are no more rebirths due to the power of karma and afflictions.
The person who is able to realize emptiness with the extremely subtle mind of clear light is confirmed to achieve enlightenment in that lifetime.
If that doesn’t happen i.e. the extremely subtle mind cannot be transformed into the entity of the path, then one has to take rebirth through the intermediate state. If one is taking rebirth in the desire and form realm, then you definitely have to go through the intermediate state. If you enter into the intermediate state, then the 8 signs of involution occur. Instead of evolution, involution means the 8 signs of the reverse order arise. 
So if one enters the intermediate state, one take rebirth through the intermediate state. Then one arises from the clear light of death. Then one arises into the mind of near attainment. From the mind of near attainment then come the mind of increase, i.e. the mind becomes increasingly coarse. Then from the mind of increase comes the mind of appearance. Then the coarser consciousnesses come into being and the coarse bodies come into being. Maybe I will talk about this when we talk about rebirth.
This leads us back to the question about the basis of infusion of the imprints. If you think about it, it seems like you have no choice but to say that ultimately is the clear light, the extremely subtle mind, acts as the repository of the imprints. If you look at death process, at the 4th stage when the winds dissolve into consciousness, the ability of the wind element to acts as support for the consciousness has deteriorated. Because of that, then those coarser levels of consciousness also cease. 
When the ability of the wind that acts as the mount of those consciousnesses to support the consciousness has deteriorates, then the consciousness that they support also dissolve. From the wind element, it dissolves into consciousness. Having said that, would it be alright to say that together with the dissolution of these coarser levels of mind, the imprints are also transferred to subtler level of mind and so forth down all the way to the clear light?
In the Pramanavarttika, there is a section discussing the proof of past and future lives where it talks about the breath, sense powers and consciousnesses moving from life to life. 
The energy is the wind. The sense power and consciousness goes from life to life. The point is that it is not just the consciousness that goes from life to life. 
In the Pramanavarttika, it talks about the wind and the sense powers. When we talk about sense powers, for example the eye sense power, which is the uncommon empowering condition for the production of the eye consciousness. This uncommon empowering condition, the eye sense power, is not this physical eyeball. It is said to be very subtle form. What is this? I think is very difficult to pinpoint. Anyway this is what it is being said in the teachings. So when we talk about uncommon empowering condition, in the case of the eye sense power, there is this very subtle form that move from life to life as well. When we say these sense powers go from life to life, they do move from life to life in the entity of predisposition or imprint. 
Q&A
Student 1: On the categories of the five aggregates, during the 4th stage is the compositional factor. Of the four elements during the 4th stage it is wind. It is said that the wind dissolves into the coarse sense consciousness and mental consciousnesses, together with the 80 indicative conceptions.
Ven Gyurme:  Sense consciousness? Sense consciousness already dissolved earlier.
Student 1: When? In the 4th stage when the wind is dissolving. Right to say that? My question is actually trying to account for the aggregates of consciousness. In the four stages, 
the first one is form, 
the second one is feeling,
the third is discrimination 
the fourth is compositional factor
The fifth aggregate is the consciousness which is not explicitly mentioned at which stage. So I am trying to account for that. 
Khen Rinpoche: The aggregate of consciousness encompasses many things; not just the coarse but including the subtler. This means that the 80 indicative conceptions, the appearance, increase, near attainment and even the clear light itself.
Student 1: I would like to clarity the external sign for the 4th stage dissolution of the body and tongue sense power. The external sign for the object of taste and touch, I wasn’t very clear as to what are these two external signs. There are the six sense powers. On the 4th stage, there are the tongue and body sense power that so called dissolve and correspond to that there were be their external signs. Of the five objects included within the continuum, there are taste and touch object that is dissolving, what would be these two groups corresponding external signs?
Khen Rinpoche: When the tongue sense power are dissolved, its ability to taste deteriorates, If that dissolve then the taste which is one of the five objects will also dissolve. The tongue becomes shorter and thicker. The external sign of the tongues sense power dissolving is that it becomes shorter and thicker.
Student 1: When the white and red bodhicitta are travelling from the crown and the navel to the heart chakra, I understand the white bodhicitta is in the form of liquid. 
Ven Gyurme:  Nature.
Student 1: Nature, I don’t know what does that means. Nature of liquid is liquid?
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, I think it is mentioned there.
Student 1: So that is actually a form.  From the 5th stage onwards there is no external sign yet we have the coarse movement of the physical entity down. Would that be considered as an external sign from the 5th stage, 6th stage, 7th stage?
Khen Rinpoche:  There is nothing that you can observe externally. 
Ven Gyurme: External sign? When we look at somebody who is at that stage of dying, we don’t see anything, right?
Student 1: For example, the external sign of not able to remember when the wisdom of activity dissolves and unable to taste. All these are experienced by the dying person and in the sense somebody outside of him would not be able to tell as well. 
Handout