Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L43.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:26.538403
================================================================================

In my reply to the last question of a student on the previous class was an off the cuff remark which I did not really give some thought to it. So whatever was said on the reply was incorrect. Later I will give you a clear answer. (Khen Rinpoche asked to delete)
When the four elements (earth, water, fire, wind) dissolve in stages, the strength of the energies or winds becomes weaker as well. 
The earth element dissolves into water, water dissolves into fire and fire dissolves into wind. 
At the stage when the fire element dissolves into the wind, the mind of the 80 indicative conceptions will be dissolving as well. 
Then the winds dissolve into the mind of appearance. The energies or the winds which is the mount of the mind of appearance would definitely be more subtle but not as strong.
When the 80 indicative conceptions dissolve into the mind of appearance, all conventional appearances would have dissolved; especially the coarse ones. When the mind of appearance manifests, all the appearances to the coarser levels of consciousness would have ceased. 
What is appearing to the mind of appearance is vacuity. Although it is vacuity, it has the element of whitish appearance. 
The mind of appearance then dissolves into the mind of increase. 
The mind of increase dissolves into the mind of near attainment. 
The mind of near attainment dissolves into clear light. 
Progressively, the mind becomes more and more subtle, culminating in the extremely subtle mind of clear light. 
During the process, the winds that are the mount of those minds also dissolve and become increasingly subtle.
It is really interesting. As the winds dissolve during the entire process, the winds become less and less coarse i.e. become more and more subtle. When the winds become more and more subtle, the propensity for the conceptuality for discursive thought becomes weaker and weaker. 
By the time there is the mind of appearance, nothing else appears except vacuity.  Although it is a vacuity, that has the element of whitish appearance. 
The coarse conceptuality has ceased and does not function. 
Then the mind becomes increasingly more subtle:
with the mind of increase, there is reddish appearance, 
then the mind of near attainment, there is pitch black darkness 
then culminating in the extremely subtle mind of clear light. In this case is clear light of death if you are talking about it from the basis point of view. What appears is nothing except very clean clear vacuity. 
At these later stages of the dissolution, there is no coarse conceptuality. This means the minds potential for staying on an object could be stronger and stronger as naturally there is the absence of laxity, excitement, distraction and so forth.  
By the time the extremely subtle mind manifest, all appearances would have subsided by then. What appears is clean clear vacuity. 
It is said that those individuals who already have a very great familiarity on the realization of understanding of emptiness, when they reach a point where they are able to make use of that extremely subtle mind, the opportunity then becomes extraordinary experience because of the subtlety of the mind and the quality of it. 
One of the special uncommon features of unsurpassed yoga tantra is the technology or the technique to utilize that extremely subtle mind to realize emptiness. Such a method and means is not found in the Paramitayana, neither is it found in the three lower classes of tantra. 

It is said that this extremely subtle mind is very powerful and the potential is there. If one can access to that mind, the individual then able to realize emptiness. That is a very uncommon feature of unsurpassed yoga tantra. This extremely subtle mind which realizes emptiness is also said to be a very powerful antidote to the knowledge obscuration. 
It is important and it is also very good if you can catch the essential points: What is this special uncommon thing about tantra or unsurpassed yoga tantra? Even if you cannot understand all the details, you must really try to get the essentials points. 
For someone who is taking rebirth, one will not remain forever in that extremely subtle mind. The mind will become coarser gradually; from the clear light of death, one arises to the mind of near attainment. So the mind will become increasingly coarse.
From the clear light of death, one enters into intermediate state with the mind of near attainment. 
Having said that, is it a matter of the extremely subtle mind itself transforming in entity to become the mind of near attainment or not?
I personally don’t think that is the case because it is problematic if you say that. During the clear light of death, the mind is not focused. What is appearing to that mind is clean clear vacuity. For whatever reason, it dissipates and then a coarser level of mind arises together with coarser winds which are grosser than the extremely subtle wind. The coarser mind and coarser wind arises. The first thing to arise would be the mind of near attainment of the reverse order. 
From the clear light, then the mind of near attainment arises. 
From that, the mind of increase arises.
Then the mind of appearance arises and so forth. 
Then increasingly coarser levels of mind arise. Correspondingly the energies or the winds that mount on those consciousnesses will also be coarser. 
This is what is being said in the teachings. The mind becomes increasingly coarse and likewise the winds or energies as well. 
From the mind of appearance, increasingly coarser winds are generated. 
From the mind of appearance arise the 80 indicative conceptions together with the three mental poisons - ignorance, anger, attachment and so forth. 
What I have just said is mentioned in Arya Nagarjuna’s Five Stages and the principle commentary by his heart son Aryadeva’s The Compendium of Conduct and also a commentary by Je Rinpoche called The Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages of Guhyasamaja. 
It is explained in this text here that birth and death is brought about by energy or wind. It is explained in the unsurpassed yoga tantra that the extremely subtle mind is the root of samsara and nirvana. If you are talking about samsara, this extremely subtle mind is the root of samsara because if the extremely subtle mind does not realize emptiness, then you have birth and death. If you cannot stop birth, then you cannot stop samsara. So if you look at it just like that, it is saying that without realizing emptiness by the extremely subtle mind, then there is no end to samsara.
If you look at how it is described in the tantric text, in terms of the death process, the four elements and then after the four elements have dissolved, the winds become increasingly subtle, then arise the mind of appearance, the mind of increase, the mind of mere attainment, and then culminating in clear light. These are the four empties. Then arising from the clear light of death, the mind of near attainment, the mind of increase and the mind of appearance where the minds again becomes increasingly coarse.
When it dissolves at the time of death, it becomes increasingly subtle. Arising from that, the minds become increasingly coarse. By the time mind of appearance arise, then comes the 80 indicative conceptions and the three mental poisons and so forth. That is samsara.
This is how it is explained.  How are you going to answer the question about arhats and those bodhisattvas abiding in the pure grounds? How are you going to explain their achievement of liberation as they have achieved liberation from samsara?
There is no way you speak about arhats realizing emptiness with the extremely subtle mind.
You also don’t talk about the bodhisattvas on the Paramitayana path realizing emptiness with the extremely subtle mind. 
Khen Rinpoche: First get the question. You get? If you don’t get then there is no point to talk next. What are you going to say?
Even the CMWS posit arhats so arhats exist and arhats achieve liberation. The bodhisattvas abiding on the pure grounds after the 10th ground do exist. Those so called arhats asserted by the CMWS do not exist cannot be accepted that as they do exist. 
The 14th root downfall of the bodhisattva vows is to despise the Hinayana. The definition of that downfall is to say that by practising the Hinayana, you cannot achieve freedom from the afflictions. If one asserts that by practising and actualizing the Hearer and Solitary Realizer path, one cannot achieve liberation from samsara, then one incurs this root downfall of the bodhisattva vow. This means you have to accept that one can achieve liberation do exist. 
Khen Rinpoche: No choice
In the Nagarjuna’s Five Stages and the commentary on that, the Compendium of Conduct by Aryadeva, there is explanation of how the wind that makes samsara possible. Je Rinpoche commented on that in his The Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages. Je Rinpoche said that the intent of the text is not saying that ignorance or self-grasping is not the root of samsara. Neither the texts is saying that the winds are like the principal cause. That is not the meaning. 
You need keep in mind of what Je Rinpoche Lama Tsongkapa said in his The Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages. What is being said by Je Rinpoche in his The Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages should be taken as the final conclusion representing his final thought. 
You will see this in Je Rinpoche’s life on how he manifests even in his compositions. His views sometimes seem to be different in later part of the life.  If you look at Lama Tsongkhapa’s Great Treatise on the Stages of Mantra (Sngags rim chen mo), some of the things that he said are not exactly correct to the point. In terms of when he composed the text, Sngags rim Chenmo was composed before The Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages. The Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages was composed towards the end part of his life which represents his final thought and his ultimate intent. That should be taken to be correct. If you analyze, probably there is not much fault you can find with the positions in that. Such a thing you will also find in relation to his compositions on sutra.
In his The Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages of the completion stage of Guhyasamaja, Je Rinpoche says that it is not the intent of Nagarjuna and Aryadeva to say that ignorance or self-grasping is not the root of samsara. He cites Aryadeva’s Compendium of Conduct to prove his point. In Aryadeva’s Compendium of Conduct, he says that due to grasping of an I and mine, one comes to accumulate virtuous and non-virtuous karma. From that, there comes good rebirth and bad rebirth in samsara.
Je Rinpoche cites Aryadeva’s Compendium of Conduct in which that text cites many quotes from the   Perfection of Wisdom Sutra in Eight Thousand Stanzas and so forth. Then in The Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages, Je Rinpoche also cites many of Nagarjuna’s writings which essentially states that not realizing the nature of things then there is a grasping or ignorance which leads one to accumulate karma and then samsara. Then Je Rinpoche concludes by saying that it is the shared view of sutra and tantra that the grasping at the self is the root of samsara. With regards to the description of how wind is the cause of samsara, Je Rinpoche essentially is saying that is not necessarily so. Yes, wind is the cause of samsara because it is a cooperative condition and it works together with the self-grasping. So the wind is a cooperative condition for samsara but it is not the main cause or the only cause. 
Hinayana superiors realize emptiness directly because when one achieves the Hinayana Path of Seeing one realizes emptiness directly. Until one is an arhat one is not able to stop birth and samsara. Although Hearer superiors (who are non-arhat) have realize emptiness directly but they still take rebirth in cyclic existence. Then for a person who enters the Mahayana path from the onset, when that bodhisattva realizes emptiness directly, he achieves the Path of Seeing. After that there is no more rebirth in samsara due to the power of karma and afflictions. 
It doesn’t matter whether you are talking about the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the Resultant Vajrayana Vehicle, it is the same. When one achieves the Mahayana Path of Seeing, from then on there is no rebirth in samsara due to the power of karma and afflictions. However, if you are talking about somebody who is on the Hinayana path, even after achieving the Hinayana Path of Seeing, from then until the achievement of liberation or becoming an arhat, there is rebirth in samsara due to the power of karma and afflictions. 
You clear about this? Then naturally question will arise.
Why is it that when you achieve the Mahayana Path of Seeing, whether it is Causal Perfection Vehicle or the Resultant Vajrayana Vehicle, henceforth there is no rebirth in samsara due to the power of karma and afflictions? 
You realize emptiness directly, right? The Hinayana superiors realize emptiness directly, right? 
The object emptiness that is realizes directly on the Hinayana Path of Seeing and the Mahayana Path of Seeing, whether it is Causal Perfection Vehicle or Resultant Vajrayana Vehicle, is the same.
If you think about it, then answer would have to be that there must be an account for the difference. If it is not the object that is realized, then what alternative you would have other than putting the reason as down to the difference in the mind that takes that emptiness as the object?
Anyway, the answer has to do with the quality of the mind. The difference lies in the mind. That is why those who realize emptiness on the Mahayana Path of Seeing and henceforth are able to stop samsara. However, those on the Hinayana path are not able to do that even after achieving the Path of Seeing. 
When one achieves the Mahayana Path of Seeing, the bodhisattva acquires a set of 12 qualities and these qualities increase exponentially as they progess on the grounds. Such qualities are not obtained when one achieves the Hinayana Path of Seeing because there must be a difference in the mind. 
[When a bodhisattva reaches the first ground he attains twelve groups of excellent qualities:
(1) in one moment he can see a hundred buddhas
(2) in one moment he knows that he is blessed by them
(3) in one moment he is able to enter a hundred concentrations
(4) in one moment he is able to shake a hundred world systems
(5) in one moment he is able to go to a hundred world systems
(6) in one moment a hundred world systems appear to him
(7) in one moment he is able to ripen a hundred sentient beings
(8) he is able to abide for a hundred eons
(9) in one moment he is able to know the end of the beginning and the end of the end
(10) in one moment he is able to open a hundred Dharma doors
(11) in one moment he is able to manifest a hundred bodies
(12) in one moment he is able to give Dharma teachings to a hundred bodhisattvas who surround each of his hundred emanated bodies]
Then next question arise: Why is there this big difference in the mind? 
The answer would be whether there is training in the limitless collection of merit or not. 
On the Mahayana Paths of Accumulation and Path of Preparation, the bodhisattvas are trained in the limitless collection of merit and such training in not found in the Hinayana path. As such, the realization that follows from such a limitless collection of merit on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation and the Mahayana Path of Preparation leads to such quality of the mind that realizes emptiness directly on the Mahayana Path of Seeing. 
The people on the Hinayana take a shorter time to realize emptiness directly and it takes a longer time on the Mahayana path to realize emptiness directly. 
I thought the tenets say the Vabhashika and Sautrantika say that one can become an arhat in three lifetimes. 
So in terms of the speed, one realizes emptiness directly quicker on the Hinayana path but is slower on the Mahayana path. 
Khen Rinpoche: Quicker? Yes.
Although realizing emptiness directly takes much longer on the Mahayana path as compared to the Hinayana path, the qualities that are obtained after realizing emptiness directly on the Mahayana path is likened to space whereas the qualities that are obtained after realizing emptiness directly on the Hinayana path is likened to what can fit in the palm of the hand. 
It is not really a big deal that one realizes emptiness directly much more quickly on the Hinayana path. The bodhisattvas are not really in a hurry to realize emptiness quickly because the qualities that are gained after realizing emptiness directly on the Mahayana path basically worth the wait. So to realize emptiness directly on the Causal Perfection Vehicle is much longer than realizing emptiness directly on the Hinayana path. 
Then what about tantra? What do you think? 
Khen Rinpoche: Much much longer than that?
The answer is it is much quicker than the other two. 
Je Rinpoche said not only the tantric path is quicker in the sense of realizing emptiness directly, but even in terms of the qualities that are attained, it is much more. So the tantric path is excellent. As such it is a marvelous path. 
You need to accumulate the collections for three countless great eons in order to abandon the knowledge obscurations on the Causal Perfection Vehicle. However, with unsurpassed yoga tantra the potential is there for any individual to abandon the two obscurations in one short lifetime of this degenerate age. So tantric path, particularly the unsurpassed yoga tantra path, is unexcelled and is very extra-ordinary. It is very different from other paths as it is much quicker and much more powerful.
In the Causal Perfection Vehicle, even after realizing emptiness directly, with regards to the afflictive obscurations, the afflictive obscurations are gradually abandoned. The process only starts after realizing emptiness directly. When one realizes emptiness directly, first he abandons the acquired afflictive obscurations. Then the process starts with the abandonment of the many different layers of the innate afflictive obscurations. That is the long process. But in the unsurpassed yoga tantra path, when one reach the unsurpassed yoga tantra Path of Seeing, with one uninterrupted path, without differentiating the afflictive obscurations into acquired and innate, both are abandoned at the same time by one uninterrupted path. So, it is very powerful path. So, the path of unsurpassed yoga tantra is exalted, special, very quick and very powerful in overcoming the two obscurations. Such a feature is not found in other paths. 
What makes the unsurpassed yoga tantra such a quick and powerful path? 
The answer lies in the subject or the mind that realizes emptiness because the mind that realizes emptiness in the unsurpassed yoga tantra is very different and is a special mind. 
If you compare the time taken to abandon the afflictions obscurations, it takes much longer in the Causal Perfection Vehicle path. In the Causal Perfection Vehicle path, the afflictive obscurations are only abandoned on the 8th grounds. So, it takes much longer time when compared to the Hinayana path.
Why the unsurpassed yoga tantra is so powerful? 
The difference comes in the subject - the mind – that realizes emptiness. If the simultaneously born joy is able to utilize that to ascertain emptiness then all of these happen quickly and powerful. One of the critical reasons for achieving the unsurpassed yoga tantra path has got to do with removing the subtle knowledge obscurations. So the subtle knowledge obscurations cannot be removed if one cannot ascertain emptiness with the simultaneously born joy. Basically we cannot utilize extremely subtle mind to realize emptiness then there is no way the subtle knowledge obscurations can be overcome.
One can only access this extremely subtle mind and generate this mind by depending on the path of unsurpassed yoga tantra. For that reason, sooner or later for achieving enlightenment one needs to enter the path of unsurpassed yoga tantra.
When comparing the sutric path and the tantric path and if we talk about the difference between the speeds of the path, the tantra is more superior to the sutra not so much because it is faster and quicker in overcoming the afflictive obscurations but rather it is much quicker in overcoming the knowledge obscurations. That is the key point. 
Within tantra, it is only in the unsurpassed yoga tantra that has the technology to generate the extremely object possessor (mind) that takes emptiness as its object.
Even if you look at the sutra, the Causal Perfection Vehicle, even if one has the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, that alone is not the reason for achieving enlightenment or even liberation for samsara. Even it is the antidote but that alone does not cut it. On the Causal Perfection Vehicle without training in the limitless collections over an immeasurable length of time, even with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness one will not have liberation or enlightenment. This is how if it is being explained in the Causal Perfection Vehicle. In order to achieve enlightenment in the Causal Perfection Vehicle one has to overcome also the knowledge obscurations. For the purpose of overcoming the knowledge obscurations, the bodhisattvas have to train in the limitless accumulation of the collection of merit in the limitless way for immeasurable amount of time. Without that, it is not possible to abandon the knowledge obscurations. That is why it takes the three countless great eons.
It is taught that in the unsurpassed yoga tantra path, the individual does not need to train in the limitless collection of merit for long period of time. Even though that is not done, still one is able to overcome both the afflictive and knowledge obscurations in a very quick time. So it is the special feature of the unsurpassed yoga tantra to be able to generate an exalted mind ascertaining emptiness which is the essentially the simultaneously born joy. That is a very powerful in overcoming even the subtle dualistic appearances. The reason why an empowerment (wang or initiation) is considered sacred and why the generation stage practice also is considered so sacred which essentially it is the practice of taking the three bodies as the path and that makes the individual be able to quickly generate this exalted mind that realizes emptiness.
If we are talking about unsurpassed yoga tantra, after obtaining the wang (empowerment or initiation) one trains in the generation stage which essentially is the main purpose of taking the three bodies as the path which act as the ripener for generating the completion stage in the mind of the individual. Then the person enters the completion stage and trains in the different levels of the completion stage. It will come a time where he is able to ascertain emptiness with his extremely subtle mind. Once that happen, that is the end of story. That realization is made possible because the generation stage is the ripener of the completion stage. The generation stage has to be preceded by obtaining the wang. That is reason why wang plus the generation stage are considered sacred. 
Hearer and Solitary Realizer are able to achieve liberation. They are able to abandon the afflictive obscurations. If you are asked: How do they abandon it? What answer do you have? 
The only answer is because they can generate wisdom directly realizing emptiness or wisdom directly realizing selflessness. Other than that what are you going to say?  For sure you can say that they definitely have abandoned the afflictions and relatively speaking the afflictions is coarse. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. You understand what I am talking so far or you don’t understand anything?
Q&A
Student 1: Just now we mentioned about Causal Perfection Vehicle, the bodhisattva after uncontrived bodhicitta needs to accumulate limitless collections of merit before directly realization of emptiness. That takes one countless great eon. Direct realization of emptiness is not a hindrance to accumulate merit?
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah
Student 1: In fact it enhances it as he accumulates merits faster. Why don’t the bodhisattvas just quickly directly realize emptiness before accumulating this limitless accumulation of merit? 
Khen Rinpoche: That does not hindrance.
Student 1:  Similarly the afflictive obscurations of a bodhisattva and afflictive obscurations of an arhat are no difference. So, in fact they should quickly abandon obscurations.
Khen Rinpoche: It is worth to wait for the bodhisattvas i.e. they are not in the hurry, so to speak. Even if he quickly realizes emptiness then what he will get literally are just a handful of qualities. So, in order to get a sky of qualities, you must put more effort that is all.
Student 1: What I meant is that if you realize emptiness directly, with bodhicitta wouldn’t you accumulate merits fast?
Khen Rinpoche: In order for the arhat to achieve enlightenment he has to enter the Mahayana Path of Accumulation. That is no way but he still have to accumulate merit. So take longer, right?
Student 1: So, direct realization of emptiness doesn’t really help much in the accumulation of merit?
Khen Rinpoche: We stop here today. I mean sometime it is good that you ask good questions that give me opportunity to read more texts. No question, then I am too lazy to read texts.
If you could bring the self-generation rite, whether it is Vajrabhairava or Vajrayogini, so when we look at the practice of taking death as the path of the dharmakaya which is essentially a meditation that is concordant with the aspect of death, then you see the concept clearly as now you have an example. You have to bring the long self-generation rite as there is nothing much in the abbreviated version. 
We are going to look at just the section on taking death as the path of the dharmakaya. You don’t need to bring the whole sadhana even it is not that heavy because we are concerned with just that section. Just along that section if you are able to identify that section. I hope it would be more useful by relating it to the self-generation rite. 
BP1
Before we can talk about the completion stage, we first need to understand the different levels of the body and mind. The body exists on three different levels: 
1. The coarse body refers to the body that we have which we can see. 
2. The subtle body refers to the channels, winds and the drops abiding inside our body. 
3. The extremely subtle body refers to the extremely subtle wind. 
Likewise, the mind is divided into three: 
1. The coarse mind refers to the manifest sense consciousnesses. 
2. The subtle mind refers to the 80 indicative conceptions together with the minds of appearance, increase and near attainment. 
3. The extremely subtle mind is the fundamental innate mind. 
It is quite difficult to understand how we move from one particular completion stage to another higher completion stage without first understanding the nature of the bases, i.e., the body and mind. We should remember all these levels. 
What happens at the time of death? 
• At the time of death, the coarse physical body ceases. 
• First the four different elements (earth, water, fire and wind) gradually dissolve into one another, i.e., the earth element dissolves into the water element and so forth. 
• The mind also becomes subtler. 
• After the dissolution of the four elements, the minds of the 80 indicative conceptions gradually dissolve into the mind of white appearance. 
• The mind of white appearance gradually ceases and dissolves into the mind of red increase. 
• The mind of red increase ceases and dissolves into the mind of black near attainment. 
• That mind of the black near-attainment ceases and dissolves into the extremely subtle mind, the mind of clear light at the time of death. 
• When this clear light mind manifests, this is when actual death is said to happen. 
You need to have a rough idea of the stages of dissolution: 
o First, the coarser levels of consciousnesses dissolve. 
o Then the minds of the 80 indicative conceptions dissolve. 
o Then the mind of white appearance dissolves. 
o Then the mind of red increase dissolves. 
o Then the mind of the black near-attainment dissolves. 
o Finally, at the end of the death process, it culminates in the mind of clear light. 
At the time of our death, (as) we go through the dissolution process, we will arrive at the stage where the mind of white appearance manifests. At that time one has the appearance of whitish light. This is an internal appearance to the mind and is not something external or appearing from outside. 
Why does this happen? We have three main channels in our body: the central channel and the right and left channels. The mind of white appearance starts when the winds in the right and left channels start to enter the central channel. The winds at the upper part of the body enter the central channel from the top and, at the same time, the white bodhicitta at the crown (which came from our father) starts to descend together with the movement of the winds down into the central channel. This white bodhicitta descends to the level of one’s heart chakra. As it descends, one will have the internal appearance of white light. 
The mind of white appearance is followed by the manifestation of the mind of red increase. That happens when the winds in the right and left channels enter the central channel from beneath the navel. Due to the movement of the winds up the (central) channel, the red bodhicitta at the navel that came from our mother moves up the central channel to the level of the heart. Due to the movement of this red bodhicitta up the central channel, one has the internal reddish appearance. 
After the mind of red increase, the mind of black near-attainment will manifest. Earlier on we saw how the winds in the right and left channels enter the central channel from the top and bottom. These winds gradually come to the level of the heart but they have not yet dissolved at the heart. 
At the heart, there is the indestructible drop which has always existed from birth. When the white and red bodhicittas come together at the level of the heart, there is an appearance of darkness to the mind. It is like fainting or blacking out. It is said that there are two parts to this mind of black near- attainment: During the earlier part, it is said that one still has some mindfulness and objects can appear to that mind. In the later part, that mind does not have mindfulness of any object. At that time, it is like one has fainted or blacked out. 
When one arises (wakes up) from that state, (at the end of the dissolution process) that is when the extremely subtle mind manifests. This is the clear light mind of death. What appears to that clear light mind is vacuity or nothingness. It is not the emptiness (of inherent existence) that we usually talk about. Together with this extremely subtle mind is the extremely subtle wind. It is said that one can abide in this state for 3 days. For yogis or practitioners, they are able to do so for a longer period of time. 
One remains in that state of clear light mind of death till the extremely subtle wind starts to stir. That is the time when the extremely subtle wind inside the indestructible drop will leave the body with the extremely subtle mind (since these two are one entity). 
The signs of the consciousness having left the body is the emitting of the white and red bodhicittas: The red bodhicitta at the level of the heart ascends and is emitted through the nostril. The white bodhicitta at the level of the heart descends and is emitted from the sexual organ. Seeing these red and white bodhicittas leave the body is taken as the signs that the consciousness has left the body. 
The body of the intermediate state comes into being when one enters the intermediate state. The extremely subtle wind is the mount of the extremely subtle mind. 
o The extremely subtle wind is the substantial cause of the body of the intermediate state being. 
o The extremely subtle mind is the substantial cause of the mind of the intermediate state being. 
When one enters the intermediate state, the first consciousness that comes into being is the mind of black near attainment followed gradually by the mind of red increase, white appearance, the 80 indicative conceptions and so forth. Basically, the mind becomes coarser, i.e., when (the mind) is first established, it is established as subtle and then it becomes coarser. 
You have to know the stages of the process of dying and how one comes into existence again because when we examine the completion stage, this whole process will come into play. 
o In essence when one dies, the coarse mind will become subtler. 
o When one enters the intermediate state, the mind moves from being subtle into a coarser state. 
In order to take rebirth, the intermediate state being has to die and does so by going through the same death dissolution process. The coarser levels of mind dissolve and the subtle mind manifests. We have the 80 indicative conceptions, the minds of white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment, finally culminating in the clear light mind of death. 
It is this mind of clear light of death of the intermediate state being that connects with the fertilised egg (at conception) and takes rebirth in the womb. The mind becomes increasingly coarser again. The mind of black near- attainment will manifest, followed by the mind of red increase and so forth. This is the reverse process. In the case of rebirth from the womb, birth does not refer to the time when one emerges from the mother’s womb. Birth is the first moment of conception. 
From the perspective of a normal person, the winds do not move into the central channel until the time of death. They move into the central channel due to the force of karma.
The mother clear light refers to the clear light of death. Everyone will experience this mother clear light in the death process. 
One can also manifest this clear light mind through the force of meditation. The clear light mind that manifests through the force of meditation is termed son clear light. 
If one is able to do that during the death process, then instead of the clear light of death arising at the time of death, through the force of meditation one manifests that son clear light. When one is able to do that during the death dissolution process, this is called the mixing of mother and son clear lights.
Question: Can the body of the intermediate state being also be divided into coarse and subtle levels? 
Answer: It is not clear in the text but I guess one can posit different levels of subtlety because when the intermediate state being first comes into existence, the mind of black near-attainment manifests. There is a wind that is the mount of that consciousness just as there are the winds that are the mounts of the minds of red increase and white appearance. These three levels of mind are considered subtle. We can therefore probably say that the winds which are the mounts of these three consciousnesses (can also) be classified as subtle bodies. When the intermediate state being comes into full existence, developing the five sense powers and so forth, we can then posit that to be the coarse body. 
Question: Does this process apply to animals? 
Answer: This particular death process pertains to those who are born from the womb, possessing the six constituents. 
Question: If the bardo being cannot find a body in which to take rebirth, does it die every seven days? 
Answer: It is taught in the teachings that the intermediate state being can remain for a maximum of 49 days but within that 49 days, the intermediate state being has to take rebirth. Within that period, if he does not find a rebirth after 7 days, he will have to die and then be reborn again in the intermediate state. He has to die every week as long as he has not taken rebirth but up to a maximum of 49 days. The intermediate state being definitely has to take rebirth within those 49 days. [195]