Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L44.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:17.892943
================================================================================

At the beginning of our class, we recite the prayer of going for refuge and generating bodhicitta three times.  The purpose of reciting this prayer, whether we are teaching the dharma or when we are listening to the dharma, is to adjust the motivation.  Ideally, the best motivation for listening to the teaching and for learning the dharma is bodhicitta.  If the act of listening is conjoined with bodhicitta motivation then it will bring about great benefit.  At the time of reciting the prayer, one should try very hard to the best of one's ability to adjust the motivation accordingly thinking that we are doing this in order to be able to bring benefits to others. 
We have been talking about taking death as a path of the dharmakaya.  I am going to say a little a bit about this in relation to the Vajrabhairava practice. 
In the Vajrabhairava extensive self-generation text, the practice of taking death as the path of dharmakaya comes in the actual body of practice.  There are preliminary practices that precede the actual body of the practice. I am not going to every single detail.  I am just to give you an overview.
The practice begins with the request to the root and lineage gurus. That is for the purpose of receiving blessings in one's heart. 
Then one arises instantaneously as Vajrabhairava. 
That is followed by the blessing of inner offerings.  
There is offering of tormas and other offerings to the directional protectors. The tormas and other offerings first have to be blessed and after that the offerings are offered to the directional protectors. 
After the offerings are made to the directional protectors, one consecrates or blesses the offering for the self-generation.  
Then there is a practice of the meditation and the recitation of Vajrasattva for the purpose of purifying the negativities. 
All of these fall into the preliminary sections.
Next is the invocation of the field of merit. 
The merit field is a very important element in the practice. If you look at any of the self-generation rites, you will always find invocation and worshipping the field of merit. If you look at the practices of Guru Puja or the Six Session Guru Yoga, there is always field of merit of that practice. Here in the practice of Vajrabhairava, the field of merit is primarily Vajrabhairava himself.
One's guru is visualized in the form of lord of the lineage who sits on the crown of the root face. One's root guru is in the aspect of Vajradhara and one's guru is in the nature of all one’s gurus. This is how one should think when invoking this specific merit field. 
It is clear in the self-generation rite that oneself visualize as Yamantaka or Vajrabhairava with one face and two arms. At the heart there is a lotus and sun disc upon which there is a blue syllabus HUM from which the light rays radiate to the ten directions invite the field of merit Vajrabhairava and with one's root guru in the aspect of Vajradhara abiding as the lord of the lineage on the crown of the root face.
After the field of merit is invited, one does the practice of what is termed as the 7 purities. This is slightly different from sutra but essentially the practice of the 7 purities is specifically for accumulating the collection of merits. 
The 7 purities include the usual practice of:
paying homage, 
making offerings, 
confessing, 
rejoicing 
dedication of the merit towards enlightenment.
That is the 5 purities.
The other two are:
refuge 
generating bodhicitta
So, this is how there are 7 purities.
That is in the self-generation rite: 
I dedicate them fully to that which proceeds to bliss.
I go for refuge to the Three Jewels.
I generate bodhicitta and so forth.
“To those who possess the ocean of excellent quality, I offer my body”- essentially this is making a pledge to train in the bodhisattva conduct.
You make the offering of body and make the pledge to engage in the practices of the bodhisattva deeds. When making offering, if the offerings are endowed with the 5 features, then it will be good.  
The 5 features are:
The feature of the substance,
The feature of concentration, 
The feature of mudra, 
The feature of mantra 
The feature of offering of practice.
Of these 5 kinds of offerings, the first is the offerings of substance. This is briefly referring to those things that we normally see and offer such as libation, flowers, incense, lights and so forth. Whatever is offered, we should offer very good quality offering substances. One should place and set-up as many offerings as one can afford. It should be as many and of good quality.  That is important as it helps to accumulate more merit. Sometimes people may think that it is not so important and the main thing is the meditation practice.  I don’t think that that is correct.
Then there is an offering of mantra which refers to verbalizing the words of the offering, for example, ARGHAM, PADYAM, PUSHPE, DHUPE, ALOKE, NAIVIDYA and SHAPTA.  
Accompanying with that is hand gesture. When we verbalize the offering mantra, and performs the hand gestures, it becomes an offering of mudra. Sometimes people might have the idea that it is ok not to do the hand gestures. However, if you do the hand gestures it becomes the offering of the mudra.
The offering of concentration will be visualizing multitude of offerings by multiplying from 1 to 2 and so on and so forth.  That probably comes under the offering of concentration. 
Then there is the offering of practice. When one’s offering of practice is done and held by the understanding that the person who is offering, the object to whom is offering and the offering of the substance itself are in the nature of bliss and emptiness, then that it become an offering of practice. Such a way of thinking can also be applied when dedicating the merit. As it is usually said that the person who is dedicating the merit, the object to which one is dedicating and the merit (the substance of the dedication) are all in the nature of emptiness. If a dedication is held by this understanding, then it protects the root of virtues from being destroyed by anger.  Otherwise, the merits that is not dedicated in such as way is destroyed whenever anger arises. 
Offering oneself as the servant is literally said as offering one's body as the servant. It is a practice of offering. The idea here is from the depth of one's heart, you dedicate your life which is the body to please the virtuous friend, to guru. So, whatever activity or deed that is pleasing to the guru, and from one’s heart, you dedicate to fulfilling that. If one is can have the kind of mind-set I think it will make a big impact on one's virtuous practices.
Then there is a taking of the tantric vows.  Taking of the tantric vows in the context of the self-generation here does not restore and make pure again of any transgression or infraction of the tantric vows.  However, if one's tantric vows have not been broken then taking the tantric vows here stabilizes whatever one has and increases the vows. As such, this pleases the guru deity, and because of that it becomes an offering of practice.
After having taken the tantric vows in the self-generation rites, there is the meditation on the fours immeasurables. From the invocation of the merit field up to this meditation of four immeasurables is the section for the purpose of accumulating merit and purifying the mind of negativities and obscurations; which is the essential point. This is an important factor that determines whether one gains experiences and realization or not. When you are doing the practices of accumulating the merit and purifying the mind of negativities and obscurations, it is to be done with the force of the mind and mindfully with visualization, reflection and meditation.
Meditation of Taking Death as the Path of the Truth Body
As for dissolution of the field of merit, there are different systems for doing so.  Here in the context of Vajrabhairava, you purify the field of merit, the environment and all inhabitant into emptiness.  That is the manner or the way to dissolve the merit field according to Vajrabhairava. 
Next begin the practice of taking the 3 bodies as the path, of which we start with the first, one taking death as a path of dharmakaya.
The section with:
OM SVABHAVA SHUDDHAH SARVA DHARMAH SVABHAVA SHUDDHO HAM or OM SHUNYATA JNANA VAJRA SVABHAVA ATMAKO HAM 
Because I myself, the deities, the field of merit and all other phenomena are imputations on dependent arisings, everything becomes emptiness having the true nature of identitylessness and devoid of the four extremes such as eternalism, nihilism and so forth.
(Translated in class:
imputations on dependent arisings translated as dependently designated 
true nature of identitylessness  as in the nature of selflessness, 
eternalism as extreme of permanence.)
At the time of death, it is said that we will experience the signs of dissolution. Altogether there are 8 signs of dissolution. During the practice of taking death as the path of the dharmakaya, we must engage in a meditation that is concordant with the aspect to those 8 signs of dissolution. These 8 signs of dissolution will arise at the time of death. Then at the time of the path, prior to the manifesting or the arising of the path of clear lights, whether it is example clear light or the meaning clear light, the signs of dissolution also arise. These are the actual signs that precede the path.
At the time of death these are also the actual signs. Here in the practice of taking death as the path of dharmakaya, we imagine these signs are happening. So it is just at the level of imagination and they don’t occur at all at the time of meditation on the generation stage. 
Before you can do this practice, you must really know:
What is the basis of purification?
What is the path that purifies? 
What is the result of purification? 
Recently we have gone through the presentation of the 3 dharmakaya:
Dharmakaya of the basis, 
Dharmakaya of the path,
Dharmakaya of the result
You must have a good understanding of that before you can actually engage in this practice.
At the beginning before the actual meditation it is said that one must project a very strong will or intention that “I am going to purify the basis of purification, and for that I will meditate on the path that purifies and through that I will actualize the result of purification”. When we say projecting the will or intention, it is kind of setting up the motivation. This is done only with good correct understanding of what is the basis of purification in this context, what is the path that purifies in this context, and what is the result of purification of such a practice. 
In the practice of taking the 3 bodies of the path, after you have imagined the achievement of the dharmakaya, from there you arise as the sambhogakaya. Then from there you arise as the nirmanakaya. Since that is done in one stream of practice, therefore one also projects the will or intention right at the beginning by thinking that “I will actualize dharmakaya. From that I will arise into the sambhogakaya and then into nirmanakaya in order to work for the benefit of all sentient beings”.
After projecting the will as explained, then from the blue syllable HUM at one’s heart as Vajrabhairava, immeasurable beams of light are emitted. These beams of light are in the nature of great bliss. These immeasurable beams of light touch the environment and the inhabitants living in it and melting the entire environment and inhabitants into light which is in the nature of great bliss. 
The purpose of doing this is to withdraw these appearances as there are so many appearances: 
appearances of the environment, 
appearances of the inhabitants
We are not transforming them into nothingness but rather we are withdrawing the appearances of them and dissolve them into light which is in the nature of bliss and emptiness. The environment and the inhabitants in it are now dissolved into light which is in the nature of bliss and emptiness. Then that mass of light dissolves into yourself who is already in the form of Vajrabhairava. When that is happening, you co-relate that with the 1st stage of dissolution - the dissolution of earth element into water element. Imagine internally you are experiencing the sign of mirage. 
Together with the visualization of the internal sign of mirage, I think maybe it would be beneficial if we can also accompany that by thinking of the external signs. While this is not mentioned at all in the generation stage commentaries, I guess it should be ok if you think of the external signs as that will be beneficial for the mind. The external sign that is associated with the 1st stage of dissolution is that your body becomes weak and almost not movable, and the function of the body deteriorates. 
I think together with the visualization of the internal signs and associates the external signs with the 1st stage of dissolution will be beneficial for the mind. 
At the end of this stage of dissolution, what is left is only ourselves as Vajrabhairava as the environment and inhabitants in it have already dissolved into us.
Then begin with the 2nd stage of dissolution of ourselves as Vajrabhairava dissolves into light from top and bottom. 
Then dissolve into the syllable HUM at the heart. Together with this visualization of dissolution from top to bottom, the syllable HUM at the heart, you co-relate this with the 2nd stage of dissolution, water element into fire element. Internally you imagine that you are experiencing the sign of smoke.
At the end of this stage of dissolution, all appearances have already been withdrawn with the exception of the syllable HUM. 
During this dissolution into the syllable HUM and culminating with the syllable HUM remaining, imagine we are experiencing the vision of smoke. At the same time, one can think about some of the external signs, for example, how the bodily fluids dry up, feel the tongue and mouth are very dry, no experience of sweating and other bodily fluids are also dry up to a certain extent. 
The HUM starts to dissolve from the bottom upwards. 
There is this curve hook-like at the bottom which is called shabkyu in Tibetan which represents vowel U
That hook shabkyu dissolves up into the main body of the syllable HA. As that happens, it co-relates to the 3rd stage of dissolution. Internally, you imagine you experience the internal sign the vision of fireflies. As this phase of dissolution is co-related with the dissolution of fire element into wind element, one of the external signs is that the body cannot digest food because of fire element has dissolved. 
The main body HA then dissolves up into the horizontal line which is called the head of the HA.  This co-relates with the dissolution of wind element into consciousness. The object of observation is becoming smaller and smaller and as such the mind becoming more and more subtle. The internal sign of this stage of dissolution is the seeing this flame of butter lamp. In this stage of dissolution you can see the mount of sense consciousness, the winds or energies that are associated with the sense consciousness have mostly dissolved. There are not much of the external signs. The internal sign is that you see the appearance of butter lamp. At this point in time, you imagine that one stops breathing. This is at the level of imagination. 
Then the head of the HA horizontal line dissolves upwards into the crescent.  At this time the sense consciousness are not in operation as they have ceased. What is left in operation is the mental consciousness. Within that there are different levels of mental consciousness which become increasingly more subtle. As the head of the HA dissolves into the crescent imagine the consciousness dissolving into the mind of appearance. There is no external sign to talk about here. Internally there is whitish appearance.
Then that crescent moon dissolves up into the drop. You visualize the drop as a sphere of light (not as circle as it is not empty inside). This co-relates with the mind of appearance dissolving into the mind of increase. Internally imagine you experience this red appearance. 
Then the drop then dissolves into the nada. This co-related with the dissolution of mind of increase into the mind of near attainment. Internally there is appearance of darkness. The nada which has a couple of curves with a very extremely fine tip.
That nada gradually dissolves into the fine tip and that dissolves into emptiness. It is not dissolving into nothingness. There is something, not nothingness or non-existence. Rather it is appearance of vacuity that is free of appearance, increase, and near attainment. How does it look like? It is likened to a clear sky at dawn time in autumn that is not polluted by moonlight, sunlight or darkness. This is what you imagine. This is not just appearance. You have to think that is also emptiness and one must ascertain emptiness. 
At the last stage of dissolution, at the level of imagination imagine that the clear light in the nature of great bliss has manifested and using that to meditates on emptiness. You have to reflect on the meaning of emptiness. Because of that ascertainment of emptiness, you can talk about the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. When you have that, do not think that this is the path clear light but rather with divine pride think that “This is my resultant dharmakaya”.
After going through the visualization in this way, then recite the word of the text: 
OM SVABHAVA SHUDDHAH SARVA DHARMAH SVABHAVA SHUDDHO HAM / OM SHUNYATA JNANA VAJRA SVABHAVA ATMAKO HAM
You do the dissolution and culminating in clear light and imagine that clear light has manifested in the nature of great bliss. At the level of imagination you have the clear light and use this clear light to meditate and ascertain on emptiness. You think about emptiness and the meaning of that. With whatever understanding and ascertainment of emptiness, then that mind become wisdom of bliss and emptiness. Rather than thinking this is the path clear light, you think this is my resultant dharmakaya - the actual dharmakaya and identify with generating of divine pride thinking: “I am the resultant dharmakaya”.
This is the practice of taking death as the path of the dharmakaya at the level of imagination. It is emphasized that it is extremely important to meditatively stabilize on the meaning of emptiness without being influenced by laxity and excitement. It is said that for those individual who has very good understanding and ascertainment of emptiness is able to withdraw conventional appearance. For such a person there is no need to meditate on those stages of dissolution i.e. from the HUM that coming from outside and then become smaller…and so forth.  This is absolutely not necessary for those individual.
However, it does make a difference for us if we do engage in the gradual stages of dissolution because there is an impact on the mind. With the stages of dissolution, the objects of observations become more subtle.  As such, there is an impact on the energy and also on the stability and concentration on the mind as well.
We do these gradual stages of dissolution of oneself as Vajrabhairava dissolving in the syllable HUM at the heart. That syllable Hum becoming smaller and smaller and dissolving in emptiness. This will make a difference because it acts kind of a ripener for the completion stage. By the very nature of such visualization, you are kind of mimicking the movement and the dissolution of the winds into the central channel and into the heart chakra. That is the special reason for this visualization. This is how you taking death as the path of the dharmakaya. As much as possible, one would be able to visualize the practice. 
If one has participated in the initiation of unsurpassed yoga tantra and has actually received the tantric vows, then it is extremely important to meditate on emptiness every day; whether it is a coarse or subtle. Otherwise, a day that goes by without meditating on emptiness, then one incurs the root downfall of not remembering or recollecting the view of emptiness. Essentially taking the death as the path of dharmakaya is imagining the manifestation or actualization of this wisdom of bliss and emptiness and imagining that to be the actual or resultant dharmakaya. Such a practice is called taking death as the path of dharmakaya because it is the yoga to purify ordinary death and through which one will achieves the resultant dharmakaya of the Buddha. As such, such yoga is called taking death as the path of dharmakaya.
This visualization is at the level of imagination on the generation stage, taking death as the path of dharmakaya, act as a cause for actualizing the path clear light: the example clear light and the meaning clear light. Through which with the meaning clear light one achieves the resultant dharmakaya.
So taking death as the path of dharmakaya in the generation stage is an exercise in correlating the stages of dissolution and the internal signs of the dissolution that comes with it. With the dissolution of the environment and the inhabitants to oneself, and oneself into syllable Hum and so forth, and at the end culminating in the clear light mind. The most important thing is meditating on the meaning of emptiness.
People may be wondering about the benefit of visualizing the signs of dissolution of death. In one practice, although it is at the level of visualization, but when we imagine we think that is actually happening. Such a recollection or meditation on the signs of death is very helpful for reminding us about the impending death. Here, we are talking about the tantric practitioner who is someone who has already meditated on death and impermanence long before that. He is supposed to have meditated upon on the certainty of death, the time of death is uncertain and at the time of death nothing helps so on and so forth.
This practitioner train in the generation stage and because of the training, he is so familiar with the signs of dissolution. So when the actual death happens, such a practitioner will not be afraid because he has already rehearsed for so many times. He knows what is going to come next and when it comes, he is not surprised because he has already rehearsed so well and is so familiar knowing exactly what is going to come. So that person has no reason to be afraid.
We are talking about this kind of person who has done all the training and has all the prerequisites and is somebody who knows in and out of the whole technology. He knows the basis of purification, the path that purify, and the result of purification. He has been rehearsing daily for the whole life. So when that time comes the person is probably welcoming that death “Finally it is here. I have been rehearsing all this while and finally the day has come”.
For these very high level practitioner who has been rehearsing for their whole life. So when the opportunity comes, then it is no more visualization but is the real thing which they are looking so forward to. As such they really focus their mind and make use of the opportunity. There will be no more intermediate state if they actualize the path of clear light at the time of death.
Those very high level individual know that if they are able to transform that clear light of death into the path, then there is no more intermediate stage and they will definitely achieve enlightenment. Of course we are talking about someone who has bodhicitta really wants enlightenment. In their whole life they are looking forward to become a Buddha. They have been rehearsing and waiting for that opportunity, and when the opportunity comes, they will be so focus and fill with joy. For these individual, there is no fear or worry whatsoever.
As for the rest of people who are not those like that, I guess there is still benefit in being very familiar with these signs of dissolution. If one has been rehearsing in life and due to the familiarity, at least one will not be surprise at the time of death as one knows what to expect and what is going to happen. This does help with the lessening of fear.
Whatever the self-generation practice of unsurpassed yoga tantra that is done, be it extensive or short, it must possess the practice of taking the three bodies as the path. As with regard to taking death as the path of dharmakaya, you must possess these essential points. If not, then it is just an exercise. 
One also can do this practice in conjunction with the Six Session Guru Yoga: “My root guru, Vajradhara comes to the crown of my head. Once more he dissolves into me” At that time, you can meditate on this death dissolution.
Khen Rinpoche: If have time we will talk next class. 
Q&A
Student 1:  By the time of the 6th stages of dissolution, all the 25 coarse phenomena would have dissolved.  So the 7th and the 8th stages of dissolution would be something else rather than the 25 coarse phenomena. 
Ven Gyurme:  We got it. You are saying that by the 6th stage, all 25 coarse phenomena have already dissolved.
Khen Rinpoche: 6th stage is what?
Student: 6th is the red increase.
Khen Rinpoche: No, the 25 coarse phenomena have not fully dissolved yet because by the 4th stage, all the first four aggregates have dissolved. The aggregate of consciousness covers many levels of consciousnesses, basically, all the three minds including the clear light. So there is still the aggregate of consciousness.
If you take the aggregate of consciousness to only mean the coarse consciousnesses like the sense and mental consciousness, the mind of the 80 indicative conceptions, yes, they have ceased. But the aggregate of consciousness has a bigger pervasion. It does not consist of that only as it consist all levels of consciousnesses. 
Student 1: However the 6th stage on the red increase, I thought is the wording are the same would be corresponding to the 5th wisdom which is the wisdom of the sphere of reality and that would be on the 6th stage of the dissolution. When you are talking about the consciousness of the 5th aggregate which is the consciousness correspond to the 5th stage of dissolution….
Ven Gyurme:  It includes all levels of consciousnesses.
Student 1: Okay. How about the 6th stage is exalted wisdom sphere of reality or the mind of white appearance?
Khen Rinpoche: I did not say that the wisdom of dharmadhatu is associated with the 5th or 6th or 7th stage because it comes down to what is defined as the wisdom of dharmadhatu. I said in class that the wisdom of dharmadhatu or the basis is that which is suitable to be transformed into a Buddha Truth Body. If that is the case then you cannot correlate the wisdom of dharmadhatu as a factor of purification associated with the 5th, 6th and even the 7th stage. 
Student: I am still not so clear. So the 7th stage….
Khen Rinpoche: Next time I will make it clear. 
In the next lesson we will talk about the achievement of the intermediate state. 