Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L45.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:18.450727
================================================================================

We have looked at the signs of dissolution in the recent classes. There are 8 internal signs of dissolutions. As for the external signs of dissolution, they occur in the first four stages:
Earth element dissolves into water element, 
Water element into fire element, 
Fire element into wind element, 
Wind element into consciousness
These are the signs of dissolution that are said to happen at the time of death. I think it is important to know these signs of dissolution. When one is doing the daily recitations in the appropriate sections, it is good to remember these signs of dissolution, at least to bring them to mind for a couple of minutes, at least three minutes or so. If we do that, it will bring some benefit to the mind. For example, when you are doing your daily recitation of the Vajrabhairava self-generation rite, at the time of taking death as the path of the dharmakaya, your visualization:
Starts with the dissolution of the environment and the inhabitants into light into oneself as Vajrabhairava. 
Then oneself as Vajrabhairava dissolves into light from up and down into the syllable Hum at the heart 
The syllable Hum gradually dissolves upwards into the top of the horizontal line which is called the head of the HA, and then into crescent, then into the drop, and then into the nada.
The nada becomes smaller and smaller and then becomes non-observable.
Everything dissolves into emptiness. 
There are both internal and external signs of dissolution. You should be able to correlate those signs of dissolution with the relevant stages of dissolution. This is done at the level of imagination. In each stage of dissolution, imagine strongly that you are experiencing the sign and that is the actual sign. Here, this level of practice is done at the level of imagination.
We are doing at the level of visualization. As the stages of dissolution proceeds from one to the other, imagine that the mind becomes increasingly subtle. As appearances are withdrawn, culminating in the mind of appearance and it becomes increasing more and more subtle. 
Finally, imagine that the clear light is manifest. By then all appearances have been dissolved. What is left is just that appearance of this vacuity. 
At the time when you imagine the clear light has manifest, it is important to meditate on emptiness. With regards to meditating on emptiness, although in the long self-generation of Vajrabhairava, there are words there but it is not absolutely necessary that you have to meditate by relying on those words. Essentially you can use any verses that you find beneficial; any verses that deal with emptiness.  There are so many and one can choose whatever is beneficial. The idea is to meditate on emptiness and to get an understanding of that. For example, we can take the line from the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra “Form is empty. Emptiness is form”. Rather than using form as the subject, for example, you can use I, the self : “I is empty. Emptiness is I”. 
When one is at that stage where all appearances have already been withdrawn, nothing else appears except vacuity at that level of imagination and you think that is clear light. Essentially the extremely subtle wind mind is the basis of designation of the I. 
When all appearances have already been withdrawn, and if you think about the basis of designation of the I, other than this extremely subtle wind mind, there is nothing else that you can point to and posit as the basis of designation of I. So the I that is designated in dependence upon that will also be subtle. 
Although this is at the level of imagination, at that time when all the appearances have withdrawn and we think that the clear light has manifest, there is an I that takes that clear light as an object.
In terms of what is appearing, nothing else appears except for that vacuity. So there is an I that takes that extremely subtle mind as an object and to which the appearances of vacuity appears. You have to investigate the ultimate nature of that I, and even that I does not exist inherently. 
There is a verse from Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland which is very effective and useful which says:
The person is not earth, is not water, 
Not fire, not wind, not space,
Not consciousness, not all of them.
The I, the person is neither any of these elements individually. Neither is all six of them together. Outside of the elements, you will not be able to point to an I. What is the I? If you look for the I in such a way, it is a bit easier. Obviously the person is not the element of earth, not element of fire, not element of water, and not of wind. It is neither the consciousness. It is neither all six of that. You will not be able to find an I outside of those as well. 
This is just the first step when you discover that the I does not exist. You cannot find the I but yet the I exist. How does it exist? It does not exist from its own side but it exists as being dependently designated. It is easy to see that the I is not the body nor the elements but I think there is difficulty in seeing how the I is not the consciousness. That is difficult. That is why with the exception of the CMWS, most of the other schools assert that the I can be found. When you look for the illustration of the I, they will point to some aspect of the mind or mental consciousness. However, for the CMWS, it is clear and is not difficult to explain how the I is not the mental consciousness. We start with the coarse consciousnesses. It is clear that the I is not the sense consciousness. It is not the mental consciousness as well. 
Let’s take the waking state for example. At the time of sleep, none of these are manifest and they are not in operation. When they are not in operation, if the I is the mental consciousness, then it follows that the I does not exist. But that cannot be because who is sleeping? I am sleeping. So there is an I who is sleeping. So it is clear that the I is not the coarser levels of consciousnesses.
Is the I the subtle level of consciousness or not? If it is, how to account for people saying “This is my mind” or “This is the mind of appearance in my continuum, this is the mind of increase in my continuum, this is the mind of near attainment in my continuum, this is my clear light”. If you say that this is mind, obviously then the I is not that which is mind. 
If you talk about the subtlest levels of mind, the extremely subtle mind which is the mind of death, and if the I is that, then why do you say “This is my clear light of death? This is my mind of death”.
The fact that there is clear light belonging to this I, show that the I is not the clear light. It cannot be that which is yours. This shows clearly that if you look for the I, it cannot be found. It is clear that even the extremely subtle mind is not the I but yet the I exist. It exist as being dependently designated in relation to this extremely subtle mind. In this context which is the basis of designation. Other than that, it does not exist from its own side. This I that is designated in dependence upon this extremely subtle mind, you identify that as resultant dharmakaya.
The very essence of taking death as the path for the dharmakaya here in the generation stage is to imagine that through the stages of dissolution, the extremely subtle mind, the mind of clear light, is manifest. Then place your mind on the emptiness. This is to reflect and to meditate on emptiness. So that is the essence. 
The verses that I have mentioned are just an example. So if you find the verses that work for you then you meditate on that. 
Student 1: The I takes the most subtle mind as its object, understand that the I is the non-associated compositional factor which is not a consciousness How is something which is not a consciousness is able to take something as its object. 
Khen Rinpoche: Just because it is an object is not necessarily must possess by consciousness. For example, does sound possesses an object or not? 
For example the word ‘pillar’ is referring to something and that very thing that is referring to is the object that is possessed by the sound. 
It is okay to say that the person realizes an object right. The reason why we say that the person realizes an object is because the mind that is possessed by the person realizes the object. For that reason, we say that the person realizes the object. There is nothing wrong, right?
Student 1: Is this example applied to my question about the I realizes the most subtle mind but becomes…
Ven Gyurme: It takes clear light as its object. 
Student 1: But then just now you say I exist realizes the object, right? So the explanation is because the I arise in dependence on the mind. So actually is the mind that realizes its object. 
Khen Rinpoche: Because the mind realizes an object, therefore we say that the I realizes the object. There is no other reason for saying that the I realizes an object, right?
Student 1: Therefore the most subtle mind realizes itself.
Khen Rinpoche: So what is the problem? If you think about it, if you look for the I, then it is a very interesting exercise. The legs are moving, and because of that function or activity, then we say that I is walking. There is no other reason. The body is lying down and the mind is asleep, then we say “the I is sleeping”. There is no other reason, right? Why do we say that I am old? Because the aggregates are old. Why do you say that I am young? Because the aggregates are relatively young. There is no other reason. So other than that reason, if you look for that I, it cannot be found. 
I am talking about I am old. I am not talking about you. I am saying you are old then not so happy. I am old. 
Other than that, what other reason is there? Naturally then people may wonder “Therefore I am the body, is the body the I?  So that is the thing to analyze “Is the I the body or not? The I the body and/or mind or not?”
The body is I? Why not? Need to think. 
The meditation on emptiness and studying and understanding of it is very important. It is a very important exercise. It is one thing to say but we have to see for ourselves why the I is not the body, and why the I is not the mind as well. On the basis of saying that, then the conclusion is to lead the mind to the understanding that it is nothing other than that which is merely designated in dependence upon the body and mind which is the basis of designation. It does not exist other than that. That is how it exist. If you look for it, you cannot find. You have to move your mind in the direction of realizing I is that which is merely designated in dependence on that. That doesn’t mean that it feels like there is nothing.  How can it be it is just nothing? Obviously the I exist, and do things exist which is in our experience and is common sense. You cannot deny. In our experience, I exist. So the question is “How does it exist?” When you look for it, you cannot find. It is not the body, it is not the mind. Neither is both of them. Yet you cannot deny its existence. So there is no alternative left whatsoever other than for it to exist in mere name; as something dependently designated upon the body and mind. So there is no alternative. That is the conclusion that we have to arrive at one day. 
This is something we have to really think about everyday “How do the I exist?” Ultimately they say it exists as mere name; something that is merely designated in dependence upon the basis of designation. 
The meditation on emptiness is really important. If we do it, it is really helpful and definitely it helps in stopping the afflictions from arising quickly. Even if it arises, it will not as strong as it could be. That is the effect if we try to think hard and think well on emptiness. Of the many illustrations that are posited as the antidote in the practice of compassion, meditation on emptiness is said to be the most powerful. There is a reason why that is the case. 
If the person who has some familiarity that is built up over time of thinking and meditating on emptiness, for that person I think the afflictions don’t arise as strongly and maybe not as frequent. As such then the negativities accumulated by that person would not be as strong as well. 
In the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge, when they talk about the causes of afflictions, it explains that in the first place afflictions arise due to the imprint of the afflictions and then meet with the object which could act as a condition for the affliction to arise, but this not necessarily so. There is incorrect mental attention which is basically unrealistic projection of viewing of the object in question. When these come together, then anger, attachment, pride, jealousy, negative competitiveness and so on and so forth, then those afflictions manifest. 
Due to the power of karma, when we meet an object means there is consciousness meet with the object, then whatever that appears to the consciousness always appears as truly existent; whether it is pleasant or unpleasant. Then that leads to anger or attachment. Due to the power of karma, certain objects will appear beautiful to us while it might appear ugly or unpleasant to others. 
If you look at the evolution of that experience, the perceiving mind meets with the object in question, whatever object appears to our mind necessarily appears as truly existent. Whether it is truly existent pleasant or unpleasant, so that is a taken, just like a base, that comes automatically. But there are some objects, for whatever reason, it is just appears as bad or unpleasant. Just by meeting with the object it brings about unhappiness and you just don’t like it. The appearance, not just truly existent, it appears like that. 
Due to our karma, when we meet with the object, we perceive it as good or bad.  The appearance is not only just pleasant or unpleasant, but it is truly existent pleasant or truly existent unpleasant object. In the initial moments of that cognition, whether it is a liking or dislike, the strength of that emotion is not as strong as it will be if we persist in that experience.by letting the mind goes on its own. The initial moment is not as strong. There is something there but the experience is not as strong as it will be when incorrect mental attention comes into being. Essentially that is what we call exaggeration or projection. We think this and that, and then it reinforces the object is really nice. It appears as nice, we believe in it and we project more and more and then there is an increase in attachment towards the object in which the attachment become stronger and stronger. 
It is the same thing with anger. Due to karma, when the mind meets with the object, it appears as unpleasant which you just don’t like it right from the beginning. It not just appears as unpleasant but it is appearing as truly unpleasant from its own side. Then the mind really believes and assents to it. Then exaggeration follows which we call it incorrect mental attention. Then just like giving reason to support the anger which makes anger becomes stronger. 
What I am saying is something which I don’t think you have not heard of or do not know. The point is that you have to think about this every day and look at your experience and think about how our mind works. 
You see how it is like that in our experience. This incorrect mental attention which is just we call it projection or exaggeration is kind like finding reason to support the anger or attachment. We find many reasons and justification to really validate that this anger is justified or this attachment is definitely correct. This is like justification to find reason and proving something until you reach a point making the conclusion that is anger and that is attachment which is so certain, so stable and nothing can change your mind because you have thought about it. That is how it works. It very difficult to change our mind and it is very difficult to change our conclusion or our belief. 
If we look at the evolution of our mental process of how one leads to the other, that is the reality, isn’t it? Our mental projection exaggerates. We find all the reasons and justification. It is like oneself check oneself. It is like oneself says that is the thing and oneself then prove that it is the thing. At the end one concludes the object is pleasant or unpleasant. Essentially it is our own making and end up with our own conclusion. 
If we look at the evolution, it is clear that it is habituation. Once we reach the conclusion, we never ever think that we were the one who made the conclusion. “It is actually coming from the side of the object. The object is really good and is not decided by my mind and it has nothing to do with my mind. The pleasant object is completely coming from the side of the object. As for the enemy or the unpleasant object, it is exactly the same thing. Actually we are the one who created the enemy but we forgot we are the one who reached the conclusion. Then we think that is completely coming from the object side and we believe that is how it appears. We made up the concept but once we made the decision, we forgot that we are the one who made the decision. We believe that it is completely coming from the side of the object. When that specific mind in relation to that object is thinking in such a way, for as long as it is thinking in such a way and manifest, then there is no room to consider any other thing with regards to the object. Let’s say we are thinking about a bad person and when the mind is in that mode, the mind thinks that the person is hundred percent bad from its own side. When the mind is manifest, there is no opportunity whatsoever to think anything else of the object. Even if there is something good, the mind will not entertain such thought. That means when such a mind is manifest, for that time we are not able to discriminate, so we lose the ability to differentiate between what is good and bad and what is right and wrong. 
That is how we lead our life naturally; just by habituation and just automatic. Whether we are talking about what we consider the unpleasant or pleasant, our love ones, our friends on our side, people who are not on our side, enemies who don’t like us or whatever it is, it is very firm in our mind that we have already decided long ago. Everyday we reinforce it by finding reasons “Yeah, it is like that” and then day after day it is like that. 
That is the reality for all of us. Everybody is same. We never ever think that the problem could be with us. In fact, we think that “I am good. I am right” basically all the positives and we claim it. We have already made the decision and we really live by our decision. We stick to this principle thinking that we are right. That is our meditation, which means familiarizing. Everyday is so normal and automatically. Not only have we meditated, we have culminated the meditation and realize that is true. We accept that this is our life and that is how thing should be. Therefore, we don’t think that there is anything that needs to be done or changed. That is how it should be. We are all like that. We don’t see the need to change at all and that is why we don’t put in effort to change because in the first place we don’t see the point. We look at our own experience. We find it so difficult to change because of habit. It is very difficult. 
In the first place, without even talking about this life, we have all these imprints or habituation since beginningless lifetimes. We have to content with that in the first place. But it is not just that. When we come into this life, we don’t do anything with the imprints but in fact we reinforce those imprints. In the first place it is already almost near impossible, but we are making it even more impossible just by doing things naturally as we go along with the life. We are always reinforcing those imprints and we are not doing anything to destroy or acting on it. Then obviously it is even more difficult. Because it is part of us and we think that it is just human nature. So what so big deal about that? What so surprising in that? We don’t see as a big deal to have a lot of desire, attachment or to be angry because it is human nature. That is what it means to be human. So what is the problem? Why we make such a big fuss out of this by saying that this is a fault and this is a problem that we need to change? This is human nature. Then we also use this as another reason to reinforce the bad habits to make it even stronger; “That is how it should be! I am an ordinary being. That is how I should behave. What you expect?” That is what we say. Basically we are justifying the bad habits. 
First, I think it is so difficult for us to accept that we have issues that we need to address. We don’t even see the problem, not intellectually to see that it is a problem, and it is suffering. If we don’t accept that there is a problem, then how to change in the first place? 
If we are habituated to think or meditating on emptiness, then when we meet with the object, then at those initial moments, whether it is an unpleasant object or a pleasant object, relatively speaking, any destructive emotions or affliction that arises at that time is still not as strong. If we let it continue it will become stronger.  By thinking about the meaning of emptiness over and over again, then those moments when an affliction is kind of arising, there is an appearance of an object, whether good or bad, pleasant or unpleasant. It is not saying that there is nothing pleasant about a pleasant object. But there is also the aspect of that pleasant object appearing as truly existent from its own side. That is the thing that is not true. We are not negating the pleasant part but we are targeting at the false part - the appearance as truly existent pleasant. So we put mindfulness reminding ourselves that for someone who has meditated on emptiness and who has some understanding is able to recognize that it does not exist in the way it appears to me. There is no true existence. It is helpful as at least it will stop the mind from continued engagement with the object in an unrealistic way by doing all sorts of unrealistic projection. At least it stops that negative projection from increasing. 
So having mindfulness and vigilance becomes very important. To be mindful, to be vigilant and to be able to recognize when an affliction arises as soon as possible so we are able to catch it at the beginning or we are able to nip it in the bud. So when an affliction arises, at least in the back of your mind we know something is coming up. Only if we are able to recognize, then we are able to do something. If we really do something about it such as applying antidote to it, at it just arisen and still relatively weak, there is some chance to stop it from increasing. In fact, we maybe can even lessen it if we catch it as soon as possible. 
One problem is not catching the afflictions. Catching the afflictions is the difficult thing as we are not even aware that it has arisen. So that is the problem. We must catch it as it arises. The sooner we catch it then the sooner we will be able to apply the antidote. The sooner we are able to apply the antidote then it is easier to deal with it especially when it is still in brewing stage. If we have the habit of being able to be aware of afflictions arising and try to build up the habit over and over again and once we get into this kind of habit, then there is hope for life really to change. We will find ourselves transforming for the better. By acquiring this habit of being able to mindful and vigilant then I think we are able to start to see some positive changes to the action of body, speech and mind.  
It is clear from our experience that at time we know that there is something bad going on but because it has gone to a stage where it become uncontrollable. We know it is bad. We know “I am angry” but it has gone to a point of no return in that there is nothing we can do about it within our capacity. When the exaggeration becomes stronger and stronger, which we call incorrect mental attention then the affliction that leads to either attachment or anger becomes very strong. That is when we say karma is accumulated. With this strong state of mind then whatever we are doing with our body and speech will create and accumulate karma. This shows that strong incorrect mental attention leads to manifest physically and verbally in the form of violent speech, harsh speech or violent physical action. Then the karma that is accumulated will also be very strong. 
We start from seeing the mental evolution and how it builds up. There is an appearance of true existence which is the basis for incorrect mental attention and that leads to strong emotion. This leads to strong negative action accumulate karma. It is not that we don’t know any of this. Although it is said in Lamrim, that is our life story. Maybe all of us lead our life like that. It is just natural and habituation and it just goes on and on. When we get angry or we do nasty thing and at the same time we just think that “It is me. Just take it or leave it. That is my character. This is my nature. What you want me to do?” Then we accumulate negativity and we harm ourselves and then we harm others. When we are such a point, we could say there is no hope. There is no room for change. It is difficult because it becomes almost like the nature. It is so habituated. It is nature. So, it is very difficult to change and cannot be changed anyway. 
In the first place, why there are people even at that stage? Because of not having applied the antidote in the first place, that is why it is so habituated. That is why it is very strong. It is almost said that there is no way of changing. You can do whatever but it is quite difficult. What do you expect to do? When the mind is already like and even so if one studies the dharma in that state for 20, 30 years, nothing will change. How could change when it is no possible? It is up to our individual self. We just have to analyze and think about it for ourselves. Whether we have been studying and practicing the dharma for 10 years or 20 years or 30 years, as everyone is different, whatever the specified time, we just have to see over that time are we getting better? We only know ourselves. We should only check on ourselves. Let’s check; “Am I a better self today than where I was 10 years or 20 years ago? Or is this a better version of me as compare to the self before meeting dharma? Did we become worst or did we become better? We just have to check at ourselves and also see internally how the mind evolve, how it leads to exaggeration and how it leads to certain afflictions. We have to look inward and discover whether that is true or not.  If we do discover something that needs to fix then we try to fix it by applying the antidote. 
It is not that all of us here don’t know the dharma. We have heard so many teachings and even heard about the Lamrim for many thousands of times. This is just my exaggeration but the thing is that you have heard it so many times. We just need to check ourselves and do some self-discovery. Then based on what you have discovered then ask yourself “With what I have been doing with my life so far where am I going to after death. Am I really to get a good rebirth or a bad rebirth?” Before you can even really ask that question “Based on what I have been doing so far, am I going to get a good rebirth or bad rebirth?”, in the first place, do you  really believe there is a rebirth or not. I am not just talking about casual talk “Yeah, I believe”. That kind of wishy washy belief that is not founded on reason or ascertainment is not going to cut it at all. If you what to have a real change, it is important to gain an understanding on reincarnation and not just “Yeah, it exists because I feel it is like this and it should be”. But it has to be the real ascertainment which based on the correct reason. It is not just a belief. It is said that we should develop an ascertainment with certainty or conviction.
After having that kind of conviction that comes from reasoning, then we have to take rebirth. There are only 2 counters for rebirth - the counter that goes to the happy realms and the counter that goes to the lower realms. Are we likely to get a good one or are we likely to get a bad one. If we go to the lower realm, can we really tolerate it? This question of whether we can tolerate it or not doesn’t really work unless there is real hard deep hearted conviction that there is future lives and there is reincarnation? When we talked about the belief in rebirth, we are not just talking about rebirth in general. End of the day, we are talking about ourselves. Do we have this feeling “When I died, I will be going somewhere that is going to be a next life?” Here we are talking about this belief. If we are born in one of the inopportune states such as hell, if we really think about it, it is very difficult to see how it is possible to get out once you are in such a state? It is very difficult to fit the mind. We also need to have some conviction in this. This is not just intellectual. If we really get some feel of how there is a next life and since we know ourselves well and if we look into ourselves based on our life, our character, our karma and then put all these together then we will understand that we are heading to the lower realms.
For example, if we will be born in the hell, not just intellectually but with feeling, then real fear arises. If fear does arise maybe there is hope that we can change for the better as that fear really motivates us to change. But generally that is difficult for any of us. There is always the danger for us that dharma is just for knowledge. This is just something to be learnt. Therefore we really need to put some attention that dharma is something to be practiced.  
Back to the understanding of meditation on emptiness, it is said to be the supreme antidote to afflictions and antidotes to negative karma if we understand and meditate on emptiness every time. In the context of what we have been talking about so far, at the level of imagination we do the death dissolution and then culminating thinking that clear light is manifest. The point is that at the time to meditate on emptiness, we analyze and then get rid of the habit. Gradually we build up the habit then overtime we will be able to make our afflictions weaker and stop them from becoming bigger. With that we don’t end up having karma accumulated but at least lesser. At the same time, meditation on emptiness is said to be the supreme antidote to purify the negativities. In particular, for those who have obtained the tantric vow, if a day passes without meditating or reflecting or bringing to mind the meaning of selflessness, either coarse or subtle at least, then a root downfall may happen. 
I get this one questions from many people: Can I just do all my six sessions in one shot in the morning? I personally think it is okay but not exactly sure but provided you are able to live life in the meaning of the six sessions guru yoga throughout the day. Observing or guarding the tantric vow involves guarding against many things and having to do many things. The purpose of the Six Sessions is to remind and to recollect what the training is. That is why that is three in the day and three in the night. The idea is to remind ourselves during the day and then during the night. If you are able to keep the mindfulness and maintain the practice, then why not? If you are living in the meaning of Six Sessions and is always in the mind, there is no need even to recite of the prayer. The very actually idea of the Six Sessions is that you are supposed to be reminded every now and then. If you divide 24 hours into six parts, actually every four hours you are supposed to engage in the practice. That means you have to give up sleep. Even if you are able to do that every four hours, for our level that is not sufficient and is a bit too little for us. 