Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L46.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:15.201456
================================================================================

The basis dharmakaya is the mind of death. The coarser level of winds and consciousnesses has to dissolve before the mind of clear light can manifest. In the stages of dissolution it is said that the person who is dying experiences different signs internally. Altogether there are 8 signs which we have talked about it over the last few lessons.
What are the benefits of knowing the signs of dissolution? We put what we have learned into practice when we recite the self-generation rite, particularly during the practice of taking death as a path of dharmakaya. During taking death as a path the dharmakaya, we imagine that through the dissolution of the various factors we experience the signs of the dissolution.
What is the benefit of doing the practice of taking death as a path of dharmakaya?  Such a practice is a cause for actualizing the path of clear light and it also places the potential imprint to achieve the resultant dharmakaya in the future. After learning the stage of dissolution and the signs of the dissolution and so forth, we can put this information to use at the time of reciting the self-generation rite or the practice of the Six Sessions Guru Yoga. At least it fills the purpose of receiving the wang when entering into tantra. 
The dissolution starts with earth element dissolving into water element, the water element dissolving into fire element, the fire element dissolving into wind element, and then the wind element dissolving into the consciousness. 
When the wind element dissolving into consciousness, has all the winds (energies) of the body completely dissolved?  No! 
Has the consciousnesses completely dissolves? No! 
At the time of the wind dissolving into the consciousness, the 80 indicative conceptions will dissolves. Even after having dissolved, it doesn’t mean that there aren’t any other levels of consciousness that have not dissolved. 
When the wind dissolve into the consciousnesses, since they are the mount of the coarser level of the consciousnesses, the coarser level of consciousness also dissolve.  
After the coarser level of the winds (energies) has dissolved only then will the subtler level of the winds will manifest.
Likewise, after the coarser level of consciousness has dissolved, the subtler level of consciousness will manifest, starting with the mind of appearance, proceeding to increase, then attainment and then culminating in the clear light. 
If we divide the mind into coarse and subtle, the coarse include all the mind up to the 80 indicative conceptions, then the subtle level of consciousnesses would be consisted of the mind of appearance, mind of increase, mind of near attainment and clear light.
Has the subtle mind gradually manifest?  Starting with mind of appearance, mind of increase, mind of near attainment and then culminating to clear light, the latter is subtler than the former. Likewise, the winds (energies) also become increasingly subtle. 
It is said that as the mind become increasingly subtle, it becomes clearer.  It is said that as the mind become more subtle, starting from the mind of appearance and goes all the way to clear light, as that happen along the way, the subsiding of the dualistic appearance become greater so much so that when the mind of clear light manifests, nothing else appear except vacuity.  There is no conventional appearance whatsoever. There is nothing else except this appearance of vacuity. It is said that the experience is similar to the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. That is why the mind of death is called the clear light of death.  Is it an actual clear light? Is it a real clear light?  No, it is not but nevertheless it is given the name clear light.
What appear to the clear light of death?  Vacuity!
The appearance of vacuity is accompanied by the appearance of true existence i.e. it does not appear as not truly existent. As such, the dualistic appearance has not completely subsided. 
The mind of death is called the clear light mind mainly because of the coarse dualistic appearance have been subsided.  Nothing else appears except vacuity.  Because of that it is given the name clear light.
For the person who has meditated on emptiness while alive and through the force of familiarity, at the time of death, that individual is able to ascertain emptiness with that extremely subtle mind of clear light which then becomes the real actual clear light.  Of the two - objective clear light and subjective clear light - you can say for once the actual real subjective clear light.
The objective clear light - the object that is realized by this extremely subtle mind is emptiness.  
So there are objective clear light and the subjective clear light.
When the extremely subtle mind of clear light that ascertains emptiness transforms into the entity of direct perception, then that mind becomes the meaning clear light; which is the antidote to the afflictive obscuration.
It is said that if the clear light of death can be transformed into that which realizes emptiness, from there is no more rebirth in the cyclic existence. However, if that doesn’t happen then one has to take rebirth again. This is how it is explained for somebody who has entered tantra from the onset.  
After the clear light of death, the intermediate state is established. The intermediate state is also the given the name the basis of enjoyment body.
There are 2 types of illusory bodies:
the impure illusory body 
the pure illusory body
These two illusory bodies are the path time enjoyment body.
The actual enjoyment body is the resultant enjoyment body that is which is adorned with the major signs and exemplifications.
There is no certainty to the length of time for the individual to remain in the clear light of death. It could be 3 days, it could be less or it could be more, it could be a week, or it could be a month.  It is a custom in many Buddhist communities that upon dying, the body is not cremated right away and usually it is done after 3 days or more.  During this time, prayer will be recited for that person. The point is that you never know whether the consciousness is still residing in the body or not. If that is the case, if the body of the person is cremated while the consciousness is still in the body then it will cause problem for that individual. Although it is not certain for ordinary folks will stay for 3 days, this is what the text say that ordinary folks can stay up to 3 days.
The extremely wind-mind abides inside the indestructible drop at the heart. It doesn’t matter how many days the extreme subtle mind resides in the body. Comes the time when the extreme subtle wind in the indestructible drop is stirred, the stirring of the extremely subtle wind is the condition for the indestructible drop (which is made up of subtle white and red bodhicitta) to split. That is the time when the extremely subtle mind leaves the body. That is death.  That is when we can say the person has really dies.  Simultaneous with the exiting of the extremely subtle mind from the indestructible drop is the establishment of the intermediate state.
When the indestructible drop (which is made up of the subtle white and red bodhicitta) at the heart split, the extremely subtle mind exits the body. Simultaneous with that is the establishment of the intermediate state. 
What are the sign when the consciousness has exited the body?  The indestructible drop at the heart has split so the red portion of the drop (which is the essence of red bodhicitta) moves up and exit through the nose. The white portion (which is the essence of white bodhicitta) exit from the tip of the secret place. 
It is said this happens for most people as this is a sign that the consciousness has left the body. However, there are exceptions. If that person has been sick for a long time or if the vital essence in the body has deteriorated, the body has become emaciated and weak, then one may not be able to observe such signs. Otherwise, it is said this will happen to most people - the red bodhicitta exiting from the nose, and the white bodhicitta from the secret place. 
There have been many accounts of individuals who are able to remain in the state for 3 weeks and during that time the body remains fresh and doesn’t undergo decomposition. It is really amazing and strange. Comes the time when the red and white bodhicitta exit from the body, right away the body decomposes and starts to smell. 
One also hears of accounts of how even after the person has stopped breathing for quite a long while, somehow there are signs that parts of the body have moved, for example, the position of the hand move after having stopped breathing for a long time. 
Khen Rinpoche: Move by himself, or move by others, I am not sure.
Even in this day such phenomena still happens to some individuals. For as long as the consciousness is still in the body, the person is dying and is not dead. During that time, the body is still remains fresh i.e. it doesn’t decompose. 
The extremely subtle wind (which is the mount of the extremely subtle mind clear light of death) is the substantial cause for the intermediate state body. 
The extremely subtle mind acts a cooperative condition for the establishment of the intermediate state body.
The intermediate state comes into being. There are couple of characteristics that such intermediate state being possesses. One of it is the aspect. It is said that the intermediate state being looks similar in aspect to the type of being that he is going to be born as. The type of being here means the general category such as human or animal. 
Intermediate state body is not made up of blood and flesh. It is an energy body and it is established separate from the old physical body. So once the intermediate state is established, the connection with the previous physical body is completely severed. There is no connection whatsoever. 
Once the intermediate state comes into being, its karmic connection with the old physical body is completely severed. There is no more relationship of that which it dependent and that which it is dependent upon. This relationship is severed.  
The intermediate state is established when one arises from the clear light of death. The very first consciousness of the intermediate state being is the mind of near attainment. So when one arises from the clear light of death, then the mind of the black near attainment comes into being and simultaneous from the arising of the mind, the intermediate state comes into being. 
The 8 signs of dissolution experienced at the time of death are the 8 signs of evolution. Then when the intermediate state comes into existence, then the 8 signs of involution arises; which means the 8 signs of reverse order. (In simple English: the 8 signs of the forward process and 8 signs of the reverse process). 
When one arises from the clear light of death, the mind that manifests is the mind of black near attainment. Simultaneous with the manifesting of that mind is the establishment of the intermediate state.
Of the different types of birth, the establishment of the intermediate state is miraculous birth. The intermediate state being possesses the complete sense powers and is born with full faculties. For example, if the intermediate state being is going to be born as a human, he has the aspect of a human such as possessing the limbs and so forth. 
Then the mind of that intermediate state becomes increasingly coarser. It starts with the mind of near attainment of the reverse order. From that is the mind of increase. Then the mind becomes more coarse - from the mind of red increase comes the mind of white appearance. From that the 80 indicative conceptions arise, and then follow by the signs associated with the dissolution of the elements. Although we don’t talk about the intermediate state being having the coarse elements such as earth element, water element and so forth, but the signs associated with the dissolution state will still arise. From the mind of 80 indicative conceptions arise the flame of the butter lamp, vision of the fire flies, appearance of smoke and finally ending up with the mirage in the reverse order.
It is said that this intermediate state being becomes very busy looking for a place to take rebirth. It is said this intermediate state being can only enjoy smell as they don’t eat or drink, but only enjoy smells. They experience different kinds of appearances. The intermediate state being is also referred to as a smell-eater. 
How do we know that intermediate state exists? In the text, it usually uses dream experiences as an example. It is said when we fall asleep, a similitude of the 8 signs occur. As they are too brief and happen quickly, it is said they do arise. It is said that there is a clear light of sleep and the dream body comes into existence after arising from the clear light of sleep. This dream body goes around and does stuff. At the time of awaking from sleep, this dream body is dissolved back into the extremely subtle wind mind. I don’t really know whether the dream body happens to everybody or not but you hear that people do travelling with their dream body and do stuff with their dream body in the sleep. I don’t know whether we can see a dream body or not.
Khen Rinpoche: I heard many stories like that. During sleep, the dream body goes to Lhasa, Tibet and come back. There are many stories like that. But I don’t know whether everybody have this dream body. But when you dream, you go many places but whether your dream body really goes or just a dream only. Anybody have better idea we have dream body? 
Whether dream body is used as an example to help us to get an idea of the intermediate state. In the first place, what do we posit or identify as a dream body. 
Khen Rinpoche: I am not sure. Sometimes interesting when you have dream. Sometime I have a dream. I cannot like fly this (backward) but like that I can fly very high. When I wake up, my heel is so painful. I never had that. I don’t know whether is related to my dream body or not. I have no idea anyway. So when you have dream, your dream body really go or not. My question is: When you dream, is it just a dream or you have a dream body that fly. I am not sure.  
The teachings tell us that dream body exists. But personally I don’t think that if it is a dream, it is necessarily involves a dream body moving outside out of our body. I guess it is just an appearance to our mind. In fact dream is a mistaken appearance; just a projection of our mind. Yet you cannot say dream body doesn’t exist. You do hear accounts of people travelling in their dream and the teachings tell us the dream body exists. But it doesn’t also mean that every single dream is a dream body. If there is dream body, maybe the dream body dissolves back into the clear light of sleep and gradually the individual awakes.
The intermediate state being body essentially is an energy body and very subtle. It is kind of like mental body; not the bodhisattva kind of mental body. 
(Ven Gyurme: It is two different words in Tibetan but in English we use the same translation and sometimes is confusing. )
This intermediate state being body cannot be obstructed by most phenomena; almost anything. There is only one thing that can obstruct the intermediate being is the mother womb. Through the force of karma, all intermediate state being possesses miraculous powers; which mean they can go anyway they like. Just by having that mere thought of a place, the intermediate state being will arrives there instantly. 
These are some of features or characteristics of the intermediate state being:
- It possess the miraculous ability to travel anywhere just by mere thought.
- It cannot be obstructed by almost anything except for the future mother womb
- It subsists on smell only.
If one is going to be reborn as a human being, one achieves the intermediate state of a human first then one goes on to be reborn. If one is going to the lower realm, one achieves the intermediate state of the lower realm, for example, intermediate state of a hell being. 
Then there is a discussion on whether the intermediate state can be reversed (in simple English: can it be change). There are two views:
1. Vasubandhu in his Treasury of Manifest Knowledge says that once the intermediate state is established it cannot be change. If one has achieved the intermediate state of a human, then one is guaranteed to be born as a human. If one has achieved the intermediate state of a hell being, then one definitely going to be born as a hell-being.
I think the assertion is basically based on this. First, there is statement in the sutra that says the ripening of karma cannot be changed or cannot be reversed.
If you think about it, once the karma imprint has been nourished by craving and grasping to the point of no return and the projected results will be actualized. Craving, grasping, potential existence that become imprints which has been nourished to the point that the projected results will certainly arise. If that is the case the projected result has already been established, then how can one reverse or change that? 
While it is said that one remains in the intermediate state for up to 49 days. If the living does all kind of virtue activities and puja to accumulate merits and dedicated to that individual during the 49 days, then qualm arise. If the intermediate state cannot be change, what is the point of doing all these? 
If you tell Vasubandhu that there is no need to do all these virtue activities and puja to accumulate merit for the decease, then Vasubandhu has his own reply: No, it is not meaningless. It will not change the fact that he is going to hell because once the intermediate state of the hell being is established there is no way out and hell is for sure. But while the person is in the hell, he will experience less suffering and his visit to hell will be shorter and sooner or later he will get born as a human or a god. So it is not that it is meaningless. This is Vasubandhu’s position.
2. His brother Asanga begs to differ. In his Compendium of Knowledge, Asanga says that even though the intermediate state has really comes into existence, it still can reverse and can be change. He says that if very strong and powerful virtue is created within the 49 days, then it can change the intermediate state. So it is not meaningless but it is important and good to do. So what can change the intermediate state? Strong virtue!
There is a prevalent custom among the Tibetan and the Buddhist living in the Himalayan region to engage in a lot of practices when somebody passes away. I think it come down to this belief that the intermediate state can be changed if strong virtue is created. So people try to do strong practices for 49 days. There are some also who offer sur without a break for those forty nine days as the intermediate state being don’t eat  or drink, and the only thing that intermediate being can enjoy is sur.
The intermediate state being remains in the intermediate state for a maximum period of 49 days. Upon reaching the 7th day, if the intermediate state being has not taken rebirth he will undergo a small death. If by the next 7th he has not taken rebirth then he undergoes another death. So, one can die in the intermediate state up to maximum of 7 times. 
It is also a common among the Tibetan and the Buddhist living in the Himalayan region to do more practice and make more offerings and so forth on the 7th day. Even if they are not able to do something every day, they will definitely do something on the 7th, 14th, 21st, till the 49th day. 
As long as the conditions for rebirth are complete, rebirth will happen. It is not that one has to stay for a minimum of one week in the intermediate state then only one can take rebirth. No, it is not like that. As soon as the condition comes together, rebirth can happen maybe almost right away after the intermediate state has been established. So it is very much depending on whether the condition is there or not.
The intermediate state being has to die before he can take rebirth.  So when that intermediate state being dies, the intermediate being will experience the signs of dissolution of the evolution (the forward process) starting from mirage and so forth. 
When the white and red bodhicitta exits from the upper and lower openings of the body, then intermediate state is established. When the intermediate state is established all connection with the former physical body which is its basis is completely severed. In many of the text it is said that intermediate state being can see the own former body but it doesn’t have the attachment to it and doesn’t regard it as “Is my body” and neither has that wish to enter that body. 
This is mentioned in Asanga’s text Yogacarabhumi but in another text it talks about an exception. The exception is that if a person dies of untimely death, the karma to live has not been completely exhausted. Due to the force of strong condition, which is not mentioned, the intermediate state being can enter back into its own former body. The text says that this is mentioned in some Mahayana sutra but not telling from which sutra. 
Khen Rinpoche: So I don’t know which Mahayana sutra. I need to find out. 
Yes, some scholars say that the intermediate beings do see their relatives while in the intermediate state.
They can see what they are up to. They do see them engaging in the practice. Sometimes the intermediate being does join the relatives, sit around and rejoice. Because of that, they accumulate some merit as well. They can see us but we cannot see them. It is said that they will also talk to us but we don’t hear them. 
BP1:
What happens at the time of death? 
• At the time of death, the coarse physical body ceases. 
• First the four different elements (earth, water, fire and wind) gradually dissolve into one another, i.e., the earth element dissolves into the water element and so forth. 
• The mind also becomes subtler 
• After the dissolution of the four elements, the minds of the 80 indicative conceptions gradually dissolve into the mind of white appearance. 
• The mind of white appearance gradually ceases and dissolves into the mind of red increase. 
• The mind of red increase ceases and dissolves into the mind of black near attainment. 
• That mind of the black near-attainment ceases and dissolves into the extremely subtle mind, the mind of clear light at the time of death. 
• When this clear light mind manifests, this is when actual death is said to happen. 
You need to have a rough idea of the stages of dissolution: 
o First, the coarser levels of consciousnesses dissolve. 
o Then the minds of the 80 indicative conceptions dissolve. 
o Then the mind of white appearance dissolves. 
o Then the mind of red increase dissolves. 
o Then the mind of the black near-attainment dissolves. 
o Finally, at the end of the death process, it culminates in the mind of clear light. 
At the time of our death, (as) we go through the dissolution process, we will arrive at the stage where the mind of white appearance manifests. At that time one has the appearance of whitish light. This is an internal appearance to the mind and is not something external or appearing from outside. 
Why does this happen? We have three main channels in our body: the central channel and the right and left channels. The mind of white appearance starts when the winds in the right and left channels start to enter the central channel. The winds at the upper part of the body enter the central channel from the top and, at the same time, the white bodhicitta at the crown (which came from our father) starts to descend together with the movement of the winds down into the central channel. This white bodhicitta descends to the level of one’s heart chakra. As it descends, one will have the internal appearance of white light. 
The mind of white appearance is followed by the manifestation of the mind of red increase. That happens when the winds in the right and left channels enter the central channel from beneath the navel. Due to the movement of the winds up the (central) channel, the red bodhicitta at the navel that came from our mother moves up the central channel to the level of the heart. Due to the movement of this red bodhicitta up the central channel, one has the internal reddish appearance. 
After the mind of red increase, the mind of black near-attainment will manifest. Earlier on we saw how the winds in the right and left channels enter the central channel from the top and bottom. These winds gradually come to the level of the heart but they have not yet dissolved at the heart. 
At the heart, there is the indestructible drop which has always existed from birth. When the white and red bodhicittas come together at the level of the heart, there is an appearance of darkness to the mind. It is like fainting or blacking out. It is said that there are two parts to this mind of black near- attainment: During the earlier part, it is said that one still has some mindfulness and objects can appear to that mind. In the later part, that mind does not have mindfulness of any object. At that time, it is like one has fainted or blacked out. 
When one arises (wakes up) from that state, (at the end of the dissolution process) that is when the extremely subtle mind manifests. This is the clear light mind of death. What appears to that clear light mind is vacuity or nothingness. It is not the emptiness (of inherent existence) that we usually talk about. Together with this extremely subtle mind is the extremely subtle wind. It is said that one can abide in this state for 3 days. For yogis or practitioners, they are able to do so for a longer period of time. 
One remains in that state of clear light mind of death till the extremely subtle wind starts to stir. That is the time when the extremely subtle wind inside the indestructible drop will leave the body with the extremely subtle mind (since these two are one entity). 
The signs of the consciousness having left the body is the emitting of the white and red bodhicittas: The red bodhicitta at the level of the heart ascends and is emitted through the nostril. The white bodhicitta at the level of the heart descends and is emitted from the sexual organ. Seeing these red and white bodhicittas leave the body is taken as the signs that the consciousness has left the body. 
The body of the intermediate state comes into being when one enters the intermediate state. The extremely subtle wind is the mount of the extremely subtle mind. 
o The extremely subtle wind is the substantial cause of the body of the intermediate state being. 
o The extremely subtle mind is the substantial cause of the mind of the intermediate state being. 
When one enters the intermediate state, the first consciousness that comes into being is the mind of black near attainment followed gradually by the mind of red increase, white appearance, the 80 indicative conceptions and so forth. Basically, the mind becomes coarser, i.e., when (the mind) is first established, it is established as subtle and then it becomes coarser. 
You have to know the stages of the process of dying and how one comes into existence again because when we examine the completion stage, this whole process will come into play. 
o In essence when one dies, the coarse mind will become subtler. 
o When one enters the intermediate state, the mind moves from being subtle into a coarser state. 
Question: Can the body of the intermediate state being also be divided into coarse and subtle levels? 
Answer: It is not clear in the text but I guess one can posit different levels of subtlety because when the intermediate state being first comes into existence, the mind of black near-attainment manifests. There is a wind that is the mount of that consciousness just as there are the winds that are the mounts of the minds of red increase and white appearance. These three levels of mind are considered subtle. We can therefore probably say that the winds which are the mounts of these three consciousnesses (can also) be classified as subtle bodies. When the intermediate state being comes into full existence, developing the five sense powers and soforth, we can then posit that to be the coarse body. 
In order to take rebirth, the intermediate state being has to die and does so by going through the same death dissolution process. The coarser levels of mind dissolve and the subtle mind manifests. We have the 80 indicative conceptions, the minds of white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment, finally culminating in the clear light mind of death. 
It is this mind of clear light of death of the intermediate state being that connects with the fertilised egg (at conception) and takes rebirth in the womb. The mind becomes increasingly coarser again. The mind of black near- attainment will manifest, followed by the mind of red increase and so forth. This is the reverse process. In the case of rebirth from the womb, birth does not refer to the time when one emerges from the mother’s womb. Birth is the first moment of conception. 
From the perspective of a normal person, the winds do not move into the central channel until the time of death. They move into the central channel due to the force of karma.