Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L47.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:15.580933
================================================================================

The intermediate state is achieved when the winds are stirred while the individual is in the clear light of death. That establishment of the intermediate state is simultaneous with the arising of the mind of near attainment of involution. 
The indestructible drop abides at the heart for as long as one lives. At the very end of the dying process, when that indestructible drop splits then the intermediate state is established with the arising of the mind of near attainment of the involution.
The mind of the intermediate state being becomes increasingly coarse.
From the mind of near attainment of the involution 
 then comes the mind of increase,
 then comes the mind of appearance,
 then comes the 80 indicative conceptions. 
Although the intermediate state body is not composed of these coarse elements but nevertheless the signs associated with the dissolution of those elements arise. 
From the mind of 80 indicative conceptions
there is an appearance of glow or the flame of a butter lamp,
then the appearance of fire flies 
then the appearance of smoke
then the appearance of mirage
Basically, they are the signs associated with the dissolution of:
the wind element into fire element, 
fire element into water element,
water element into earth element. 
So the signs of dissolution that are associated with those are experienced.
When the coarser minds such as the 80 indicative conceptions and afflictions arises, the intermediate state being experiences all kinds of hallucinations. Some are seemingly joyous and positive while some are of frightening appearances or hallucinations. 
So the intermediate state being is said:
sometimes in a very joyous mood 
sometimes in a sad or unhappy mood
sometimes experiencing lot of fears
The intermediate state being can only enjoy smells. They seem to be always on the move searching for the place of next rebirth.
When the intermediate state being sees the mixture of egg and semen of the future parents, and due to karma, the egg and the semen of the future parents appear as man and woman lying in sexual intercourse. In reality it is the egg and semen of the future parents but it appears as a couple lying in sexual intercourse. 
If the intermediate state being is to be born as a male, it develops aversion and anger towards the appearance of the man but develops a very strong attachment for the woman that is appearing and has a strong desire to embrace that woman. 
If the intermediate state being is to be born as a female, it is said that this intermediate state being develops aversion and anger towards the appearance of the woman but develops a very strong attachment for the man that is appearing and has a strong desire to embrace that man.
Due to the strong desire for embrace, as it approaches closer and closer, that appearance of the man or woman that was there earlier on disappears. What the intermediate state being sees are only the genitals of both the male and female. Because of only seeing the genitals of the male and female and not able to find the object of desire or attachment, the intermediate state being gets upset and very angry and becomes unconscious (not faint). 
Then the signs of dissolution arise again:
earth dissolve in water
water dissolves into fire,
fire dissolve in into wind, 
wind dissolve in into consciousness, 
the mind of white appearance 
the mind of red increase, 
the mind of black attainment
clear light of death
The intermediate state being then dies and reaches the clear light. When the clear light ceases, then there is the arising of the mind of near attainment. Simultaneous with that is the entering of that being into the fertilized egg.  That is the first moment of rebirth or birth.
When the intermediate state being dies and takes rebirth, that intermediate state being’s mind becomes increasingly coarse.  
From the clear light of death arises the mind of near attainment of involution
Follows by the mind of increase of involution, 
Follows by the mind of appearance of involution and so on 
So the mind becomes increasingly coarse again. 
Back to the intermediate state being, it is said the intermediate state body is a very subtle form which is made of energy and is not obstructed by almost anything. It possesses some miraculous abilities.
It is said in Vasubandhu’s Treasury Of Manifest Knowledge that the size of the intermediate state being that is going to be born as a human would be the size of a five or six year old child. It is not definite but generally speaking that is the size of an intermediate state being.
It is also clearly said in the teaching that if one is going to be born as human being then the intermediate state being will look like a human being.
It is said in the teachings that the intermediate state being possesses complete faculties and all the limbs which are all established at the same time as it is a miraculous birth.
It is said clearly that the aspect of the intermediate state being which is going to be born as a human will in general look like a human. It is said they possess complete faculties and all the limbs. 
What if that individual is going to be born in the womb and comes out of the womb as a baby without limbs? It does happen, right? Then where is the concordance of the aspect? 
An intermediate state being have the complete faculties. But this doesn’t mean the intermediate being looks exactly like what he or she is going to be reborn as, but rather in general aspect. If one is going to be born as a human being, then one looks like a human being.
In the teachings, the text talks about the appearance of the intermediate state being. 
If you are talking about the intermediate state of a hell being, the body looks like a charred log. 
If a person who is in the intermediate state of a preta, the body looks kind of liquid. 
If a person who is in the intermediate state of an animal, the body appearance looks like smoky.
For those going to be born as a human or desire realm god, their bodies have kind of a golden complexion. 
Those who are going to be born in the form realm, their bodies have whitish glow appearance.
As for how the environment appears to them, 	
for those intermediate state beings who are going to be reborn in the lower realms, the environment looks very dark and gloomy
For those who are going to have good rebirth, the environment looks like night sky pervaded by moonlight.
How they move in general:
For those intermediate state beings that are going to be born in lower realms, they move with the head downwards i.e. inverted. 
For those who are going to be born as a human being, basically just walk straight (upright).
For those who are going to be born as gods, they travel upward direction
For those who are going to be born in the desire and form realms necessarily take rebirth via the intermediate state.
For those who are going to be born in the formless realm do not have to go through the intermediate state. With the cessation of the mind of clear light of death, the next moment the concentration associated with one of those four formless realm manifest
In the text by Yangchen Gawai Lodoe, he states that those who are taking rebirth in the formless realms, with the cessation of the clear light of death, the next moment they are in the formless realm actualize one of the minds of the formless realms without having to go through the minds of attainment, increase, appearance and so forth. 
Following by what he said, the coarse mind comes into being. Then the question is: Why is it like that?
This seems to be an exception? It is clearly said in Yangchen Gawai Lodoe’s text that there is no mind of near attainment. Why? That is the thing that I am wondering. 
It is clearly mentioned in the text that:
- Immediately upon the establishment of the intermediate state, the connection to the previous body is severed right away. There is no dependency on the body.
- There are exceptions to this, for example, as in the case of untimely death, it is possible for the intermediate state being to re-enter the body. 
-  The intermediate state being can see their former relatives, loved ones, sees them and even talks to them but is only a one-way communication.
While it is not apparent or clear in the text, since the intermediate state being can see the former relatives and loved ones, so it is possible that they rejoice when they see their former relatives or loved ones or friends engaging in virtue for their sake. 
It is also said that intermediate state beings do possess some miraculous abilities and have some levels of clairvoyance. 
It is common that people are asking the same thing: What is the point of doing all these? The person is already dead. Why do you want to do virtues and prayers and you have to do it for 49 days? It really does have some help? 
Yes, as we talked about this in the previous lesson between the positions taken in the lower and higher Abhidharma. In higher Abhidharma which is Compendium of Knowledge by Asanga, he said that even if the person is already in the intermediate state of lower realms, for example in hell, and if strong virtue is created then there is hope and it is possible to change the intermediate state of that being. 
Yet the teaching is telling us that a person stays in the intermediate state for a maximum of 49 days. If the intermediate state being has not taken rebirth after 7 day, he will undergo a small death. Then the intermediate state is established again for up to a maximum of 7 times. 
It doesn’t mean that everybody has to take 49 days to take rebirth. It could be almost right away after death or it could be 1 day after death. There is no certainty in this. But yet you hear a lot of people say “It has been more than 49 days but they are still hanging around”. I don’t know how they know they are still hanging around. Maybe appear in the dream? I don't know. But some people seem to experience their deceased loved ones or relatives come back asking for stuffs or telling them something. These things do happen but it is mentioned in the teachings that it is not the actual person. It is another non-human entity who disguise as the former deceased. 
When Jetsun Milarepa was alive, there were people who reported to him, “This person has passed away 49 days but after having done all the pujas the person still appears and says things.”
Then Jetsun Milarepa said “No, the person has already taken rebirth. The one that you saw is not the actual person but someone else.” In fact in some of those accounts, Jetsun Milarepa is able to tell those relatives, “The person has already taken rebirth there.”
However, if you look at the local customs such as Qing Ming, every year people really make it a point to visit the grave, make a lot of offerings and pay homage. Why are they doing that? Essentially they believe that their father or mother or relatives is there in the grave. However, from the Buddhist view, it all depends on whether the person has taken rebirth or not. If the person has not taken rebirth and is hanging around the grave, then it is a different thing. But if the person has already taken rebirth, maybe having a good rebirth, then who are they praying to? 
People make offerings and pray to their ancestors thinking that their ancestors are still around. In fact, they are no more around. But in place of their ancestors are all kinds of non-human entities which you never know. It is possible that some of these non-human entities pretend to be the deceased and take on the form and start to communicate. People then make offerings and there is always possibility that some of these non-human entities are happy when they are being worshipped and offerings are made for them. Within their own power, these non-human entities perform some miracles to help the person who is making the offerings with a little bit of success. All you need is for one person to find success and the words will spread. Then more and more people who want that would also start to pray. They may worry that if they don’t pray, then something bad will happen to them.  
Once 49 days is over, the person definitely has taken rebirth. We do not know what kind of rebirth they will take. What I am saying here is that some people feel that their deceased still hanging around in relation to the grave. That is why they clean the grave and make offerings. 
The initial place where the consciousness exits from the indestructible drop is at the heart because it splits. As for the final exit door in relation to the body:
if the person who is going to be born in the intermediate state of hell, the consciousness exits the lower orifice. 
if the person who is going to be born in the intermediate state of preta, the consciousness exits from the mouth after exiting from the indestructible drop at the heart
If the person who is going to be born as an animal, the consciousness exits through the opening of the sexual organ. 
If the person who is going to be born as a human, the consciousness exits through the eyes. 
If the person who is going to be born as a desire realm god, the consciousness exits from the navel. 
If the person who is going to be born as a form realm god, the consciousness exits through the mid brow. 
If the person who is going to be born as formless realm god, the consciousness exits through the crown. 
The exit doors through which the consciousness leaves the body was taught by Buddha in one of the sutras. It is stated in the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge that the intermediate state beings can only see those of the similar type, and those who are of the same level as them or below. So a person in the intermediate state of form realm can see other fellow intermediate state beings of the form realm and also intermediate state beings of the desire realm. So a person in the intermediate state of a human being can see fellow intermediate state beings of human being and intermediate state beings that are going to be born as animal. You need to have some idea on how the intermediate state is established. 
Arising from the clear light, then the mind of near attainment of evolution manifests. Simultaneous with that, the intermediate state is established. I guess in some cases we have to assume that it is possible that the intermediate state being can re-enter the old body.
Khen Rinpoche: They die and after that they come back. First they die. After they die, then they alive again. 
Ven Gyurme: They say there are zombies or vampires right? 
Khen Rinpoche: There is a real story that I heard from someone. In India, there is one girl suddenly fell down from the roof top and become unconscious. I think not so very young but around 9 or 10 years old. She was brought to hospital and the doctor said she already dead and no use. Her mother couldn’t believe and she begged the doctor to help. Doctor already said no use and nothing much can be done and was left outside. The mother was crying. After a while then this girl started to move. The small girl became conscious again and started to talk but when she talked, she doesn’t seem to be the same person. She was a different person. She said “I am such and such and you are not my mother”. She said that. Then her mother got confuse. She continued “My house is somewhere there. My parents’ name is this.” Before that she doesn’t know how to write because the actual daughter who died didn’t know how to write. Then they said “If you write the address and we will bring you there.” Then she really wrote the address. Then they really brought her to the place. Somehow they are able to find the place. When they reached there, their own daughter passed away on the same day. Somehow this daughter’s consciousness went to the other girl’s consciousness. Then she talked out everything to her own mother. She knew everything exactly. Then this daughter doesn’t want to go back with her parent and she wanted to live there and told them, “This is my home and my parent is not you”. I don't know how this happened.  Afterwards, from time to time, she visits both sides. I don't know how it happened.
If you look at the accounts of those who seem to able to remember their past lives, they died relatively young or due to some accidents. There is an account that a boy who died and then takes rebirth is able to identify himself as a boy and remember things. 
Khen Rinpoche: Mostly, if you watch the documentary about those people who can remember their past lives.
Student 1: Will you be going through what the 80 indicative conceptions? What is it referring to? It comes up a lot with this topic. We were given the categories of the different kinds of minds - the coarse, subtle and then the very subtle. You mentioned that to do with a coarse mind it covers the root afflictions and the 20 secondary afflictions and so forth. Where do the virtuous mental factors for ordinary beings will be classified – coarse mind or subtle mind?
Khen Rinpoche: The virtuous minds are also coarse; just like the anger, attachment and those afflictions. In the 80 indicative conceptions, there are some that are virtuous, some that are non-virtuous, and there are some that are unspecified (normally translated as neutral). 
How do you get 80?  The division goes like this:
- 40 associated with appearance, 
- 33 associated with increase 
- 7 associated with near attainment. 
If there is time, maybe we would go through them. 
Student 2: When a person is able to use the clear light to ascertain emptiness directly and then achieve meaning clear light, and from there pure illusory body arises. In such case, is the impure illusory body still applies?
Ven Gyurne: What do you mean applies? You mean does it exist at that time or not?  Can you go straight to pure illusory body by skipping the impure is it?
Student 2:  Yes, because when you are already using clear light ascertain emptiness directly and from there you achieve meaning clear light.  Then the pure illusory body arises. Therefore, it don’t need to go through the impure illusory body.
Khen Rinpoche: If you are talking about someone who enters the unsurpassed yoga tantric path from the onset without having entered the Paramitayana path, then for such a person the impure illusory body is necessarily achieved prior to the meaning clear light. That is definitely the case for someone who enters the tantric path from the onset. Otherwise, then there are exception. For example, our kind guru Shakyamuni Buddha, the founder had finished the accumulation of the three countless eons of merits and on the 10th ground then he entered the tantric path via the 4th stage meaning clear light; which means he didn’t have to achieve the impure illusory body first.
Student 2: Is the projecting karma activated before the 8th stages of dissolution? If it is not, at which stage the projecting karma is activated?
Ven Gyurme: I think you mean potential existence? You don’t activate the projecting karma.
Khen Rinpoche: In sutra, you find the explanation of the twelve-link of the dependent origination of which there are afflictions: craving and grasping which nourishes the karmic seed to the point that it is certain to give rise to an effect. That is in the link of potential existence which itself is karma. The karma is an actualizing karma. We cannot say for sure. If we think about it, perhaps we can make an argument that it is possible when the coarse minds are still present. Where are we going to draw the line? In the 80 indicative conceptions, there are some afflictions inside which are coarse mind. If that hasn’t dissolved, perhaps you can make an argument until then it is still possible for the potential existence to come into being. I am not saying that it is for sure and you need to think about it. 
I guess we probably have to say that the nourishing of the karmic seeds by craving and grasping is only done when the coarsest minds are manifest. It is quite difficult to imagine how that is done when the subtle minds such as the mind of appearance already manifest. By then, the 80 indicative conceptions have dissolved. I am not exactly sure but I think that it is probably difficult to say that the karmic seed can still nourish when the subtle minds are in operation.
Student 2: At which stage of the 8 stages of the reverse order, does the intermediate state being sees various appearances?
Khen Rinpoche: I would think the appearances arise when the coarse minds are manifest. I don’t know exactly.
Student 3: My question is actually pertaining to the part that the 8 dissolution process. Upon clinical death when the heart stops breathing but it could be the case that the death process is still going on.  Now we are talking about organ donation. If the indestructible drop is still residing in the heart but they actually take out the heart and get it transfers to another body. What will happen? 
Khen Rinpoche: If one is a very good practitioner, has very good experience of bodhicitta and emptiness, always engage in deity yoga, has great familiarity with the different levels of mind, so for such a person, at the time of death then if the person can stay undisturbed while the subtle minds come into play then it would be better, isn’t it? 
Anyway, it is just my opinion. Otherwise, it will be better just to give the body away so at least it benefits somebody if there is no hope of returning as you are dying for sure and you are dead. You are not going realize emptiness with clear light mind so it is better to just give it away and at least benefit somebody. 
I think some people worry that if the person who is dead is being cut, the person might be experiencing pain. I don’t think that is the case. 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know exactly. Many people ask this kind of question. What I think is something like that. It is better if your organ is useful then use for someone. If you have some hope to meditate with clear light then please keep it.
Student 3: Actually it is not so much on meditation. I think I am far away from meditation. It is just that I am thinking what really happen if it is being disturbed.
Khen Rinpoche: Nothing happen. I don’t know what will happen. 
(Student asking question: inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: Not necessary. Some people died in the hospital. They carry all the way two hours in the car. It still might leave there. It is not necessary. Even if you donate I am not sure whether the subtle consciousness leaves or not. That is a question mark. Maybe it is still there.
In the monastery, some monks died in the hospital. They have to bring the bodies three hours with the bumpy road. After that they still live one week like this. This happens. So I don’t think just move then it just goes like that. Sometimes it is hard to know. The very subtle mind is in the very central of the channel in the indestructible drop there. It is not easy just to move and come out. Otherwise, we move everyday then it may come out. I don’t think so it not easy to come out. I am not saying donate. Whether is okay I don’t know. I don’t think so much issue there. We just worry. After died nothing much to worry. 
Student 4: The body of the intermediate state is not made of constituents, right?
Khen Rinpoche: No
Student 4: This dissolution that evolves has nothing to do anything with channels. So all the death process the 8 dissolution has nothing to do with channels, right?  The whole basis of this body is so special. If the person is going to be born may not be born as a human and may take on the form of jelly fish in the bardo state in the state of an animal. If bardo state don’t have channels, the dissolution will still happen.
Khen Rinpoche: It states very clearly in the text that intermediate state beings do experience the signs of dissolution which means you probably can say that it is not absolute necessarily to process the white and red bodhicitta in order to experience the sign of dissolution. Then you probably have to say that the form realm gods also experience the sign of dissolution.
Student 4: Does the extremely subtle mind still have the five omnipresent mental factors?
Khen Rinpoche: What are the five? Also I forgot. Tell me the five. Do you remember the discussion about what appears to clear light of death; the clear light of the basis? According to Panchen Sonam Trapha (??), he said that the actual emptiness appears to the mind but it is not ascertained. For him, it will be an awareness to which it appears but it does not ascertained. So the actual emptiness appears but it is not ascertained. But according to Yangchen Gawai Lodoe, he said that emptiness does not appear but what appears is a vacuity. It is just the mere cessation of coarse dualistic or conventional appearances. So there are two views. So, Yangchen Gawai Lodoe takes the position that the actual emptiness does not appear because if it appears then he throws the consequence: “It follow that all sentient beings would have realize emptiness effortlessly at the time of death.” For him, if emptiness appears then it is necessarily must be ascertained. If we think about it, it abides in the form of potential. When the clear light of death is manifest, there isn’t the usual feeling that we usually use to like feeling of joy or sadness or unpleasant feeling. The feeling that we talk about is very coarse. I am not sure. 
Student 5: It is regarding to potential existence. At the time of death, it is possible that the actualized karma happen before the coarse mind dissolves. After that all the imprints and all the coarse minds dissolve into the clear light. They should become dormant and non-functional. Then how the intermediate being comes about? Because prior to the clear light, everything is dormant and not functional. So that is my qualm.
Khen Rinpoche: When you sleep, how do you wake up? All senses close up when you sleep, isn’t it? The five doors - eye consciousness, ear, smell, and so forth -  are close. When wake up all come up, isn’t it?
Student 5: How it works?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, I am asking you how it works. You think about it. Tomorrow morning wake up, how you come up? You ask your question then answer me next class. 