Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L48.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:17.323969
================================================================================

Student 1: I would like to ask what is the path liberating empowerment?   It was only mentioned in class but the meaning wasn’t really elaborated.
Khen Rinpoche: Next time.  I don't know what is that?
About apportioning of the 80 indicative conceptions:
33 belong to the mind of appearance, 
40 belong to the mind of increase
7 belong to the mind of near attainment.  
Student 2: Regarding the 5 omnipresent mental factors. 
Khen Rinpoche: If you say "yes" then it shouldn’t be a problem.  Although it is not clearly mentioned in tantra but in sutra, it is stated very clearly all principal minds are necessarily accompanied by the 5 omnipresent mental factors.  Although it is not clearly mentioned in tantra, it seems there isn’t any reason to say why they cannot be there. So, there shouldn’t be any problem to say they are there - the clear light mind and the 5 omnipresent mental factors are in the retinue the retinue of the clear light mind.  
Student 2: When a person actually using the clear light of death to directly realize emptiness, that clear light of death is actually the wisdom directly realizes emptiness. Actually, that is a main mind, right
Khen Rinpoche: You can say that.
Student 2: So, when we talk about wisdom directly realizes emptiness, it is not really necessarily the mental factor of wisdom. Is it because of the mental factor of wisdom and therefore the main mind is also known as wisdom directly realizes emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: In general, wisdom is a mental factor and is one of the object ascertaining mental factors together with mindfulness and concentration, aspiration and so forth.  Whether it is the main mind or the mental factor, if there is one that realizes emptiness, the other necessary realizes too, right?  
Student 2: So, you call the main mind wisdom directly realizes emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche:  In Lorig, the study of mind, sems and yishepa?? which is translated as mind and mental consciousness.  In the context when mental consciousness is use, it is usually refers to the main mind, the principal mind.
But when we talk about clear light, it is always referring to it as the main mind or the principal mind. This is something that you have to think about it.
Student 2: In the last discussion, we are talking about the clear light of death. Is this clear light of death naturally blissful?
Khen Rinpoche: Naturally peaceful.  I could say that.
Student 2: So everyone will have a blissful death.
Student 2: Peaceful or blissful?
KR: Peaceful.  Blissful, I don’t know. Not sure
Student 2: We say we are trying to meditate in order to utilize the extremely subtle mind to realize emptiness. So we are using the blissful mind to realize emptiness. Wouldn’t have to say that extremely subtle mind is naturally blissful. I don’t know whether I am making myself clear 
Khen Rinpoche: I wonder if the basis clear light is naturally blissful. I don’t really think so.  But the clear light that is generated on the path on the completion stage, there are technique taught to transform the extremely subtle mind into the entity of great bliss.
This happen through meditation on the path especially on the completion stage where there are techniques to transform the mind into the nature of bliss by using the blissful state to ascertain emptiness. But to say that the clear light of the basis is by nature blissful, I don’t think so.
Student 2: When the last moment of the sentient being has done the completion stage and he is in the meaning clear light, and the person is in meditative equipoise accessing the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness.  Once the person abandons all the obscurations that person’s gross mind does not manifest anymore when he became Buddha.  So, the mind remains extremely subtle from then on.   Then the form body that arises, nirmanakaya or sambhogakaya would be also extremely subtle or... 
Ven Gyurme: What are the implications you are trying to draw?
Student 2: I am just curious. For nirmanakaya is something we can see. So when we talk about the form being gross or subtle, how you measure? Is Buddha’s form body considered as extremely subtle?  As the coarse mind is no longer manifest, is the form body, the nirmanakaya like Buddha Shakyamuni considered as extremely subtle or...?
Khen Rinpoche: In tantra, the way to actualize the truth body and form body is explained.  As for the actualization of the truth body, the thing that acts as the substantial cause for that has to an extremely subtle mind. A coarse mind cannot act as substantial cause for dharmakaya.  
In order to abandon the knowledge obscuration, the extremely subtle mind has to transform into the entity of directly perception of emptiness.  Without which, the knowledge obscuration cannot be abandoned. 
In unsurpassed highest yoga tantra, the mind is divided into coarse and subtle:
The subtle minds consist of the mind of appearance, increase, near attainment and culminating in clear light.  The mind of appearance, mind of increase and mind of near attainment are accompanied by the appearance of true existence.  This appearance of true existence is posited as knowledge obscuration.  So, without stopping this mind, you cannot achieve enlightenment because you cannot overcome the knowledge obscuration.
The afflictive obscurations are mainly the two kinds of grasping:
Grasping at the self of a person
Grasping at the self of phenomena
The afflictive obscuration is coarser compare to knowledge obscuration. That is why in Paramitayana, they talk about wisdom directly realizing emptiness overcoming the afflictive obscuration.  So, based on that, you can achieve liberation from samsara.  So relative to the knowledge obscuration, afflictive obscuration is coarser. This mean the mind that overcomes the afflictive obscuration can be a coarser mind.
In order to abandon afflictive obscuration, you don’t need extremely subtle mind that is directly realizing emptiness to act as their antidote.  
So now, is there a grasping at true existence which is a mind of appearance, mind of increase or mind of near attainment?
This is a qualm. Can there be apprehension of true existence or grasping at true existence?
Can that be a mind of appearance which is ignorance?
Can that be a mind of increase which is ignorance?
Can that be a mind of near attainment which is ignorance?
We cannot just say outright no. Another way of looking at it is: If you say “yes”, is there any fallacy?
Khen Rinpoche: If you say “yes” what is the problem? Or no problem?  
Khen Rinpoche: If you say ‘Yes’, there is problem. If you say ‘No’ how comfortable are you?
Student 3: Just want to clarify some terms about what exactly is coarse mind, subtle mind and extremely subtle mind.  I recall in lesson 39:
sense consciousness being coarse mental consciousness 
subtle mind is divide into two groups
one group is the 80 indicative conceptions and 20 secondary affliction and 6 root afflictions
other group is the call the extremely subtle mind which is the 4 empties.
Just now we are talking about subtle mind the extremely subtle mind:
The subtle mind being referred as the 4 emptiness.
The extremely subtle mind being the clear light mind
Should I use the terms subtle mind for the 80 indicative conceptions, the 20 secondary afflictions, the 6 root afflictions
Khen Rinpoche: It is just two different ways of saying the same thing. It is the way of classifying:
One way of classifying it into coarse, subtle, and extremely subtle
Another way of classifying is just looking at it as coarse and subtle. 
You can follow whatever suits you as it is getting to the same thing and it is not contradictory. 
Student 3: If you specify it, it is fine. But in the class, when you say subtle mind and extremely subtle mind I don’t know what to refer to you see. 
Khen Rinpoche: There are two ways to look at it. Which one you are comfortable with, that’s it. It is not so difficult.
The types of mind that are explained in sutra such as all sense and mental consciousness, and from the perspective of tantra, they are coarse. At the time of dying when one stop breathing, those consciousnesses are stopped. Then the subtle mind - the mind of appearance, increase, and near attainment - manifests. At the end the extremely subtle mind of clear light manifest. If you think like this, then it is clear. 
Student 3: So the 80 indicative conceptions would be classified as coarse mind? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, the 80 indicative conceptions are coarse. Even the 6 root afflictions and 22 secondary afflictions are all coarse. 
Student 4: The way the arhats and the superior bodhisattvas undergo the inconceivable transference of death, in tantra that would involve the involution (reverse order) of near attainment, red increase, and white appearance. Since these are not taught and practiced in sutra, how to get the minds of the 4 empties to realize emptiness? In fact I understand even the 80 indicative conceptions are not taught in sutra, am I right to say that?  I am just trying to discuss and understand how those who did not practice unsurpassed yoga tantra are able to achieve liberation and as well as abide on the bodhisattva superiors’ path in sutra and still undergo this cycle of dissolution. After that, where they abide? 
Ven Gyurme: Are you saying that at the time of achieving liberation, they have to die. Then there is a reverse order for those minds will come about. 
 Student 4: Have to come about. Since Khen Rinpoche asked is there ignorance in these minds, and since they are not taught in sutra, is it comfortable to say there are ignorance for that level in the minds of these persons? 
Khen Rinpoche: You are saying that there can be mind of near attainment which is in the entity of ignorance.
Student 4: I am trying to discuss. I am not sure.
Khen Rinpoche: They are already arhats then you got a problem.
Student 4: After the involution process, the minds of near attainment, increase and appearance, they rise from there and then they abide….
Khen Rinpoche: Immediately after they achieve arhats, you mean?
Student 4: They arise from there and subsequently they abide in meditative equipoise
Ven Gyurme: To show that therefore there is no mind of attainment that is in the nature of ignorance, are you using this to prove?
Student 4: No, I am saying that there could be still ignorance but it does not in any way cause them to not achieve nirvana. Remember I was asking this question about how they go through the inconceivable transference of death. Precisely these are not taught in sutra and yet in sutra they definitely achieve liberation. Yet they still have to go through this process and they were not taught and they did not practice using these four types of minds to cause them to realize emptiness. Therefore they do not have these four types of minds to realize emptiness because they have not practiced. Is it comfortable to say they still have ignorance in these four types of mind?
Ven Gyurme: Ignorance of…
Student 4: How to account for them achieving liberation? Is that on involution process, these minds manifest, yet…
Khen Rinpoche:  What is involution process? 
Student 4: That means reverse process, from clear light…
Khen Rinpoche: From where? From clear light in sutra when they are arhats?
Student 4: Precisely. So that is why they still have this clear light that did not realize emptiness. So you can say that there is clear light with ignorance for them. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why? Ignorance is gross mind. Ignorance has to be gross mind. That’s it. The conclusion is that, no?  That’s why my qualm is whether subtle mind has ignorance or not. That is my question. If you say yes, difficult, except arhats. Therefore ignorance must be gross mind. No subtle mind is ignorance. 
Student 4: That means the other way round, all sentient beings who go through these four types of mind there is no ignorance there because ignorance is coarse mind.  So when these 4 minds manifest, there is no ignorance.
Khen Rinpoche:  Even though those minds are not in the entity of ignorance but they are accompanied by the seeds of ignorance.
Student 4:  I am trying to figure out where they abide while they are abiding in meditative equipoise in nirvana. When the arhats arise into the reverse process, these minds manifest. Yet these minds do not realize emptiness, indirectly for them. So the only time the mind directly realizing emptiness to manifest would be after the white appearance of the reverse process, or after the 80 indicative conceptions of the reverse process. Then there is a mind directly realizing emptiness and the arhat abiding in equipoise in that mind. 
Ven Gyurme: The final uninterrupted path is not an extremely subtle mind. That is the problem, right?
Student 4: Of course. Is it possible to say that because we have to account for where they abide? What sort of mind that is manifesting to abide in nirvana. 
During the 4th dissolution process and the forward order, the winds dissolve into the consciousnesses. So these consciousnesses are the coarse - 6 roots, 22 secondary, then the 80 indicative conceptions. When the arhats come out to the reverse order during the reverse order on this process, for sure the 6 roots and 22 secondary will not be there, but not sure about the 80 indicative conceptions because it is not taught in the sutra.
Khen Rinpoche: Not all the 80 indicative conceptions are objects of abandonment because there are many of them are virtuous in the 80 indicative conceptions. They are conceptual and many of which are virtuous so only a portion of it.
Student 4: If these minds are accompanied by mind not realizing emptiness, are they still an object of abandonment?
Ven Gyurme: You are talking about arhats?
Student 4: In the 80 indicative conceptions, those minds that are virtuous accompanied by ignorance need to be abandoned. For example, the virtuous mind grasping at true existence.
Ven Gyurme: At which stage?
Student 4: During the 80 indicative conceptions.
Khen Rinpoche: Arhats don’t have that.
Student 4: For sure they will have abandoned all those at coarse level.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, all coarse grasping are abandoned. 
Student 4: For the superior bodhisattvas, from the time they achieve the Path of Seeing onwards, in their level inconceivable transference of death, when they arise from the reverse process, the same case will apply but they will manifest grosser levels of mind and from there and work for sentient beings?
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah
Student 4: OK, thank you. 
Student 5: In the last lesson you mentioned that consciousness come out from the mouth will be born as a ghost. In the many teachings the lamas said that if the consciousness come out from the upper part of the body is a good rebirth.
Ven Gyurme: Which lama? 
Student 5: If you see FPMT website, in the death process, the teachers said that if you sit near the upper part of the body the dying person, so that the consciousness is attracted to come out from the upper part of the body.  The qualm is that if it is coming out of upper part of body is necessarily a good rebirth. Above the navel is considered as the upper part of the body. 
Khen Rinpoche: I seem to remember that there is a saying that depending on where the heat gathers in the body during the death process, it could be an indication whether the person is going to lower realms or going to get a good rebirth. If the person is going to get a good rebirth, there is still heat in the upper part of the body. That means the upper part of the body is kind of warm and the lower part is kind of cold. If it is the reverse then it is a sign perhaps the person is going to lower realms. That is the heat is very much in the lower part of the body and the upper part is still cold.
Maybe your question is relating to that? What you are referring to could be the part of the body where the heat starts to dissipate. For somebody who is going to get good rebirth, the cessation of the bodily heat starts from the lower part of the body, whereas the one going that is going to get bad rebirth, the body heat starts to dissipate from the upper part of the body. 
That is different from the place of exit of the consciousness. For someone who is going:
to be born in the hells, the consciousness leaves through the lower orifices
to be born as hungry ghost, the consciousness leaves through the mouth. 
to be born as animals, the consciousness leaves from the genitals, the secret place
to be born as human, the consciousness leaves through the eyes
to be born as the desire realm god, the consciousness leaves from the navel
to be born as form realm god, the consciousness leaves from mid brow
to be born in the formless realms, the consciousness leaves from the crown.
The text stated clearly the various exits of the consciousnesses. This is probably very much different from what you are referring to about where the body heat gathers in the body at the time of death. These are two different things. 
We have talked about the death process and connecting that to the practice of taking death as the path of dharmakaya. In relation to the self-generation rite:
there is the invitation of the merit field, 
after that performing the seven-branch worship in relation to the merit field
then the merit field dissolves into the practitioner
the practitioner experiences happiness or joy
then that practitioner, the I which experiences happiness or joy, becomes the subject of enquiry. 
In this case investigating what is the nature of this person who is experiencing the bliss by using the reasoning of the 4 extremes in the self-generation rite of Vajrabhairava. Basically you come to ascertain the emptiness of selflessness, emptiness of I and even the bliss that one is experiencing. One comes to investigates and also see the emptiness of that. 
Then one ascertains emptiness realizes emptiness. One does not regard this as ordinary mind but rather this is the wisdom of great bliss directly realizing emptiness. With that, one identifies and think this is the actual resultant dharmakaya. One then places divine pride on that and identify as that. 
We can use the same way of thinking and apply it to negative emotion like jealousy or anger. When you are very upset or jealous of someone and there is a very strong sense of I, then you ask yourself the same question. Instead of applying to the great bliss, you apply to this unhappy feeling: Who is this me that is upset? Where is this anger? What is this anger? Who is this me that is feeling jealous? Where is this jealousy? When you look for it, you can’t find it.
When we are angry or upset, obviously there is this person that is upset. We feel it. Then we should look for it. If it really exists the way it appears, it should be found. Where are we going to find it? It should be within the confine of this physical space which we call the body. Where is it? Is it the head? Is it the heart? Which part? The thing is when you look for it, you can’t find it.
When we are upset, obviously we can feel it. We never ever think that it is outside this physical space.   We never think that it is outside the body. We always feel it is somewhere inside. If that is the case there is where we should look for it. If it is really inside, because we believe it is inside this physical confine, then it should be found. When we look for it but there is nothing we can really point to - it is this I that is upset.
Khen Rinpoche: It is very helpful. Sit down really look when you feel so much unhappy. 
We try it out and think about it. We cannot really find the I that is so upset and yet we feel it. It cannot be found. Then maybe is possible to get the glimpse of how it is just completely made up by our mind. Whether we are upset or not, end of the day we are our own creator because we create that experience. Having that glimpse will make us to want to continue to work with our mind and to change our mind because we see that it is in our own hands. We make that experience. If we don’t have that glimpse of how the good or bad experiences are made up by ourselves, then what alternative is there? We believe that it is made up by something outside of us, some body or some situation. If that is our belief, then we always looking outside for a solution and we will never ever want to do anything with our mind or to change our mind.
There is this unhappy person, and we look for it, then it is kind of strange that we cannot point to anything that is the person.  When we look for the mind as well where this anger is and at the end of the day, we also cannot really pinpoint what is it and where is it. This becomes more powerful. 
Anyway, we are often beset by some unhappy experience. We are always unhappy about something. So in those situations, you try to look for that I that is unhappy or the unhappy mind. When you look for it, it becomes elusive. When you cannot find it, definitely the unhappy mind feeling will subside or at least become weaker. 
The only thing is to try out for yourself whenever you feel unhappy for whatever reason. That is the time to experiment and look for this I or look for the unhappy mind. Without trying we cannot really say it works or it doesn’t work. However, if you try and it works, then it is good and you have a glimpse. If you try and nothing works, then nothing can be done.
Khen Rinpoche: Try. You try. It will work. 
We have talked about how the intermediate state is established. Now let’s see how we can connect that with taking the intermediate state as the enjoyment body.
We will talk about this in relation with the Vajrabhairava practice. 
After meditating on taking death as the path the dharmakaya, continuing from that there is the generating the four elemental mandalas upon which you generate the common protection wheel and follows by the uncommon protection wheel. Inside that one generates the entire inestimable mansion. 
In order to be born from the womb possessing the six elements in the southern continent:
The southern continent must come into being first before you can be born from the womb in the southern continent
In term of the formation of the world system, first there is the eon of empty and then the eon of formation.
What happen during the taking the death as the path of dharmakaya? 
A part of it is kind of concordant with the empty eon, there is nothing! 
Then during the eon of formation, the gross elements start coming into being - starting with the wind, fire, water and then earth element. 
Concordant of that is found in the sadhana when you generate the four elemental mandalas after the meditation of clear light and end in the celestial mansion inside the protection wheel. 
So the generation of the celestial mansion is concordant with the formation of the southern continent.
In the long sadhana up to the point when it says “surrounded by the eight charnel grounds,” that is the session of generating the celestial mansion in the charnel ground.
Then it says:
Inside the celestial mansion surrounded by these charnel grounds, from a YAM comes a black wind mandala with a slight shade of red …
That is taking the intermediate state as the sambhogakaya.
It will be good to project the wheels just before one starts the practice of taking the intermediate state as the path of sambhogakaya which in the sadhana it says:
Inside the celestial mansion surrounded by these charnel grounds, from a YAM comes a black wind mandala with a slight shade of red …
It is there in the long sadhana. 
Before you meditate on that you project the wheel thinking “I am going to purify my intermediate state. I am going to actualize the path time illusory body so that I will achieve the resultant enjoyment body in the future.”
Inside the celestial mansion surrounded by these charnel grounds, from a YAM comes a black wind mandala with a slight shade of red, on top of which from the first letter (of the Sanskrit alphabet) A, comes a moon mandala.
Earlier on the practice of taking death as a path to dharmakaya has already done culminating in placing divine pride as the resultant dharmakaya. That mind takes on the form of short A on top of the wind mandala.
Once the mind that one has identified to be the resultant dharmakaya that was meditated upon takes on the aspect of a short A. The short A melts into light and transform into moon disc radiating with light. 
Essentially this is one’s mind. Imagine that is dharmakaya that is taking the form of short A which then transform into moon disc. This basically is one’s mind.
In the center of it, like a bubble out of water, comes a yellow DHIH which transforms into a sword marked in the center (of its hub) with a DHIH.
Arising like a bubble out of water, on top of the moon disc is the syllable DHIH, which you imagine that your mind and Manjushri are perfect enlightenment wisdom being inseparable but in the aspect of a syllable DHIH.
This DHIH is essentially one’s mind which is inseparable in entity from Manjushri omniscient wisdom and now appearing in the form of DHIH. It is a DHIH that is resonating means sounds like DHIH.
This DHIH which is on top of the moon disc completely transforms into a sword standing upright which is blue and has double-edge. This sword is standing upright. Either in the handle or in the middle of the sword you visualize the syllable marked with a DHI. 
Light rays radiate from this sword marked with a DHIH goes out and invite all the Manjushri either in the form of Manjushri of the five lineages or in the form of the Causal Vajra-holder Manjugosha. They absorb into the sword and the sword is completely transformed and one become a Causal Vajra-holder Manjugosha, yellow one face two arms, right holding a sword and left holding a text. This yellow Manjushri is slightly wrathful.
This enjoyment body is very subtle established from the extremely subtle wind mind and radiating five colored light and can only be seen by bodhisattva superiors.
One meditates on clear appearance of that and generates divine pride of being the resultant sambhogakaya.
One arises as the Causal Vajra-holder Manjugosha. Most masters stops there for the section of taking the intermediate state as the path of sambhogakaya. 
Then in the next session taking rebirth as the path of nirmanakaya starts with:
In the heart of myself as Manjugosha from AH comes a sun disc…
Most masters place that visualization under taking rebirth as the path of nirmanakaya. But there are some who place that meditation on the sun disc in the session of taking intermediate state as the path of sambhogakaya.
Khen Rinpoche: You don’t have the text? You don’t bring text then you don’t know what I am talking about. At least you know by heart than is different. If you bring the sadhana then we can pinpoint there, otherwise…
This visualization starting from:
AH becoming a moon disc and the syllable DHIH becoming a sword and so forth
There is an explanation of the concordant with the basis, path and result. 
Let’s look at the concordant with the basis first. 
“From AH becoming a moon disc”, the AH symbolizes the extremely subtle wind mind of the basis.
The extremely subtle wind mind is the basis of accomplishment of the intermediate state.
If you explain the concordant with the path then that AH represent the example and meaning clear light of the path. From which the illusory body of the path arises.
If you apply to the concordant with the results, it is the final moment of mind, just before enlightenment, the path clear light. The extremely subtle wind and mind at the end of the continuum represents that. It is from there enlightenment comes.
The moon represents the extremely subtle wind mind of the basis, the example and meaning clear light of the path and the final moment of the learner’s union. On top of that is a syllable DHIH which is resonating. 
If you look at it in term of the basis it represents the speech of the intermediate state being:
When is applied to the path it is the speech of the path of illusory body.
When is applied to the result it is the speech of the enjoyment body.
Then the syllable DHIH transforms into sword marked with the DHIH.
If apply to the basis, it represents the mind of the intermediate state being. 
If apply to the path, it is the mind in the continuum of path of the illusory body. 
If apply to the result, it is an exalted mind of the enjoyment body.
From the sword marked DHIH lights goes out and all the different Manjushris are absorbed into the sword.
If you talk about concordant with the basis, then that is what the intermediate state being does.  Due to the many hallucinations, they run around doing stuff. So this is what applies to the basis means.
When it is applied to the path time, symbolizes the activities are undertaken by path illusory body, and this path illusory body engaging in various stuffs for sentient beings.
After Manjushri has absorbed into the sword one transforms into yellow Manjugosha - the Causal Vajra-holder, Manjugosha. 
When you apply that, we talked about the concordant of that with the basis. Then that is like the establishment of the intermediate state being. The intermediate state being comes into being complete with body, speech and mind.
When apply to the path, it means the arising into illusory body of the path from the example and meaning clear light. 	
When apply to the result, it means the arising into enjoyment body from the final meaning clear light of the learner’s union.
If you look at the self-generation rite of Vajrabhairava, in the section of taking intermediate state as the path of sambhogakaya, it is all there. 
If you follow the long self-generation rite after taking the death as a path of dharmakaya, the continuation of that there is the meditation on the common and uncommon protection wheel and generating the entire celestial mansion and so on and so forth. 
If not, it is just from the state of emptiness. 
From the dharmakaya then the celestial mansion comes into being. 
In the middle of the celestial mansion, from AH comes a moon-disc mandala. 
On top of which a DHIH comes a sword marked with a DHIH. Then that sword radiates light ….
Then all the buddhas come in and all the Manjushri comes back and then the sword has completely transformed.
Then you think “Now I am the Causal Vajra-holder Manjugosha”.
We do the meditation without any distraction and just follow that sequence written in the self- generation rite and at the end culminating in the arising of oneself as the Causal Vajra-holder Manjugosha. Then one cultivates clear appearance and then establishes divine pride as the resultant sambhogakaya.
This generation stage is just done at the level of imagination. What is the purpose of doing this? What benefits is there? What do we stand to gain? 
This is the practice of taking intermediate state as the path of sambhogakaya. It is a meditation that is concordant with the aspect of the intermediate state. So by doing this practice here, the generation stage at the level of imagination, it purifies the ordinary intermediate states. This meditation is a cause to ripen the mind. It is a cause to actualize the path illusory bodies - both the pure and impure illusory bodies in the future and it places a potential to actualize the resultant sambhogakaya in the future.
Try to understand the essential points, the process, the why, how and what. Once you know it, the general theory in the unsurpassed yoga tantra practices is pretty much the same. Once you get the point, you can apply them in many places. The practice can be applied not just in the context of self-generation rites but also arising as the deity, in the Guru Puja practice or in the Six Session Guru Yoga. It is all equally applicable. So if you know the essential points and then try to practice and visualize accordingly, then at least you can say you are doing something that looks like a tantric practice.
We will talk about the taking rebirth as the path nirmanakaya in the next session. 