Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L49.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:19.124111
================================================================================

Since all of us recite the 6 Sessions Guru Yoga daily, so i thought maybe it could be beneficial if we go through the practice.  In general, it is not that you don't already know what the things to visualize but anyway we just go through it here in class.
You brought the text? All memorized must be by heart everyone.
Many a time, people ask what kind of practice should I do and how should I practice but actually in the way the answer is very simple, is very simple. Whatever practice it may be, the point is all of us have promised a pledge, taken many vows, different types of vows and different commitment and samaya, So practice means to guard the vows, to keep the samaya.  There is no practice separate from this.
So, practice to mean guard the vows and the commitment one has taken.  Practice means that. so all of us here haven taken the 3 types of vows, pratimosha vows, bodhisattva vows and tantric vows, so we possess these 3 vows, so to guard and protect the vows and to practise the commitment, the samaya is the meaning of practice. Somebody who keeps the vows as purely as he or she can, you could call the person a practitioner.
So, we have taken the tantric vows which consists of keeping specific samaya of the 5 Buddha lineages, so the 5 Buddha lineages are Vairocana, whatever order is it, is should be Ratnasambava, Amitabha, Amogasidi and Vairocana, so if the practice of the 6 sessions is done well, mindfully, then these 19 samaya of 5 Buddha lineages, one would have practised those 19, one would have been keeping those samaya.
So, there are 6 samaya of Vairocana, it consists of the 3 types of ethical disciplines, on top of that you add the practice of going refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha.  So these are the 6 samaya of Vairocana.
Yeah, you have to know, memorise, so these are the 6 samaya of Vairocana, which are keeping or practicing the 3 types of ethical discipline and going for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
Ashobya has 4 samaya, they are the mind samaya of the vajra, the speech samaya of the bell and body samaya of the mudra and the samaya of devoting to the vajra master.
Then there are the 4 samaya of Ratnasambava, which are essentially the practice the 4 types of giving.  It is actually, anyway it is in the 6 sessions right, one of the lines that goes, practice the 4 types of giving, 6 times a day, in English right?
So, the practice of 4 types of giving, 6 times everyday, that is not applicable only to 4 samaya of Ratnasambava, one has to understand it is applicable to all the samaya of the other Buddha lineages.  So whatever samaya there are of the Buddha lineages, all of those have to be practiced in 6 times a day.
Then you have the 3 samaya of Amitabha, to uphold the samaya of the outer, secret and the 3 vehicles.  So the outer here means having, pledge to train in Kriya and Charya - Action and Performance tantra.  The secret here means yoga and unsurpassed yoga tantra and there is a pledge to train in that.  And the 3 vehicles, what is usually being referred to is the 3 vehicles, you know what are the 3 vehicles. 
So, if you look at the 3 samaya of Amitabha, what we basically promised to do is practise the Buddha Dharma in its entirety. 
Then there are 2 samaya of Amogasidi, the first is do not transgress the 3 types of vows essentially and second is to make as many offerings as possible.
So the 6 session guru yoga starts with the verse of going for refuge and generating bodhicitta so it is said that you start off with 3 repetition of the verse but whether is it 3 repetition or 1 repetition that is not so much the point. OK.  The point is refuge and bodhicitta and one starts off with visualizing the objects of refuge.
So we visualize the object of refuge as it is how it is normally explain in the teaching.  So in the space in front of us on the very expansive throne on it is a lotus. moon and sun disc and on that sit ones' kind root guru in the aspect of Shakyimuni Buddha and he is surrounded by the root and lineage gurus and all other objects of refuge, the deities, the buddhas and bodhisattva, dakas, dakinis, dharma protectors and so forth.  So, it will be good if right in the beginning you should try to visualize the object of refuge as clearly as possible. 
And then we imagine we are surrounded by all sentient beings, all the 6 types of migratory beings but all in the form, in the aspect of human and in order for that to be refuge, we need to meditate on cause of refuge, we need first on our own basis reflect on the suffering of lower realms and suffering of cyclic existence on our own basis and then only then we can imagine that all the sentient beings around us also have that fear, strong fear of those suffering.
And that object, on object of refuge, they are the only one who possess the power to free one and all sentient beings from all those sufferings, the belief and the conviction, must come, something that must come from deep within us.  We are the one, the only one, nobody else.
So, and practice of this refuge, is so important, the practice of refuge if we have that attitude of refuge from the beginning then the rest of the practice whatever practice it is can happen will happen if there is real refuge in the first place.  So, all of you have studies this before, the 2 causes of refuge - fear and faith.  The fear of suffering of the lower realms, we will be there, that kind of suffering and suffering of the samsara and personal faith and conviction from the heart that only these in front of me, the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, Guru has the power to free me and other sentient beings from that suffering. So, as much as possible, we need to reflect, analyze and meditate till we are able to have this faith and conviction.  Without these 2, then is very difficult to refuge, real refuge.
I go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha so since all of you have already studied these, so when these words come out, what comes to your mind.  So, Buddha, that is who is in the nature of the 4 bodies, you have to know what are the 4 bodies, what is the nature body, what is the truth body, what is the enjoyment body and what are emanation body. Something which is in the nature of that - 4 bodies or 3 bodies, so what is buddha that you take refuge in.  Then the Dharma, you can look in Dharma as scriptural dharma and the realisational dharma or basically the actual dharma is that which is included in the true path and true cessation that is the real dharma jewel.  And then the sangha jewel, you know those Mahayana bodhisattva superior, hearer superior, solidarity realiser superior, these individuals and the qualities of abandonment and realisation in their continuum, so you really need to have a very good understanding, idea of the object of refuge.
As mentioned a couple of time before, what are the differences between having studied well the Buddha' teaching and not having studied.  So you need to know there is a huge difference because for example somebody who has studied well and knows what the 3 jewels are, then even just right here the beginning when we go for refuge this person who has so much material to draw on, so many things can draw on, so he has a big picture, very good understanding, he draws on connection. So many things that person can reflect and meditate on.  So you really have to see this point.  It is important to understand that if you have done some study, you will have a lot of resources to draw in your practice.
So since you have done some study, really, whatever you have done you should extract the relevant information, the material in your heard, whatever you have in your head and apply it in the right context in your practice.
So, having a good practice of the refuge in the beginning of the 6 sessions yoga who constitute keeping 3 out of the 6 samaya of Vairocana.  Half of the samaya of Vairocana has to do with going for refuge.
So we need to remind ourselves of what refuge is, refuge, 3 times in a day…… altogether 6 times, we have to remind ourselves 3 times in a day, 3 times at night.
The virtues I have created through the practice of generosity and so forth, may I become a buddha for the benefit of all sentient beings, so basically aspiring to be like the object of refuge, may I become like you quickly so that I can benefit the sentient beings and I do that through practicing the 6 perfections, such as the perfection of generosity and also the 4 ways of gathering the sentient beings, bringing that to one's fold.
Then the next verse is the meditation on the 4 immeasurable and it started with the immeasurable equanimity.  They are all,... basically our way we perceived other is not balanced. We don’t see everyone in the equal way, as such we feel closer to some and distant from other. So basically, we are related to the attitude of anger and attachment and through which pure love and compassion is difficult, doesn't come.  So that's why we think we have to equalise.
So, there is the longer version of the 4 ... the prayers of the 4 immeasurable there is a longer version.  If you can recite and meditate on that it will be good.  if possible, so the extensive version goes like this.  "How wonderful it will be if all sentient beings abide in equanimity and may they abide in equanimity, I myself will cause them to abide in equanimity, oh Guru Deity, please grant me blessing to be able to do so.”  Something like that right?  Anyway you know, you all people know.
The prayer, the point is not so much to blar blar blar, the point is we have to feel the prayer, so it is better to think of the prayer, feel the meaning of whatever you are reciting. Then after that there is a feel then you can recite out.
So the next is immeasurable love, so may all sentient beings achieve enjoy the special bliss or special joy or special happiness which in the ultimate sense the highest happiness, the pure, highest happiness, is enlightenment which means all sentient being will need to have that.  So if you recite the longer version "How wonderful it will be if all sentient beings ..." the long one... i know the long one anyway ... whatever is it you can find it in the prayer…
Stopped at 36:00
(71:48)So if you think about it, you know, generating real faith in the guru, in the gurus’ is not easy. Why? Because it all down to what you are looking for in life. Depends on what you are looking for. So here for somebody who is really looking for enlightenment especially who is looking for enlightenment in one short lifetime of the degenerate age who really want to work for sentient beings. So when such a student, find such a lama, a guru who can shows the entire path from beginning to end and this is how you do it and then, of course, that, such a disciple who has that kind of unbelievable devotion to that guru, he has find the one who can give him what he wants, basically.
So this is how really, real faith is to be generated. It is very much depends on what you want. So somebody who wants the dharma, who wants what the dharma says you can achieved, in here, enlightenment. Somebody who wants this and then finds that lama, whatever you call, the person who can give you that. Then of course, that person, finds what he needs right? Of course that person faith is unshakeable. What you call? Irreversible faith.
So when such a disciple finds such a lama, such a disciple has no issue about bowing to the lowest point of guru’s body which is the lotus feet. Isn’t it? You will do it completely from the heart. In fact, the person dedicate his body, speech and mind to his guru in that way. But, otherwise it’s difficult, put aside, forget about touching the lotus feet, even just to bend down slightly is very challenging to the guru.
Of course, this discussion is in the context of unsurpassed yoga tantra, it is a practice of tantra. Within that the highest level of tantra, we are talking about somebody who wants enlightenment in one short lifetime. And finding that lama who can give him that, you know. So we are talking that about, this is the context. Okay.
As next is the recitation of the eight …I don’t know how to translate, they said eight legged praise, but then it sounds damn funny to me. They said Eight Legged Praise right? In English, I don’t know how to translate, KanGei. Literally it is eight legs, literally. Eight lines I think. Eight Lines. Whatever it is. Anyway it is said that, a lot of benefits you know by reciting the praise.
Okay so next the verse of making our offerings right? There are both owned and unowned and we should offer as much as we can and including those that are visualized.
So the making of the outer offering and since this is a practice of unsurpassed yoga tantra, there is the practice of making the nner offering which is essentially an inner offering which is in the nature of the five meats and five nectars.
There is the secret offering, that everybody here has received unsurpassed yoga tantra, wang. So you emanate from the heart of yourself, you emanate from your heart, the fully qualified wisdom mothers. And these wisdom mothers that you have emanate dissolved into Guru Vajradhara wisdom mother who is the, Dharmadhtu Isvahri. And as a result then Guru Vajradhara in union with the wisdom mother then you visualized that they generate non-dual bliss and emptiness in their heart, in their mind.
Yeah so this secret offering is essentially, through the visualization, you imagine the guru, generates the wisdom of great bliss.
Then there is the suchness offering so you can think that through, you can think that the guru with the wisdom of great bliss that he experienced through this secret offering. Then that wisdom of great bliss ascertained emptiness. This great bliss and emptiness becomes non-dual. And such an experience generated in his mind is the suchness offering.
Yeah so these are the four offerings in the secret offerings. In the Guru Puja, there are the verses for the inner offerings, the verse for the secret offering and the verse for the suchness offering. If you can think of the meaning or even use those verses right, here in this context, if you know how to think then you can accumulate vast amount of merit.
Next is you see is the mandala offering, the verse says you are offering the body, speech and mind of oneself and others and all the possessions and including all the merits, virtue of the three times. And then you gathered altogether, then you heaped it as a mandala and you offer.
And you can apply the offering visualization of  Samantabhadra, here in the mandala offering. From one mandala comes the twenty five each, I think I have described the visualization to you in one of the previous module so that you can apply that visualization.
Then it is followed by two verses, which, the meaning of which is practice of correctly devoting to the virtuous friend. So immediately after the offering, there is this verse. Point is that here you bring to mind the qualities of one’s, your own Guru, you know. To remembering, to bring to mind the qualities of the Guru then we generate faith and in the next verse then you, through remembering the kindness of the Guru we developed respect.
Then the next verse are all, “Supreme and common attainments…” that verse comes from following after the virtuous friend so, I think, this shows the practice of correctly devoting to the virtuous friend in action.
So “All the supreme and common attainments..” the common attainments are the one that we talked about earlier on in this module right? The supreme attainment is like enlightenment. So it is saying that whatever attainment it is, supreme and common, all of them comes from in dependence upon correctly devoting to the virtuous friend, you know, right. So through being convinced of that then one apply, lead,  practice accordingly. So essentially we have to think about the benefits of correctly devoting to the virtuous friend. Then the faults of not devoting and the faults of devoting incorrectly. So through knowing both benefits and the faults, then at all times, the training is to stop the mind looking for faults and the mind that sees faults in the guru. Stop that and then always focus on the qualities and kindness in order to engender devotion. Devotion in one’s mind towards the guru.
So first we have to see, not intellectually, you have to realize, feel and understand that every single attainment. Every single, it says every attainment, it says all the attainments both the supreme and common without exception. Malupa means without leaving anyone. It is saying every single thing, you know, very single good thing, you know, no matter how big or how small the good thing is comes from correctly devoting to the virtuous friend. So those people who sees that and realized that from the heart, are people who will never, ever give up their gurus even if they have to lose their lives, they will not do that. In fact those who are the people who will never do that and those were the people who will do everything in their power to please their virtuous friend. But in the first place, if we want to become like that, whoa at all cost, we never gave up the guru and we will please the guru. In the first place, in order for that to happen, in the first place, we must be really convinced that every single good thing, you know, it says Every. Every attainment comes from correctly devoting to the virtuous friend. First we have to settle that first. If that doesn’t happen then the second practice doesn’t happened of course.
So if you looked at the Six Session Guru Yoga, all the important, critical, essential practices are all gathered in one place. It is all there.
So at this point, after this verse, then “All supreme and common attainments follows about …” that verse. I don’t know. I think what you all call them A something A14 or something like that right. Somehow I remembered there is A14 somewhere. So after that, then if you can, it is very good to insert the verse from the Guru Puja. The verse which says “You are my Guru, You are my Yidam, You are my…”whatever. Then verse, Kyo ni Lama, Kyo Ni Yidam, that verse okay? So you insert there, you can recite three times. The idea is with devotion.Right? You recite it three times then after that you insert the following verse in the guru puja which is the verse of, which talks about, taking the blessing, taking the four initiations in the manner of blessing right? So you can insert that.
So you can insert the verse from Guru Puja right?n That comes after, You are Guru, You are my Yidam…so that this the verse for taking the short way, the four initiation.in the manner of a blessing. There is also an extensive way for taking the four initiations.So if you know how to think, what can be insert at this point.
So if we go according to what is in the Guru Puja right? The verse, the short way of taking the four initiation in the manner of blessing. Then, first, you visualized from Om from the guru forehead, there is a white Om from there light rays and nectar comes and enter into your forehead. And then through that you received the vase initiation, you are empowered. Then you think that you are empowered to meditate on generation stage and the potential to actualize the emanation body is planted.
Then from the Red Syllable AH in the guru throat comes the red beam of night and nectar into our throat, then we imagined that we received  the secret initiation. All the sickness and obscuration of the speech is purified. Then you are empowered to meditate on the completion stage of the conventional illusory body. And then the potential has been planted to actualize the resultant enjoyment body.
Then next from the blue Hum at the heart of the Guru, comes blue light rays and nectar. At your heart, you received the knowledge wisdom initiation, all the negativities and obscuration of the mind is purified then one is empowered to meditate on ultimate meaning, ultimate meaning clear light of the completion stage and the potential to actualize the resultant Dharmakaya is planted.
Then lastly visualize lights and nectar from the three places of the Guru emerges simultaneously and it dissolved in your three places. You think you received the precious words initiation all the negativities obscurations are common to the body, speech and mind. Particularly their imprints are purified. And it empowers to meditate on the completion stage of the inseparable two truths and the imprints is planted for, to actualize the unification of no more learning. Unification.
Then you imagined that the root guru is actually pleased. And then with great delight, then he comes above of our crown. And then he dissolved into us and becomes inseparable.
Then you dissolved into light from top and bottom, you know, in the light and then, 
And then in the emptiness you imagined that you manifest the Dharmakaya.
So imagined that, you dissolved into emptiness then you imagined you manifest the wisdom of great bliss and then enter into meditative equipoise on emptiness.
So here I mean you can do the visualization that includes the essential points of taking the three bodies as the path right? So first there is the taking death as the path of Dharmakaya, that essential meditation on emptiness and then imagined then that mind arises as a white shaft of light. And then, and that is like taking the intermediate state as the path of the sambhogakaya and then that shaft of light becomes a …what the six session guru yoga says. You arise as Vajrasattva.embraces Bhagavati right? So that will be like the birth as a path of Nirmanakaya.
Then the next verse, I think is about the practice of the generosity.
So next follows that a couple of paragraphs that lists all the trainings of the three vows. The pratimosha, bodhisattva and the tantric vows. So the idea is that by knowing what the downfalls are and then as ones goes through all of them. So one will not incur any transgression or downfalls then we can rejoice. If you discover that there is some infraction, you know, transgression that they said we should confess and then do the practice of vajrasattva.
So if there is any infraction or transgression, we should, must have and all the time, basically, an attitude to have at the back of our heart, our mind, you know. In that, it should always be very strong remorse, you know, regret for whatever transgression that has been committed and always to have an attitude really trying our best to dn not make same mistakes again. Do not incur those infractions again in future. Strong restraint, basically.
Then you finish the practice and dedicate well that’s it.
Khen Rinpoche : Time is over okay? So I think I don’t have anything much to talk anymore so Thursday I thought to do Tara Puja together. Okay? Tara Puja. Thursday. I am not going to teach you Tara Puja. Same time I will give you some homework. Something you must have to do. Thursday ok? So we do Tara Puja together than that is the conclusion of this year class. Come together pray okay? Clear all obstacles, successful in study whatever. So I think there are five group leaders, please set up the tara puja. Whatever you need to set up for the tara puja. Five leaders please help.to set up that. Okay? <completed>
I have finished with:
presenting the establishment of the intermediate state,
how is the taking of the intermediate state as the path for the sambhogakaya, 
how that is the meditation that is concordant with aspects of the intermediate state and 
discuss that in relation to the Vajrabhairava.
Next is the taking rebirth as the path for the nirmanakaya. Since it is in meditation that is concordant with aspects of birth, now I will just mention something about birth. 
What is the purpose or the benefit of the practice of taking the ordinary rebirth as the path of the nirmanakaya? 
The practice in a way:
purifies ordinary rebirth which happens due to karma and afflictions
ripens the mind for the illusory bodies of the path, both the pure and impure illusory body, to be able to enters and abides within the coarse body.
through that work for sentient beings 
is also a cause for actualizing the resultant emanation body which emanates or issues forth from the enjoyment body. 
In this context here, the process of birth is explained from the perspective of a human born from the womb who possesses the six elements. Rebirth generally has to happen via the intermediate state. The intermediate state being has to die before rebirth can happen.
When the intermediate state being dies, there is death process as well culminating in clear light of death. The cessation of the clear light of death, arising of the involutional mind of near attainment and the entry of the consciousness into the fertilized egg happens simultaneously. 
There are some favorable conditions in order for rebirth to happen:
The mother’s womb must be free of defects, free of disease
The mother must have regular menstruation. 
The intermediate state being who is going to be born as the child of that couple must be nearby. 
The couple must be lying together. 
There must also be the absence of unfavorable conditions:
The center of the mother’s womb cannot be too clean. 
Both the semen of the father and the blood of the mother must flow together and must mix. Even if the semen and the blood flow together and mix, however if there is any fault in either one or both, then rebirth will not happen. Basically it must not be spoilt.
The intermediate state being must have accumulated the karma to be born as the child of that couple.
The couple must have accumulated the karma to have that intermediate state being to be born as their child. That is why this text says that there must be no fault of the intermediate state being not having accumulated the karma for this couple to be his or her parents. 
Even if the semen and the blood flow concurrently, are free of faults and are free of defects and even are mixed, does it mean that conception will necessary take place? 
The answer is no. There must be another condition to be present, which is the intermediate state being’s consciousness must enter, otherwise conception doesn’t happen. 
It is clear that conception doesn’t necessarily happen just because one has the ovum. This shows that there must be another condition before conception can happens. So from the Buddhist perspective, there must be an intermediate state being whose consciousness enters into that ovum. Otherwise, conception doesn’t happen. Also in order for that to happen, the intermediate state being must have accumulated the karma to be born as the child of that couple and that couple must have the karma to have this intermediate state being to be born as their child.
Some people have no issues in getting pregnant and some people want children but never get pregnant despite the meeting of the semen and the blood. This shows that there must be another condition. So from the Buddhist’s perspective, in relation to rebirth, we talk about the existence of a consciousness that enters into the fertilized egg. This is helpful in understanding rebirth. Otherwise, if you say that conception is necessarily take place once one has the fertilized egg, then there will be problem in explaining rebirth. Similarly, if you say conception necessarily takes place just because of the meeting of the semen and blood.
Will conception necessarily take place even if all the conditions such as the following are there? 
the mother’s womb is free of defects, 
there is nothing wrong with her menstruation,
she has capacity to give birth 
even if the egg mix with the sperm 
The answer is clearly “No”. It is not necessarily that it will happen and it doesn’t happen all the time. What does this show? It shows that there must be another condition for conception to take place. If you say just by the egg and sperm meeting then there will be conception, then you got a problem. It is basically like saying there is no need to have consciousness and then reincarnation falls apart. The scientists also say that conception doesn’t necessarily take place just because the egg and the sperm meet. 
So the intermediate state being must have the karma to be born as that couple’s child. If there is karma, when the intermediate state being dies, it enters into the fertilized egg and life begins as life. Before that, there is no life. It is not life. 
When the intermediate state being is around with the future parents, it says that the male and female are engaged in sexual intercourse. In some texts it says the intermediate state being sees them lying in embrace. 
If the intermediate being is to be born as a male, that intermediate state being has aversion for the future father and has attachment for the future mother and wishes to embrace the mother.
If the intermediate state being is to be born as a female, that intermediate state being has aversion for the future mother, and has attachment for the future father and wants to embrace the father. 
Out of the desire to embrace with either the father or the mother, as the intermediate state being goes nears to the couple, what the intermediate state being sees are only the genitals. Then it gets angry, faints and then dies. The consciousness enters into the fertilized egg.
Just by this we can see that in general most intermediate state beings don’t take rebirth with a happy mind. It is with attachment and aversion. So rebirth happens within attachment and aversion. 
As for where the consciousness enters, different texts have different explanations. 
- One text says that the consciousness enters either through the crown of the father or mother. 
-  Another text says is through the mouth of the father. 
-  Another text says it is through the secret place of the mother; entrance through the womb.
The intermediate state being has to die before taking rebirth. The intermediate state being experiences the eight signs of dissolution culminating in the clear light of death. 
When that clear light of death stops, the involutional mind of near attainment arise. That is when the consciousness enters to the center of the fertilized egg. That is the start of the birth existence. So this is the very first mind of the birth existence - the involutional mind of near attainment. 
The mind of near attainment arises. From that arises the mind of increase; from there arises the mind of appearance and then the 80 indicative conceptions. During the involutional phase from wind  fire  water  earth, the potential or the power of those elements to act as a support for consciousness gradually develops. 
As for the stages of the development of the fetus, there are said to be five:
For the white element, the white bodhicitta first is called the oval-shaped fetus. 
As the fetus develops, the 1st week is called oval-shaped and melting.  The text describes the body of this being like cream on top of boiled milk.  From the outside it looks thick but inside is like very fluid.
Khen Rinpoche: You know how to boil milk? You have seen the example? Or else you don’t understand. You boil then you know. After you boil, keep aside for a while. On top there is some cream like a skin which very delicate. If you touch inside is just liquid.
In the 2nd week, the 2nd stage of development is like a red lump. Both inside and outside of the body of the fetus is viscous. 
The 3rd week is called like a pebble and a lump. This is the time where block of stuff is becoming like flesh. Although it is like becoming flesh, it cannot bear pressing. 
In the 4th week, it is called turning solid. That is the time when it becomes fresh and can bear a little bit of pressing. 
In the 5th week, it is called producing hands and feet and well mix. That is when there are signs of the five limbs developing. When you look at the mixture then you can see stumps protruding out in the part of the head and the two hands and the two legs; which is called the five limbs.
By the 35th and 36th week, basically the body is pretty much formed and the hairs, nails, teeth, tongue, palate and so forth.  It is said that to quite a large extend the mindfulness is there. The baby has mindfulness.
- If the child is a male, it is said that his face is facing towards the back of the mother and he lies on the right side in the womb.  
- If the child is a female, it is said that she lies on the mother’s left side facing towards the front. 
- If twins are to be born or more babies to be born, for example twins, there two separate consciousnesses. It is not that one consciousness is divided to two. So separate two separate individuals, two consciousnesses enter into two different fertilized eggs. It is said that the twins develop individually in the womb so one is on the right and the others is on the left.
- If the fetus is born with indeterminate sex, basically having both male and female genitals, then the baby will remains in the center of the womb.
Khen Rinpoche: I’m just wondering how accurate this one. I’m not sure. According to doctor, scientist, is it correct?
Khen Rinpoche: I’m just wondering what I have read, do you have some idea how accurate are these - boy facing at the back, girl facing in front? I’m just wondering because in 2000 years ago we don’t have CT scan. I am just wondering how they can tell all these.  According to scientists or doctors, what I explained the text, is it accurate or not accurate? Anybody has experienced? In ancient times you don’t need to scan and they know boy or girl. By touching they know whether it is boy or girl. Now you can tell with good machine. Anyway, try to find out what I have read is accurate or not. One very interesting thing is about the sun eclipse and moon eclipse. Nowadays scientists have so many technology to see, but ancient times they don’t have the technology but  with the Tibetan calculation they can predict exactly when the sun eclipse, what time, where will happen. Without any technology but just by calculation I don't know how they do it as it happens exactly on the same day and at the same time.
In my home town, at night time they look at the stars and can tell “summer is coming. Winter is coming.  Rain will come” just by judging the stars. But now weather all change and now unpredictable. I’m just wondering how they can find out. That is why when I read this, how they conceive, what the baby see, right face, front back and I don't know how accurate it is. Many are mothers should know.
Then there is also description of the kind of posture that the baby takes while in the womb. The way one sits with the feet and hands are bent and the two little fingers are inside the nostrils. 
Khen Rinpoche: This one only after come out. In the womb you don’t do until like this. I’m not sure.  Any doctor has some experience?  How accurate I’m not sure.
Khen Rinpoche: I never see (the scan) so I don't know. I’m just wondering how they sit. This can be general. It must be something like that as the text mentioned something like that.
How is the baby nourished? 
It is the nutrient of the food that is eaten by the mother is delivered to the baby through the umbilical cord that is attached to the fetus’s navel.
Khen Rinpoche: That one accurate. That one must be accurate as there is no other way. That is why after they have to cut that. That is why there is a hole in the navel.
Since the mother’s womb is located just directly beneath the stomach, it is said that: 
When the mother ingests hot food or drink, the baby will feels as if hot water is poured over him or her. 
When the mother eats very cold food or drink, the baby will experiences suffering like being thrown or caught in ice. 
When the mother is running and jumping, the baby will feels as if it is falling over a cliff. 
This is taught by Buddha in the sutra called The Sutra of Entry Into the Womb where the Buddha describes the many sufferings that the baby experiences.
In general, the baby is said to remain in the womb for up to 38 weeks. 
By the 35th week, the body is fully formed with hair, nails, tongue, palate, teeth and so forth.  
By the 36th week, the baby develops the desire to exit. 
In the 37th week, the baby experiences bad smell and filthiness.
In the 38th week, by the force of the karmic wind, the baby starts to turn upside down with the head towards the exit of the womb. 
Then it starts to stretch limbs and the baby starts to come out of the womb. When the baby comes out of the mother’s womb, it is said to experience great suffering like the skin is being pricked by thorns with lot of suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: That is why when the baby comes out, not one is smiling. I think everyone cry or no? When baby come out they don’t cry?
Student 1: They usually pat it to make it start crying. I can ask my mum as she delivered a lot of babies.
Khen Rinpoche: In our hometown we don’t have the facility. Mother gives birth in house. (Sometimes) they go to the field or jungle and deliver baby just like that. So definitely they will cry.  I don't know. Here they don’t cry?
Student 1:  (Inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: Mother (here) should know. Any baby not cries? All cry yeah? 
(Students respond inaudible) 
Khen Rinpoche: Only hit then cry? You don’t hit they don’t cry? I’m just wondering. Surprise. According to text you don’t need to hit. As, there is so much pain immediately they would cry. Have to beat? I’m wondering. Sometimes there is blue mark, maybe because of that? I’m not sure. That one need to check. I am just reading from the text.
People usually wash the baby when the baby comes out. They think they are doing a fantastic job but it is said that the baby feels as if hot water is being poured over the sensitive skin. Even the mother would like to hold the baby with love, but actually the baby feels as if it is being handled by someone with claws.
Even though the baby is placed on very soft cloth, it is said that it is like being placed on thorn bush and the baby experiences suffering.
In essence, there is suffering when the baby is in the womb and also lot of suffering on the way out as the baby is born. 
When we put all these together it is clear that everything is in the nature of suffering. The intermediate state being dies with suffering and then enters into the fertilized egg, suffers in the womb, and also suffers on the way out.
If we look at the practice of taking birth as the path for the nirmanakaya in relation to Vajrabhairava in the sadhana in the self-generation rite, which you have already arisen as the Causal Vajra-holder Manjughosha. Then it says:
At my heart, from the syllable AH comes a sun-disc.
At the time of taking the intermediate state as the path of the sambhogakaya one has already arisen into the Causal Vajra-holder yellow Manjughosha.
Then in the heart of oneself as the Causal Vajra-holder Manjughosha then there is a syllable AH which then melts and transform into a sun-disc. In reality that sun-disc is the wisdom of great bliss. The entity is that but in the aspect of a sun-disc. 
Then light radiates from the sun-disc and invokes and invites all the buddhas and bodhisattvas to dissolve into the sun-disc. For simplicity sake, they all dissolve in the form of Vajrabhairava into that sun disc.
When you read in the self-generation rite, it is clear ,isn’t it? 
Light rays go out to all the Buddhas such as the Vairochana, Bodhisattvas such as Vajra-sharp, Wrathful Deities such as Vajra-hook and Knowledge-holders such as Lady Vajramind.
In the commentary it is said that there are 49 different kinds of deities that are absorbed. For simplicity sake, just think that they are all absorbed in the form of Vajrabhairava into the sun-disc. 
Then yourself as the Manjugosha dissolves into light from top and bottom and dissolve into the sun-disc at the heart. 
At the end, what is left is the sun-disc which becomes more radiant than before. What is left is just the appearance of that sun-disc. 
Whether you call it as I or one’s mind, identify yourself as that sun-disc and generating divine pride.
On top of that sun-disc come a dark blue syllable HUM that is radiating with light and is resonating so loud as if it is like the roar of a dragon. 
Then the light radiates from the dark blue HUM and invites all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas in aspect of Vajrabhairava and they dissolve into this HUM. 
Then the HUM completely transform into a black nine spoke vajra. 
Light rays radiating from this vajra that is adorned with the HUM at the navel. At the tips of these light rays are infinite small vajras and also various kinds of emanation in whatever forms that are suitable for subduing all the sentient beings. From these forms, light rays and nectar flow onto the sentient beings and purify them from their negativities and obscurations. After purifying all the sentient beings of their negativities and obscurations, imagine they are placed in the state of Vajrabhairavahood or the state of enlightenment. Then all these sentient beings have been transformed into Vajrabhairava together with all the vajras. Whatever forms that you have emanated out, all of them are gathered back and absorbed into the vajra.
At this time, there is the moon-disc.
On top of which is the sun-disc.
On top of which is a nine spokes vajra and the navel of which is a syllable HUM.
That completely transforms and one arises as the Vajrabhairava in the complete form. 
There are many different ways in which you can talk about the generation of a deity. One of which is the arising of the deity through the five manifest realizations:
Manifest realization from the moon
Manifest realization from the sun
Manifest realization from the six syllables
Manifest realization from the hand implement
Manifest realization from the complete body
In the self-generation rite, following that is a description of Vajrabhairava - that numbers of faces, number of hands, legs and so forth. The idea is that after you have arisen as the deity you are supposed to train in clear appearance and divine pride. 
On the section of taking the birth as the path of the nirmanakaya, after everything is absorbed into the vajra and one arise as the deity and says: 
I arise as the Resultant Vajra-holder, the great and glorious Vajrabhairava, with a body dark blue black in color, nine faces, thirty-four arms and sixteen legs, standing in the pose of right ones bent and left extended.
For somebody who has trained then there is no need to go on with the description. As it is not possible from the beginning and since there is a need to train in clear appearance and divine pride, therefore there is a description at the sadhana that says:
With the ability to devour the lords of the Three Realms, I chortle “HA-HA”, with my tongue darting, my fangs bared, my mouth having wrinkles of anger, my brow also wrinkled in anger, with my eyes and eyebrows ablaze like the eon of destruction and my orange hair bristling upward.
You can read the rest of the self-generation rite.
After that is:
The blessing of the sources, body, speech and mind
Meditates on the three tier beings. 
Invites the wisdom beings.
Doing the initiation and seal the impression.
Making the outer offerings 
Making the inner offerings and so forth.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, that is all. I think I have covered the three kayas.
One of the really essential points right at the beginning is the meditation on emptiness. One really has to learn and understand real well the presentation of emptiness which is found in the Sutra. After that one really has to meditate, reflect and analyze. 
If one does not bring to mind and meditate on emptiness everyday then there is a danger of committing the tantric root downfall of not recollecting the views of emptiness. So at the relevant section of the self- generation rite, as much as possible, try to mediate on emptiness for 5 or 10 minutes. You must develop that habit. After meditating on emptiness, the mind that understand or ascertain emptiness, imagine this is the wisdom of great bliss. So the mind that understands or ascertains on emptiness, imagine that is the wisdom of great bliss has the appearance of sun-disc.
I seem to remember reading one text that on top of that sun-disc is oneself in the ordinary aspect. That then gradually dissolve and become kind of a ball of light which is about one cubic high.  One identifies with that. 
Then that ball of light which is one cubic high gradually becomes clearer and takes on the form of the deity - one face and two arms Vajrabhairava. 
This is a very short kind of meditation of taking three bodies as the path. It might be easier for beginner to start with that.
However, if we are doing it in relation to Vajrabhairava self-generation rite, whether is short or long one, do according to the words that you meditate. Vajrayogini has its own way of doing it. So once you know the essence, then you know how to do it. You can also apply it to the six session guru yoga.
Q&A
Student 2: There is mentioned of the 3 stack beings after arising as Yamantaka. When do we visualize that? What is the purpose? When we recite the mantra what are we supposed to visualize?
Khen Rinpoche: In the self-generation rite, the meditation on the three tier beings come after one arisen as the Resultant Vajra-holder glorious Vajrabhairava, with a body dark blue black in color, nine faces, thirty-four arms and sixteen legs, standing in the pose of right ones bent and left extended.
Yourself as Vajrabhairava, then there is the commitment being. 
In the heart of the commitment being sitting on the moon disc, there is a wisdom being which Manjugosha is.
In the heart of Manjugosha on the sun-disc there is a syllable HUM. The HUM is the concentration being. 
So the meditation on the three tier beings come after the blessing of the sources. 
As for the three tier beings, the text talks about:
the three tier beings of the basis,
the three tier beings of the path and
the three tier being of the result. 
If we apply three tier beings of the basis is as follow:
The commitment being of the basis will be the present coarse body. 
The wisdom being will be the extremely subtle wind. 
The concentration being of the basis is the extremely subtle mind.
The three tier beings of the path are as follow: 
The commitment being of the path is the coarse body in which the impure and pure illusory body of the path enters and abides. 
The two illusory bodies of the path, both the impure and pure illusory bodies, are the wisdom being of the path.
The example and meaning clear light of the path are the concentration being of the path. 
The three tier beings of the result are as follow: 
The resultant emanation body is the commitment being of the result. 
Here we talk about union, in particular the union of no more learning, which is the enlightenment or Buddhahood. In the continuum of the person who achieves the union of no more learning, the union means the coming together of the two things, the pure illusory body and the meaning clear light, in the continuum of the non-learner. 
The illusory body is wisdom being of the result. 
The wisdom of great bliss, the meaning clear light is the concentration being of the result. 
The concept of the three tier beings can be understood:
in terms of the basis,
in term of the path,
in term of the result. 
In term of the basis, the three tier beings symbolize something. 
In term of the path it symbolizes something else. 
In term of the result it symbolizes the result.