Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L5.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:17.026093
================================================================================

In the Three Principal Aspects of the Path, it says:
Those who are not attached to the pleasures of circling [samsara]
This line indicates renunciation. One interpretation of this line is that it talks about those who do not even have the slightest interest in anything that has to do with samsara. No matter what is the samsaric happiness, they don’t even have the slightest attachment or clinging to the samsaric perfections. All of us are working so hard day and night to achieve something. At end of the day, what are we fighting for is samsaric happiness. This is because we are attached to samsaric happiness. As we want samsaric pleasure, and because we are driven by craving, we will do whatever in the day, in the night and everyday of our lives. We crave to meet with desirable objects and we are craving to be separated from unpleasant object. From our very own experience, it is evident that prior to getting an object or achieving a particular desirable scenario, there is very strong craving to obtain that pleasure or to meet with that person or to encounter that desirable situation. After we have met with that person or gotten that object or that desirable outcome, then there is another kind of craving of enhancing that craving to hold on to that experience. At the end then there is also a very strong craving and desire hoping that we will never ever lose that experience or that person or the object. At those times, we may not actually manifest experiencing the pleasant situation, but we go back to the past and think of all those pleasurable experiences, and when the memories of that pleasure arise, we cling on those memories. That is another kind of craving.
When we meet with problems and difficulties, we are unhappy and suffer. Then there is a strong craving or desire to be freed of that problems and difficulties. Even when we are freed from those problems then there is another kind of craving for, “May it never happen to me again!” There is a very strong desire for that. That is our life story. Whether we meet with pleasure or suffering, it is always intertwined with craving. 
From craving comes grasping and then we accumulate karma. That is how we perpetuate our existence in cyclic existence (samsara). So renunciation is very important. That is why Lama Tsongkhapa (Je Rinpoche) in his Three Principal Aspects of the Path says at the beginning of the second paragraph:
Those who are not attached to the pleasures of circling [samsara]
Somebody who has this real heartfelt renunciation and not interested in samsara is the person of medium capacity. That is how someone becomes a person of medium capacity when this renunciation arises.
Who strive to make freedom and endowments meaningful
This 2nd line shows bodhicitta (mind of enlightenment). It is said that the best way of making our life meaningful is to cultivate and actualize great compassion in particular if we can cultivate and actualize bodhicitta. It is that make the human life of freedom and endowments really meaningful.
Who entrust themselves to the path pleasing the Victorious Ones –
This indicates the view of dependent origination. This shows that we have to engage in hearing, reflection, and meditating on dependent arising. Somebody who does that is engaging in something that is really pleasing the Buddha. Essentially, this line shows the need for correct view.
Je Rinpoche concludes that paragraph by saying:
You fortunate ones: listen with a calm mind.
This is what I have been trying to emphasize recently. Whenever we listen to the teaching or study the Buddhadharma, it is very important to make sure that the motivation is pure and correct.
Student 1: If renunciation is not needed to realize emptiness, in the first place, why do we need renunciation to directly realize emptiness to enter the Path of Seeing? 
Khen Rinpoche: This is related to why it is not possible to achieve the Path of Seeing newly in the form realm. The reason given then was that there is no strong renunciation. Is it related to that?
Khen Rinpoche: May new people come and answer. Somebody come and answer. 
Question: If one doesn’t necessary need to realize emptiness prior to generating renunciation, why is it that one needs strong renunciation to newly generate the Path of Seeing? 
The reason given was that you cannot achieve the Path of Seeing newly in the form realm because you don’t have strong renunciation. 
[In the form realm, no strong renunciation  cannot achieve Path of Seeing newly]
Student 1: In the last lesson, we were told that before one enters the path, one can realize emptiness inferentially first. Upon seeing it is possible to achieve liberation then one generates renunciation. That means one can realize emptiness and then generate renunciation after that. So renunciation is not needed to realize emptiness inferentially.
Ven Gyurme: Just now you say directly.
Student 1: Not directly. Before entering the path.
Ven Gyurme:  Why do you need renunciation in order to newly realize the Path of Seeing? 
Student 2: Without renunciation, one will have strong attachment to the happiness of this life. Without renunciation to the pleasures of samsara, like all the pleasurable experiences in the higher realms, then there is no way that one can develop calm-abiding. So without calm-abiding it is difficult to achieve special insight and subsequently inferential realization of emptiness and then direct realization of emptiness. In that sense, renunciation is an important component in gradual step towards the direct realization of emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know.
Student 3: Could that be seeing emptiness directly, you really pacified calm mind to penetrate into the wisdom. Hence without renunciation, you won’t get to that level of calmness. 
Question that related to the Mahayana and Hinayana path: 
As said in the previous lessons, the individual that has entered the Mahayana path right from the onset, there is a systematic way of doing it. Firstly, renounce the happiness of this life, and then overcome the attachment of this life and become a person of small capacity. Then follows by developing an aversion to every single samsaric perfection and seeing them in the nature of suffering. And also sees that everybody else in samsara is in the same boat. That individual empathizes with others and develops the same level of aversion for others suffering. He then undergoes training in bodhicitta, either with the method of exchanging for others or sevenfold causes and effects and develop great compassion and wholehearted resolved and become a person of great capacity. At that time he would have developed contrived bodhicitta. So this person of great capacity before entering the Mahayana path would have contrived renunciation for himself mixed with contrived bodhicitta at equal level. At the point when that contrived renunciation becomes uncontrived renunciation, his contrived bodhicitta simultaneously would become uncontrived bodhicitta as well. Then he enters the Mahayana Path.
It strikes me that the differences between someone following Hinayana or Mahayana path is that after becoming a person of small capacity, Hinayana practitioner will develop renunciation just for himself and go on to the Hinayana path. On the other hand, that individual after becoming a person of small capacity develop renunciation for himself and empathize with others and develop the same level of aversion for other people’s suffering. At that point, the training for developing bodhicitta should be available. If such training is not available, not being taught, not being emphasized at this point, the individual would otherwise likely to go into Hinayana Path? 
Khen Rinpoche: If you don’t train, you go to Hinayana path?
Right at the beginning of the journey, generally an individual kind of knowing what he is looking for. There is one kind of people who right at the beginning aiming for their own liberation. Then there are others who are not looking for that but are looking for the Mahayana path.  Only if one has this thought of wanting to arrive in the either destination, whether it is personal liberation or full enlightenment, only then he will train in the path that will bring him to that destination. When one adopts the training, one will have the training of the person of the small capacity, and likewise, training of the person of the middle capacity and training for the person of the great capacity.
Student 4: Just wondering contrived renunciation is a valid cognition? 
Khen Rinpoche: If you are talking about a contrived experience - an experience that arises through effort   is contrived- it need not be a valid cognition because it is possible to have a contrived experience which is a correctly assuming consciousness.
I guess you can even include the doubt tending towards factual siding with the reality; something which is better than that is the correctly assuming consciousness. Of course, the best is having a valid cognizer.
Student 4: I am just wondering whether an inferential realization of emptiness can be based on an inferential realization of renunciation. Just now I am relating contrived renunciation with inferential realization of renunciation. Taking the account that a contrived renunciation may not be an inferential realization of renunciation, so I kind of drop that. To answer to that question about inferential realization of emptiness before having an uncontrived renunciation I am just wondering whether the inferential realization of emptiness can be based on an inferential realization of renunciation as both can be done before the path. It is still sequential in the sense that you would have inferential realization of renunciation before you inferential realization of emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: You have to remember what we have discussed earlier in the previous lesson. What is the meaning of “to enter a path”? When does one enter a path? When does a path arise in the heart or in one’s continuum? Just having an aversion or lack of interest whatsoever in samsaric perfections alone is not enough. But that is important and must come first. By reflecting on the disadvantages or the faults of true suffering, and when one has an aversion and does not want to have anything to do with samsara, the person is a person of medium capacity. But a person of medium capacity is not necessary a person who has entered a path. He must have the attitude to renounce samsaric pleasure. 
In order for a path to arise, something else must be present. What is that? That thing could only come about through reflecting on true origins. By seeing true origins that has to be abandoned and needs to be abandoned and by seeing that true origins on a personal level indeed can be abandoned then come a day when he can actually abandons the true origins. Only then the desire arises “Therefore I must achieve liberation from samsara.” When this thought seeking liberation arises day and night and the path arises in the mind then the person enter a path. It must be a thought seeking liberation. As Lama Tsongkhapa says:
 And all day and night the intention seeking liberation arises –
Then the thought of renunciation has been generated.
That is the measure of having generated renunciation. Day and night literally means day and night, just like at our level we has desire arising day and night. We have stress and worries arising day and night. It doesn’t matter whether we are eating, walking or sleeping, there are always worries. They are there all the time. In the case of entering a path, then the intention seeking liberation day and night comes from the basis of having renounce samsaric perfections first. If that thought of seeking liberation arises day and night, the path arises in the heart then the person enters a path.
This is something you must keep in the mind. You must remember this. On the basis of this then the question arises: 
In order for such a renunciation to arise, i.e. in order to enter the path, do you need to realize emptiness first? 
Do you need to realize emptiness first to enter the path or not? 
In order for this strong desire for liberation, before it can arise, do you need to realize emptiness first? 
That is why you have the question: Do you need emptiness prior to entering the path?
We have briefly looked at the answer. There is a difference in term of the individual. That is why we talked about the sharp facultied trainees and dull facultied trainees. 
For the sharp facultied trainees, we probably have to say they need to realize emptiness before they enter the path. 
For the dull facultied trainees, they are individuals who have entered the path without realizing emptiness. 
What is the criterion to enter a path? It is as long as the uncontrived wish for liberation is produced. When you have the uncontrived renunciation, then you enter the path. As such it is not necessary to realize emptiness first. 
When you enter the path, whether it is a Hinayana path or a Mahayana path, you are on the Path of Accumulation. As the path already exists, there is no need to talk about generating a path. There is no question about whether that individual has renunciation on the Path of Accumulation or on the Path of Preparation. So there is no need to question about whether you need renunciation to realize emptiness directly or not, because you necessarily have renunciation. 
Student inaudible (46:55)
When we talk about cyclic existence in terms of the three realms - the desire realm, form realm and the formless realm, in the Abhidharmakosa (Treasury of the Manifest Knowledge), it is said that in order to newly attain the Path of Seeing, one must possess the basis of the desire realm.
In the Abhidharmakosa, it is said that only a person who has a desire realm basis can newly attain the Path of Seeing for the very first time. 
Having said that, then the question is: 
In order to enter a path, what kind of basis do you need? Can one enter a path on the basis of having a desire realm basis, form realm basis, formless realm basis? Or you can only develop a path newly in a certain realm but not in other realms. What do you think? 
Question: Is it possible to newly attain a path with a form realm basis? Is it possible to newly attain a path on a formless realm basis? 
Khen Rinpoche: Sometimes I just talk but you cannot catch up. So better you ask question, and I answer. For me, this works better. If I just talk, then nothing go inside. You must think and ask, and someone answer. You must think about your question sincerely before you talk. So that one answer can clear your doubt. You can learn better that way. So that is why I am asking question. If you think you have some answer, immediately say so. If something wrong, then I will say “That’s wrong”. But many people just shy to answer my question. No people want to come here and say “What you say must be wrong” or  “Maybe not right”. Nobody wants to come and say. Come out and say. It doesn’t matter whether it is right or wrong. Just come and say “I think this…”, just say whatever you think. Of course, before you say, you must think. Otherwise you cannot say “I think”. What you think maybe right maybe wrong, it doesn’t matter. Something wrong I will ask other question. Then your brain is working. Any new student wants to come, come. Next time I buy masks for everyone so people don’t recognized you.
Student 5: Form and formless realm cannot enter into a path. Only desire realm then can.
Khen Rinpoche:  Formless realm cannot newly enter a path?
Student 5: Yeah.
Khen Rinpoche: Why?
Student 5: Because they are enjoying their life.
Khen Rinpoche: Very good. If you enjoy, then there is no renunciation. 
It is not about right and wrong all the time. What is your stand? You must have your own stand and your view about things. We can only have certain opinions if we have thought about it. That is the idea. If you have thought about it, then you come up with an opinion. 
It is true that if there is no suffering then there is no renunciation. Having said that, are you going to say that formless and form realms are free of suffering? No, they are not free of suffering because they are included in samsara. Therefore, they do have suffering. But their kind of suffering is much more subtle. They do have suffering which is the pervasive compounded suffering or the suffering of conditionality. 
As said in the Lamrim, some of the gods have unbelievable mental stress and suffering prior to death. While they do have very long lifespan and many great enjoyments, but it is said that a week prior to their dying, they experience the signs of death which drive them crazy. It makes them unbelievably sad and fearful, and with so much worries. This is their kind of mental stress and suffering. Can they generate renunciation during that time? What you think? It is possible? 
During that one week can they achieve renunciation or not? Here we are talking about the one week of the god, not the one week of the humans. The measurement of time depends on the type of god realms. 
Question: Is it possible to generate renunciation in that week or not? 
Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Manifest Knowledge says that it is possible to newly generate the first three levels of the Path of Preparation with a form realm basis, i.e. one can newly attain the heat, peak, forbearance level of the Path of Preparation. If it is possible to newly attain the Path of Preparation with a form realm basis, then it could be quite difficult to establish it is not possible to newly attain the Path of Accumulation with the same basis. 
It is also clear in the great treatises which cites many sutras that one can generates the uncontrived mind of enlightenment on the basis of the six types of migrators of the three realms. 
Khen Rinpoche: Six types of migration and the three realms
If that is the case, what is the implication? Therefore, you cannot say it is not possible to newly attain a path. You cannot say it is not possible to newly attain a path with any of the basis in samsara. 
Khen Rinpoche:  You know the three realms?
If it is possible to newly attain uncontrived bodhicitta in any basis of the three realms, then there is nothing to say you cannot newly attain a path on the basis on any of the three realms.
Back to the question: Is it possible to newly attain a path on any of the basis of the three realms? 
Probably it is better to say “Yes”.  There are two reasons:
Many sutras have stated that it is possible to newly achieve the mind of enlightenment (bodhicitta). Here we are talking of the Mahayana path on any of the basis of the three realms.
It is clearly stated in Vasubandhu Treasury of Manifest Knowledge that one can newly attains the Path of Preparation with the form realm basis. If that is the case, then it is difficult to establish why you cannot newly attain the Path of Accumulation with a form realm basis. 
While Vasubandhu clearly said newly attain the Path of Preparation with the form realm basis, he did say that you can achieve the first three levels of the Path of Preparation newly with the form realm basis. He also clearly said that it is not possible to newly achieve the Supreme Mundane Qualities (SMQ) level of the Path of Preparation with the form or formless realm basis. 
What is Vasubandhu’s reason for saying that one cannot newly attains the SMQ level of the Path of Preparation on the form realm basis? 
The reason is that the person with the form realm basis cannot newly attain the Path of Seeing. If he cannot newly attain the Path of Seeing with a form realm basis he cannot newly attain the SMQ level of the Path of Preparation on the form realm basis. Why? Because one achieves the Path of Seeing in one meditative equipoise continuously proceeding from the SMQ level of the Path of Preparation. 
Why do the individuals with the form realm and formless realm basis cannot newly attain the Path of Seeing? 
The reason is that their disenchantment is weak.  Therefore, in order to newly achieve the Path of Seeing, just having renunciation alone is not enough to lead to the newly attain the Path of Seeing.  In order to newly attain the Path of Seeing, one must have very strong renunciation i.e. great disenchantment with cyclic existence. Such disenchantment with cyclic existence can only be generated with the desire realm basis. 
With all these information, we can expand on it and analyze: Does that mean that renunciation of the individual on the Path of Accumulation and his renunciation on the Path of Preparation is different? Does that individual’s renunciation change in quality? Is there a difference? 
Khen Rinpoche: Any difference?
What is the measure of renunciation? You already have that desire for liberation day and night, and if you posit that there is a difference, what else more could you have?
Khen Rinpoche:  If day and night, no more there? There is already day and night taken out, so how?
Student: Inaudible…
Khen Rinpoche: Gold renunciation? 
Student: Inaudible…
Khen Rinpoche: After realizing emptiness, how does renunciation become strong? 
Student 6: You are asking whether there is any difference in renunciation. Just like bodhicitta, there is earth and gold which depend on whether you have realization of emptiness. Similarly, between the Path of Accumulation and the Path of Preparation there is a difference in the understanding of emptiness, and that generates the difference in faith. I think that could enhance your renunciation. 
Khen Rinpoche: If we take the position that the strength of renunciation grows, this means on the Path of Accumulation he has a certain level of renunciation. When he has the union of calm abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness, he enters the Path of Preparation. Because of that, his renunciation should be stronger. 
If you were to attribute the growth of his renunciation to the growth of his wisdom realizing emptiness, since what is changing at each level is the wisdom realizing emptiness, then it doesn’t matter which realm you are. Why is it that you can only realize emptiness directly for the first time on the desire realm basis? When you are on the Path of Accumulation in the form and formless realm, you say that your renunciation has definitely have grown over time because of wisdom realizing emptiness. What is there to stop the individual from realizing emptiness directly for the 1st time? If you use that as a reason, then desire realm doesn’t matter anymore.
Student 7: In the last module you did mentioned that at the forbearance level, it is not sure whether you can newly generate the forbearance level of Path of Preparation. In our exam, I think most of us wrote “That it is not clear”. Now it seems according to Treasury of Manifest Knowledge, you can newly achieve the forbearance level. So my answer to the exam will be affected. 
Khen Rinpoche: What it is said is that you can newly attain the heat and peak level of the Path of Preparation, and you cannot newly attain the SMQ level of the Path of Preparation.
So a qualm was raised. You are asked to think whether it is possible to newly attain the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation or not. It is either “Yes” or “No”. and you have to give the answer.  What is the reason can you give if you say “Yes”?  Then you have to justify your answer. This is probably how you can do it. 
The forbearance level of the Path of Preparation itself also is divided into three: small, middling and great. We can say that the small and middling level of the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation can newly attain. As for the great level of the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation, you have to say “No”. This is because it is one meditative equipoise from the great level of the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation into the SMQ level of the Path of Preparation. Since it is one meditative equipoise, you can then say that you cannot newly attain the great level of the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation. 
KR: I thought I have mentioned before.
So it is clear that it is not mentioned clearly in the text that the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation can be newly attained with the form level basis. If you think about it, they never say yes or no. My personal view is that of the three levels of the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation, we can say that we can newly attain at the small and middling levels of the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation. As for the great level of the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation, I think you have to say you cannot newly attain. 
Anyway the reason that is given in the treatises are to explain why it is not possible to newly attain the Path of Seeing on the form realm basis because of weak disenchantment; which basically is saying because of not having strong enough renunciation. You have to link that with the statement saying one can only newly attain the Path of Seeing with a desire realm basis. So basically they are saying in the desire realm basis you can have strong renunciation. Why?
Student 8: I think if I were to enter the path as a form realm god, I wonder how I am going to practice the six perfections. Who am I going to practice patience? Who am I going to practice giving?
Khen Rinpoche: Which place is you are talking about?
Student 8: Form realm
KR: Form realm? Not only you. There are many others also.
Student 8: The intensity of giving, compare to desire realm, I think there will be a difference. For example, we don’t experience the kind of suffering in the desire realm in the formless realm. If I am a formless realm god, I can just look at the desire realm suffering like a movie. I cannot feel the intensity of the amount of suffering compare with someone who is practicing in the desire realm. Therefore the disenchantment comparatively will be weaker.
Question: Why it is not strong enough to generate the Path of Seeing newly?
Student 9: I think the desire realm is more suitable because the desire realm will have both the mental and physical aggregates. In the formless realm they don’t have the physical aggregates. As for the form realm, they have already renounced sensual pleasure. For them, their suffering is quite subtle so it is very difficult for them to feel very strong disenchantment. 
I want to ask a question. Is there such a thing as contrived renunciation? In the 2nd lesson, I understand that Mahayanist actually enter a path generating renunciation and bodhicitta together. Is it possible for them to do it sequentially in that they first generate a contrived renunciation and then go on generate bodhicitta? As they progress on the path they will still need to revisit this portion and to make the renunciation stronger. 
Khen Rinpoche: Je Rinpoche Lama Tsongkhapa posited the criteria of having generated renunciation very clearly in The Three Principal Aspects of the Path. The thought desiring liberation day and night is the measure of someone who has entered the path. 
When we say somebody has entered the path, what is the criterion for saying that? Anybody who develops the thought desiring liberation spontaneously effortlessly uncontrived day and night. That is the measure of renunciation. So if he has this renunciation, he become somebody who has entered the path as he has the path in his mind. 
When we elaborate further “What path?”, so when a person enters the path, there are only two possibilities, and there is nothing in between the path. The path one has entered is either the Hinayana path or the Mahayana path. Uncontrived renunciation means entering the path. With uncontrived renunciation one is either entering the Hinayana path or the Mahayana path. 
Student 9: When entering a path there are two paths: the Hinayana path or the Mahayana path. If one enters Hinayana Path, the definition is uncontrived renunciation, whereas in the Mahayana path is uncontrived bodhicitta. Having uncontrived renunciation is day and night thinking about liberation. That I can understand. However, for Mahayanists possesses a mind to gain great enlightenment for sentient beings, and as for their own self liberation, it is not their first priority. To enter Mahayana path is uncontrived bodhicitta. I can also generate uncontrived bodhicitta with contrived renunciation. If it becomes contrived renunciation, I will be thinking day and night of my own liberation. This is what I think.
Khen Rinpoche:  I think I have explained this in the last lesson. For this question I think I have answered about that. If you get that, the answer is there. 
So the measure of renunciation is that the person has no interest in samsaric perfections, then comes to the point when day and night he has the thought desiring liberation, then he enters the path. What path does he enter? There are only two possibilities: either the Hinayana path or the Mahayana path. 
In the case of an individual who doesn’t have bodhicitta, what option does he have? Hinayana path.  When does he enter the Hinayana path? On the basis of renouncing samsaric perfections, having the thought day and night uncontrived thinking or seeking liberation for himself alone. 
This individual renounces samsaric perfections. He is only looking for liberation for himself day and night.  So what path is he on? Hinayana Path. He enters the Hinayana path from the Hinayana Path of Accumulation. After entering the Hinayana Path of Accumulation, is it possible for him to enter the Mahayana Path of Accumulation from there?
In the first place what drove him to enter a path? Day and night he is thinking of liberation for himself. Then after day and night thinking of liberation for himself he just starts the journey to his goal. Just as he has started his journey, then immediately thinking “I’m going to achieve liberation for all sentient beings”. This is unlikely.  
The question that was raised two lessons ago was “For someone who is entering the Mahayana from the onset, (someone who has not entered the Hinayana path first), if he were to enter the path and the first path is the Mahayana path, for this individual, his generation of renunciation and bodhicitta is serial or simultaneous? 
If you say it is serial “generate renunciation first then generates bodhicitta”, then it would be very difficult to defend. So the only choice is renunciation and bodhicitta are generated simultaneously. That is why you have the qualm. 
Khen Rinpoche: So sequential or simultaneously?
For someone who is entering the Mahayana on the onset, bodhicitta is generated after renunciation or bodhicitta and renunciation are generated simultaneously?
How is it possible that for these two to arise together? If you don’t even realize and renounce your own suffering how you can empathize with others and want to free them from suffering? How are you going to explain this? This doesn’t mean you are wrong. 
If we don’t contemplate on our own suffering, without seeing how terrible our own samsara is, there is no way we can think of other people’s suffering and then develop a wish to free them from their suffering. No way. So it is not simultaneous. 
Khen Rinpoche: That is why you cannot change your mind. Anyway this is a learning class. You can do any discussion. Don’t believe what I say. For the sake of discussion I will say in many different ways. I said simultaneously. Just now I said cannot be together. But you need to think. 
As for the answer as to whether it is generated simultaneously or serially, I have said many times. The answer is clear. As for the levels of practice, it is also clear. All of us we are heavily influenced under the control of ignorance, anger and attachment day and night and for every single day of our lives. That brings us problems. The two obvious ones are our anger and our attachment. Of the two, the more is the attachment. Attachment is the thing that causes all the difficulties and problems. Since that is the thing that is causing us difficulties then obviously in order to have less difficulty, less unhappiness, and less suffering, we have to moderate our attachment.  We need to do something about it and at least to weaken it. The first kind of attachment that we should work at is the attachment to this life. At the beginning of Lamrim, it talks about reversing the attachment to this life’s happiness. That is the main troublemaker for us. That is what we have to work at. If you think about it, there is no better solution than to think about our own death and impermanence all the time. This is not going to happen right away. Reducing our attachment to this life is not going to happen if we don’t apply the antidote which is death and impermanence. We have to think and to understand about death and impermanence all the time. This is how we should enter into the practice fundamentally. Practice means starts from here. 
Let’s take a simple example. When you are staying in a hotel, you don’t worry about what is going to happen to the sofa or what is going to happen to the bed because it is not our sofa or bed. If we are talking about our own sofa and our bed, then it is completely a different thing. Why there is a difference? Why we don’t give a damn to the sofa and bed in the hotel but we care so much about what we have. Because there is a mind that clings on them. Why we don’t cling on to the sofa and bed in the hotel room? Why? Because we know we are there only for a short time; perhaps only one day, and that is the things don’t bother us. But why are we so concerned about the sofa and bed in our house? Because we have this idea “These have to be with me for a long time.” 
When we say practice, what is the first practice for everybody to do? The first thing to do is to reduce or turn away from attachment of this life. The best method is to think about death and impermanence all the time, every day. Commensurate with the strength of our reflection and recollection of death and impermanence in our daily life, we will see a drop in our afflictions like anger and attachment to this life. Commensurate with the drop in our anger and attachment, obviously we become happier person, definitely with more peace and more happiness in daily life. This is the process by which we begin to move towards acquiring the status of a dharma practitioner.  
Another thing that we really ought to know is as what the great Kadampa geshe said: With every single happiness and pleasure we experience in samsara, together with it in one package is suffering. There isn’t a single samsaric pleasure and experience that anybody can possibly experience that is separated from suffering. No way. There is always at least one suffering that comes with it. This we ought to know because we don’t believe this, we don’t realize, and we don’t see it.  It doesn’t matter whether you are Buddhist or not, the point is this happens to the mind.