Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L50.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:14.990577
================================================================================

Since all of us recite the Six Session Guru Yoga daily, I thought it would be beneficial if we go through the practice.  In general, it is not that you don't already know what to visualize. Anyway, we just go through this here in the class.
Khen Rinpoche: You brought the text? Or (already) memorized? Must be by heart! 
Many a time people ask: What kind of practice should I do? How should I practice?
Actually, in the way, the answer is very simple. Whatever practice it may be, the point is all of us have promised a pledge and taken different types of vows and different commitments (samaya). So practice is to means guard the vows and the commitments (samaya) that one has taken.  There is no practice separate from this. Therefore, practice means that.  
All of us here have taken the three types of vows:
Pratimoksha vows, 
Bodhisattva vows 
Tantric vows
We possess these three vows. To protect the vows and to practise the commitments is the meaning of practice. Somebody who keeps the vows as purely as he/she can, you could call the person a practitioner.
We have taken the tantric vows that consist of keeping specific samaya of the five Buddha lineages:
Vairocana
Akshobhya 
Ratnasambhava, 
Amitabha, 
Amoghasiddhi 
If the practice of the Six Session Guru Yoga is done well and mindfully on the 19 samaya of the five Buddha lineages, then one would have practiced those 19 samaya and one would have been keeping those samaya.
There are 6 samaya of Vairocana which consists of:
keeping or practicing the three types of ethical disciplines,
the practice of going refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha
There are 4 samaya of Akshobhya which are:
the mind samaya of the vajra, 
the speech samaya of the bell 
the body samaya of the mudra 
the samaya of devoting to the vajra master.
There are 4 samaya of Ratnasambhava, which are:
the practice the 4 types of giving
It is in the Six Session Guru Yoga sessions where the lines read:
Practice the four types of giving six times a day
So, the practice of four types of giving six times every day is not applicable only to four samaya of Ratnasambhava. One has to understand that it is applicable to all the samaya of the other Buddha lineages. Whatever samaya there are of the Buddha lineages, all of those have to be practiced six times a day.
There are 3 samaya of Amitabha, which are:
to uphold the samaya of the outer - pledge to train in Action tantra (kriya) and Performance tantra (charya)  
to uphold the samaya of the secret - pledge to train in yoga tantra and unsurpassed yoga tantra
to uphold the samaya of the three vehicles.  
As for the 3 samaya of Amitabha, what we have promised is to practise the Buddhadharma in its entirety. 
There are 2 samaya of Amoghasiddhi, which are:
do not transgress the 3 types of vows
to make as many offerings as possible
The Six Session Guru Yoga starts with the verse of going for refuge and generating bodhicitta. 
I go for refuge, until I am enlightened,
To the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Highest Assembly.
From the virtuous merit that I collect
By practicing giving and other perfections,
May I attain the state of a buddha
To be able to benefit all sentient beings.     
It is said that we start off with three repetitions of the verse. There is not so much the point of whether it is three repetitions or one repetition.  The point is refuge and bodhicitta. One starts off with visualizing the objects of refuge.
We visualize the object of refuge as it is how it is normally being explained in the teaching.  
In the space in front of us on a very expansive throne is a lotus, moon and sun disc. 
On that sit one’s kind root guru in the aspect of Shakyamuni Buddha.
He is surrounded by the root and lineage gurus and all other objects of refuge - deities, buddhas, bodhisattva, dakas, dakinis, dharma protectors and so forth.  
It will be good if right at the beginning we try to visualize the object of refuge as clearly as possible. 
Imagine we are surrounded by all sentient beings - all the 6 types of migratory beings in the aspect of human.
In order for that to be refuge, we need to meditate on the cause of refuge. On our own basis, we reflect on the suffering of lower realms and the suffering of cyclic existence. Only then we can imagine all the sentient beings around us also have that strong fear of those suffering.
On the object of refuge, they are the only one who possesses the power to free one and all sentient beings from all those sufferings. That belief and conviction must come from deep within us.  We are the only one, nobody else. 
The practice of this refuge is so important. If we have that attitude of refuge from the beginning then the rest of the practice can happen and will come if there is real refuge in the first place.  
All of you have studies on the two causes of refuge - fear and faith. 
Fear of suffering of the lower realms and the suffering of the samsara 
Personal faith and conviction from the heart that only the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, and Guru have the power to free us and other sentient beings from that suffering. 
So, as much as possible, we need to reflect, analyze and meditate till we are able to have this kind of faith and conviction.  Without these two, then is very difficult to have real refuge.
I go for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
Since all of you have already studied these, and when these words come up, what comes to your mind?
The Buddha who is in the nature of the four bodies - nature body, truth body, enjoyment body and emanation body. Something which is in the nature of four bodies or three bodies – that is Buddha that you take refuge in.  
The Dharma in terms of scriptural dharma and the realizational dharma. The actual dharma is that which is included in the true path and true cessation. That is the real Dharma Jewel. 
The Sangha Jewel is those Mahayana bodhisattva superiors, Hearer superiors, Solidarity realiser superiors and the qualities of abandonment and realization in their continuum.
So you really need to have a very good understanding of the object of refuge.
I have mentioned a couple of time before what are the differences between having studied well the Buddha' teaching and not having studied.  You need to know there is a huge difference. For example, somebody who has studied well knows what the three Jewels are. 
Even right from the beginning of going for refuge, this person who has so much material to draw on will has a big picture and very good understanding and draws connection. There are so many things that the person can reflect and meditate on.  You really have to see this point.  It is important to understand that if you have done some studies, you will have a lot of resources to draw in your practice. Since you have done some studies already, so whatever you are doing you should extract the relevant information and material in the head and apply them in the right context in your practice.
Having a good practice of the refuge at the beginning of the Six Session Guru Yoga constitute keeping 3 out of the 6 samaya of Vairocana as half of the samaya of Vairocana has to do with going for refuge.
We need to remind ourselves of what refuge is. We go for refuge 6 times in a day: we have to remind ourselves 3 times in a day and 3 times at night.
The virtues I create through the practice of generosity and so forth, may I become a Buddha for the benefit of all sentient beings.
Basically aspiring to be like the object of refuge - May I become like you quickly so that I can benefit the sentient beings. I do that through practicing the six perfections such as the perfection of generosity and also the four ways of gathering the sentient beings and bringing that into one's fold.
The next paragraph is the meditation on the four immeasurables.
May all sentient beings be parted from aversion and clinging, 
feeling close to some and distant from others. 
May they win the bliss that is specially sublime, 
May they find release from the ocean of unbearable sorrow, 
And may they never be parted from freedom's true joy.
This starts with the immeasurable equanimity.  
Basically our way of perceiving others is not balanced. We don’t see everyone in the equal way. As such, we feel closer to some and distant from other which is related to the attitude of anger and attachment.  Through which pure love and compassion is difficult and it doesn't come.  First, we have to equalize.
There is a longer version of the four immeasurables prayers.
If possible, it will be good  if you can recite and meditate on that.  The extensive version goes like this:
How wonderful it would be if all sentient beings were to abide in equanimity, free from the discriminating thoughts of anger and attachment that hold some close and others distant.
May they abide in equanimity.
I myself will cause them to abide in equanimity.
Please Guru-Buddha, bless me to be able to do so.
The point is not so much to just reciting the prayer. The point is we have to feel the prayer. So it is better to think of the prayer and feel the meaning of what you are reciting. Thereafter when there is a feel then you can recite out.
Next is immeasurable love. May all sentient beings achieve or enjoy the special bliss or special joy or special happiness which in the ultimate sense is the pure highest happiness. This is enlightenment which means wishing all sentient being to have that.  
If you recite the longer version
How wonderful it would be if all sentient beings had happiness and its causes.
May they have happiness and its causes.
I myself will cause them to have happiness and its causes.
Please Guru-Buddha, bless me to be able to do so.
Next is meditation on immeasurable compassion. 
May all sentient beings be freed from oceans of unbearable sorrow and unbearable suffering. It is a wish for sentient beings to be free of oceans of samsaric suffering; free from all sufferings of samsara. If you can, you can recite the extensive one. 
How wonderful it would be if all sentient beings were free from suffering and its causes.
May they be free from suffering and its causes.
I myself will cause them to be free from suffering and its causes.
Please Guru-Buddha, bless me to be able to do so.
The last one is meditation on immeasurable joy.
May sentient beings never be separated from the happiness of nirvana; which means happiness from liberation from cyclic existence and also may never be parted from the joy of non-abiding nirvana; which is full enlightenment. 
If you can, you can recite the extensive one. 
How wonderful it would be if all sentient beings were never separated from the happiness of higher rebirth and liberation.
May they never be separated from these.
I myself will cause them never to be separated from these.
Please Guru-Buddha, bless me to be able to do so.
So that is the second paragraph on meditation of the four immeasurables. Instead of doing that, you can recite the long version of four immeasurables. Not so much just reciting, but as we recite, mix the meaning of those four immeasurables with our minds. 
Next verse is essentially generating aspirational bodhicitta with a pledge. 
From this moment on, until I am a buddha, 
May I never give up, though my life be at stake, 
The attitude wishing to gain full enlightenment
In order to free from the fears of samsara 
And nirvana's complacency all sentient beings.
Essentially what the verse is saying: From now until I achieve enlightenment I will never give up even at the cost of my life and with the thought of wanting to achieve enlightenment in order to free all sentient beings from the extremes of samsara and nirvana. 
I will not forsake this intention even at the cost of my life. 
It says ‘life’ then there is no need to say one should not even give up the thought just for the sake of worldly possessions or one’s comfort in this life, reputation and so forth.  Since we have taken the bodhisattva vow we have to generate the thought every day. 
Next is the verse of engage the bodhisattva vow. It is good to think again of the objects of refuge in the space in front of us. 
O gurus, buddhas and bodhisattvas, please listen 
To what I now say from the depths of my heart. 
Just as all buddhas of the past have developed 
The thought of enlightenment, true bodhichitta, 
Then practiced its stages of graded development 
Following the trainings for all buddhas' children, 
So may I too, for the sake of all beings, 
Develop bodhichitta and follow the trainings 
Exactly as all bodhisattvas have done.      
This is the verse of taking the bodhisattva vow. We imagine that we repeating the verse after the objects of refuge in the space in front of us. The verse starts with calling for the attention of the objects of refuge. It starts with:
O gurus, buddhas and bodhisattvas, please pay attention to me and so forth, and repeating after the objects of refuge. The idea is to think of the meaning of the verse and as much as possible to feel the meaning. So what the verse is saying: Just as all Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the past have developed bodhicitta and likewise train gradually in the six Perfections and the for ways of gathering sentient beings in their fold. Likewise I will also generate bodhicitta and train in the bodhisattva deeds. That is what we should think and feel when reciting this verse for taking the bodhisattva vows. 
So you need to understand that what you are reciting. Here essentially you are making a pledge to train in the bodhisattva deeds; not just to generate bodhicitta. It says “Just like what the buddhas of the past have train gradually so now I make a promise to all of you that I will follow in your footsteps.” Then we should try our best to do what we have promised. That is the idea. 
We have to examine whether we are actually able to practice all the bodhisattva deeds or not. Anyway we made the promise. Among all the deeds that we know we are actually capable of, therefore we should implement right away and do it. Those that is relatively difficult and challenging for us at the present moment. Many of those can be practiced mentally, even if you are not able to visualize and practice. Even if that is difficult, those we really find difficult now, at least we must generate the aspiration to be able to do it in the future. We pray “In the future, may I be able to do that particular one.”
That is how it is advised in the teachings. Those we are actually capable of we do it and those we can’t at least review those practices mentally and to generate a strong wish to be able to do those in the future. That is how we should act rather than just dismissing them right away “This cannot do so just forget it”. 
So that is not correct. 
So as much as possible, we should meditate to be able to develop that kind of feeling. So that is the idea of the prayer to feel the prayer. If there is time, that is how it should be done. Also it is possible that after having thought well, you have some feeling “I am going to generate some feeling of bodhicitta, some heartfelt wish to train in the bodhisattva deeds”. With that kind of feeling present in the mind, then we can even get up and kneel on one knee; like how when we take the bodhisattva vows. If we can put all that together mentally and then physically we kneel with devotion. Then definitely there is some positive impact in the mind. If you can do it like that regularly, definitely you will see some change in the mind. 
After taking the bodhisattva vows, the objects of refuge that surround Guru Shakyamuni Buddha all dissolve into Shakyamuni Buddha. Then you focus on Guru Shakyamuni Buddha. 
Then with some faith towards Guru Shakyamuni Buddha. he dissolve into light, and then dissolves into us through the mid-brow. 
Then Guru Shakyamuni Buddha dissolves into us, and then our body transforms into light. Then we appear as Guru Shakyamuni Buddha. It is ok to do this. We transform ourselves into Guru Shakyamuni Buddha and imagine we are adorned with all the signs and exemplifications. 
The next is meditation of feeling joyful, feel sense of joy. 
At this moment my life has become truly fruitful, 
For having attained an endowed human body, 
Today I have developed the true buddha essence, 
Bodhichitta, and thus have become Buddha's child.
Today I have obtained a human existence and make my life meaningful. The idea is “In this life I manage to generate bodhicitta and the opportunity with the thought about bodhicitta, generate bodhicitta and take bodhisattva vows. This is the most meaningful thing in my life”. 
How much we can actually feel this prayer; which is aspirational joy. It very much depends how much joy you felt at the time of generating bodhicitta and taking the bodhisattva vows. 
If that generating bodhicitta is heartfelt then making the promise to practice the bodhisattva deeds is heartfelt, then one would see how that makes life so meaningful. Naturally joy will come and have the opportunity to do that. 
Next verse is applying conscientiousness. 
Applying now any skilled means whatsoever, 
May I always accord what I do with this essence 
(And follow the actions of all Buddha's children). 
May I never confuse with this pure faultless essence
We are saying that one’s action or one’s behavior will not contradict the bodhisattva ideal and will not contradict the bodhisattva training. We need to understand what we are saying is that we will implement mindfulness and vigilance in our lives so as to not go against the trainings that we have promised to undertake and to make sure that we are not stained by any of the downfalls. 
Next verse is the actual body of Guru Yoga and the description is all there. What you have to visualize it is all there. If you read it mindfully and slowly, it is all there. 
In the sky before me, on a breathtaking throne of jewels, 
On a mandala seat of a lotus, sun, and full moon, 
Sits my root Guru, all-pervading Vajradhara, 
With a blue-colored body, one face, and two arms. 
Holding vajra and bell and embracing his duplicate consort, 
He shines resplendent with all the marks of a buddha, 
Adorned with many dazzling jeweled ornaments, 
Draped with fine garments of enchanting, heavenly scarves. 
Even the mere remembrance of him dispels all my torment. 
With a nature encompassing every supreme refuge, 
He sits cross-legged in the vajraposition, 
The three spots of his body marked with three letters. 
Light beams forth from the HUM (at his heart) 
And invokes Guru Vajradhara from his actual abode. 
JAH HUM BAM HO 
They (merge to) become non-dual.
It says visualize in the space before you. As for what it means as space, there are many different ways of understanding. If you take it literally it is just the empty space in front of you. Then there is a jeweled throne and sun disc. On top of that sits your own kind root guru in the aspect of Vajradhara. 
Just thinking that your root guru in the space in front of you is the literal meaning of space. Another understanding of space is emptiness. 
You start on the meditation of emptiness. While it is empty, you visualize that your root guru. Within emptiness, that is another take or meaning of space. In the space in front in the jewel throne, it is one’s kind root guru in the aspect of Vajradhara embracing the wisdom mother. Also there is the description is in the text. Then his three places are marked with the 3 syllables.
Visualize your Guru Vajradhara in the space in front. This is the commitment being.
Then from the Hum at the Guru Vajradhara’s heart light rays go out the 10 directions invites Guru Vajradhara to come and then absorb and become inseparable from the commitment being. 
Then there are these 4 syllables JAH HUM BAM HO. There is a visualization that accompanies those four syllables. Light rays from the syllable Hum at the heart of the Guru Vajradhara goes out the 10 directions and invite the wisdom being Guru Vajradhara. 
When you recite Jah, all that you are invited all gather at the top of the commitment being that you visualized. 
Hum, the wisdom being absorbs and merges with the commitment being. 
Bam becomes one taste. 
Ho means they abide with delight happily. 
Essentially the visualization of Jah Hum Bam Ho is that you invite all the wisdom beings to dissolve into commitment beings and they become inseparable. 
Then think that is really the object of refuge and abide in front of me. This practice of inviting the wisdom being absorbing into commitment being is something that is useful for our minds. 
Next is the verse of prostrations. 
I bow at your lotus feet, 
O my jewel-like Guru Vajradhara, 
Your kindness heralds an instantaneous 
Dawn of great bliss.
This is the verse of prostrations to the kind root guru; the one who has the capacity and power to grants us the final non-dual wisdom of bliss and emptiness which is enlightenment in one brief lifetime of this degenerate age.
To this inconceivable one, that particular lama, this root guru, I prostrate. You prostrate after having that faith, the conviction, the belief and devotion then you prostrate. 
If you think about it, generating real faith in the gurus is not easy. Why? Because it depends on what you are looking for in life. Here, for somebody who is really looking for enlightenment, especially who is looking for enlightenment in one short lifetime of the degenerate age, who really from the heart want to work for sentient beings. When a student can find such a guru who can shows the entire path from beginning to end “This is how you do it”, such a disciple who has that kind of unbelievable devotion to that guru, because he has find the one who can give him what he wants.
So this is how real faith is to be generated. It is very much depends on what you want. Somebody who wants the dharma says “I can achieve enlightenment here” and then finds that lama or person who can give you that. Then that person finds what he needs. Of course that person faith is unshakeable. He has irreversible faith.
When such a disciple finds such a lama, such a disciple has no issue about bowing completely from the heart to the lowest point of guru’s body which is the lotus feet. In that way the person dedicates his body, speech and mind to his guru. Otherwise it is difficult. Put aside about touching the lotus feet, even just to bend down slightly to the guru is very challenging.
This discussion is in the context of unsurpassed yoga tantra. It is a practice of tantra and within that is the highest level of tantra. We are talking in the context of someone who wants enlightenment in one short lifetime and finding that lama who can give him that. 
Next is the recitation of the Eight Legged Praise, literally is the Praise of Eight Lines. It is said that a lot of benefits by reciting the praise.
Next is the verse of making of offerings - both owned and unowned.
All the things I possess and what is not mine, 
What is actually placed here and what I mentally create, 
I present you an ocean-like cloud of these various offerings: outer, inner, and secret. 
We should offer as much as we can include those that are visualized. This is making the outer offering.
Since this is a practice of unsurpassed yoga tantra, there is the practice of making the inner offering which is in the nature of the five meats and five nectars. 
There is the secret offering. Everybody here has received unsurpassed yoga tantra wang. Emanate from the heart of ourself the fully qualified wisdom mother. This wisdom mother that we have emanated dissolves into Guru Vajradhara wisdom mother who is the Vajradhatu Ishvari. As a result of that, then Guru Vajradhara in union with the wisdom mother. Then you imagine they generate the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness in their mind. This secret offering is essentially through visualization that you imagine the guru generates the wisdom of great bliss.
There is suchness offering. You can think that the guru with the wisdom of great bliss that he experience through this secret offering ascertain emptiness. These great bliss and emptiness becomes non-dual. Such an experience that is generated in his mind is the suchness offering.
These are the four offerings that are offered in the suchness offerings. 
In the Guru Puja, there are the verses for the inner offerings, the verse for the secret offering and the verse for the suchness offering. If you can think of the meaning of those verses or even use those verses then in this context here you can accumulate vast amount of merit.
Next is the mandala offering.
The body, speech, and mind of myself and others,
Our wealth as well as our virtues amassed in the past, present, and future,
An excellent jeweled mandala together with a mass of Samantabhadra's  offerings: 
I envision these all and present them to you,
O my Guru, my yidam, and the Three Precious Gems.Accepting these in your compassion, bestow on me waves of your blessings.
IDAM GURU RATNA MANDALAKAM NIRYATAYAMI
The verse says the offering the body, speech and mind of oneself and others and all the possessions and including all the merits, virtue of the three times, then you gather all of them altogether and heap it as a mandala and you offer.
You can apply the offering visualization of Samantabhadra in the mandala offering. From one mandala comes the 25 each. I think I have described the visualization to you in one of the previous module so that you can apply that visualization here.
Then it is followed by two verses and the meaning of which is practice of correctly devoting to the virtuous friend. Immediately after the offering, there is this verse. The point is that here you bring to mind the qualities of one’s own root Guru and to bring to mind the qualities of the Guru then you generate faith.
In the next verse then through remembering the kindness of the Guru you develop respect.
I humbly beseech you, my precious Guru,
Just as the buddhas of the three times and ten directions have tamed (sentient beings),
You too enact the buddhas' deeds in countless realms,
Taking the form of a saffron-robed monk.
I humbly beseech you, my precious Guru, 
Esteemed by Vajradhara, for those meager of mind, 
As a field of merit more precious 
Than the endless circles of infinite buddhas.
Then the next verse, “All the supreme and common attainments…” comes from following after the virtuous friend. I think this shows the practice of correctly devoting to the virtuous friend in action.
Every supreme and mundane attainment 
Follows upon pure devotion to you, my protector. 
Seeing this 1 forsake my body and even my life; 
Bless me to practice what will only please you.
“All the supreme and common attainments…” – we have talked about common attainments earlier in this module. The supreme attainment is enlightenment. So it is saying that whatever attainment it is, supreme and common, all of them come in dependence upon correctly devoting to the virtuous friend.
Be convinced of that then one practice accordingly. Essentially we have to think about the benefits of correctly devoting to the virtuous friend, and then the faults of not devoting and the faults of devoting incorrectly. So through knowing both benefits and the faults, then at all times, the training is to stop the mind looking for faults and the mind that sees faults in the guru and always focus on the qualities and kindness in order to be engendered devotion in one’s mind towards the guru.
First, you have to realize, feel and understand, not intellectually, that all attainments, both the supreme and common, without exception. It is saying that every single good thing, no matter how big or how small, comes from correctly devoting to the virtuous friend. Those people who realize that from the heart are people who will never ever give up their gurus. Even if they have to lose their lives, they will not do that. In fact, these are the people who will never do that and will do everything in their power to please their virtuous friend. In the first place, in order for us to never give up the guru all cost and pleasing the guru, we must be really convinced that every single good thing comes from correctly devoting to the virtuous friend. First, we have to settle that first. If that doesn’t happen then the practice doesn’t happen.
If you look at the Six Session Guru Yoga, all the essential practices are gathered in one place. 
After this verse, “All supreme and common attainments follows upon …”, it would be  very good if you can insert the verse from the Guru Puja which says:
You are the Guru, you are the yidam,
You are the dakinis and Dharma protectors.
From now unti l enlightenment I shall seek no other refuge than you.
In this life, the bardo, and all future lives,
Hold me with your hook of compassion;
Free me from samsara and nirvana’s fears,
Grant all att ainments,
Be my constant friend and guard me from interferences
You can recite three times. The idea is with devotion.
You recite this three times. Thereafter that you can insert the following verse in the guru puja; which is a short way for taking the four initiations in the manner of blessing. There is also an extensive way for taking the four initiations. So if you know how to think of what can be inserted at this point.
If we go according to what is in the Guru Puja with the verse which is the short way of taking the four initiations in the manner of blessing. 
First, you visualize Om from the guru forehead, there are white light rays and nectar comes and enters into your forehead. Through that you receive the vase initiation then you think that you are empowered to meditate on the generation stage and the potential to actualize the emanation body is planted.
Then from the red syllable AH in the guru throat come the red beams of light and nectar into your throat, then imagine you receive the secret initiation on the negativities and obscurations of the speech is purified. Then you are empowered to meditate on the completion stage of the conventional illusory body and then the potential has been planted to actualize the resultant enjoyment body.
Next from the blue Hum at the heart of the Guru, comes blue light rays and nectar and enters into your heart. You receive the knowledge wisdom initiation. All the negativities and obscurations of the mind are purified. Then one is empowered to meditate on ultimate meaning clear light of the completion stage and the potential to actualize the resultant dharmakaya is planted.
Lastly visualize light rays and nectar from the three places of the Guru emerges simultaneously and dissolves in your three places. You think you receive the precious words initiation and all the negativities and obscurations that are common to the body, speech and mind. Particularly their imprints are purified. It empowers to meditate on the completion stage of the inseparable two truths and the imprints are planted to actualize the unification of no more learning. 
Then you imagine that the root guru is actually pleased. With great delight, then he comes above of our crown and dissolves into us and becomes inseparable.
Then you dissolve into light from top and bottom. Then in the emptiness you imagine that you manifest the dharmakaya.
Imagine that you dissolve into emptiness and imagine you manifest the wisdom of great bliss and then enter into meditative equipoise on emptiness.
You can do the visualization that includes the essential points of taking the three bodies as the path.
First, taking death as the path of dharmakaya; essential the meditation on emptiness. 
Then imagine that mind arises as a white shaft of light and taking the intermediate state as the path of the sambhogakaya.
Then that white shaft of light becomes as what the Six Session Guru Yoga says: You arise as Vajrasattva embracing Vajra Bhagavati. That will be like taking the birth as a path of nirmanakaya.
The next verse I think is about the practice of the generosity.
Next follows a couple of paragraphs that lists all the trainings of the three vows: the pratimoksha, bodhisattva and tantric vows. The idea is that by knowing what the downfalls are and as ones goes through all of them, if one has not incur any transgression or downfalls then we can rejoice. If you discover that there is some infraction and transgression, it is said that we should confess and then do the practice of Vajrasattva.
If there is any infraction or transgression, at all time we should have the attitude at the back of our mind in that, it should always be very strong remorse and regret for whatever transgression that has been committed and always to have an attitude really trying our best to do not make the same mistakes again and not incur those infractions again in future. Basically is strong restraint.
Then you finish the practice and dedicate well. That’s it.
Khen Rinpoche: I think I don’t have anything much to talk anymore. So Thursday I thought to do Tara Puja together. I am not going to teach you to do Tara Puja. Same time I will give you some homework. Something you have to do. So on Thursday we do Tara Puja together. Then that is the conclusion of this year class. Come together and pray to clear all obstacles and successful in study whatever. As for the five group leaders, please set up for the Tara Puja. 