Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L52.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:18.139700
================================================================================

(Khen Rinpoche taught in English)
Venerable Gyurme had submitted his resignation with immediate effect as a translator on last Tuesday. He has been translating for 15 to 16 years. So for the coming one or two classes I thought of giving simple talk. I don’t think I can go deep teaching on tantra for few classes. Slowly we will find a translator. So be patient for the time being. Anyway, this is our last module and is almost done. Anything can happen in the world, so just be patient.
This is Mani Kabum written by Guru Rinpoche (*see below) but I am not exactly sure. What I see here is one very simple advice. I have mentioned in some other class. 
There are few verses on “How not to waste your body, speech and mind.”  Here it says: 
Not to waste your body. Generate yourself as the Compassionate Buddha and avoiding the ordinary appearance. 
It is a very simple practice but with very profound advice. We have this body. How to make this body useful?  We have been talking so much about Tantra and this and that. 
Visualize yourself as the Compassionate Buddha. We have learned before on how to generate ourselves as the deity according to tantra; the six levels. 
Here the advice is within that kind of practice:
- not wasting your body -  visualize yourself as the deity all the time
- not wasting your speech -  recite Om Mani Padme Hung. Don’t see your speech as ordinary and that help you not to gossip and creating negative karma. In this way, your speech will not be wasted. That means it become meaningful. 
That is a very good advice. We listen so much and talk so much. But we don’t really think much in our practice. So for the few classes I will try to talk as simple as possible. The point is listen well and then put in effort in the practice. This is something that we all are lacking. We are not lacking of understanding anything. I don’t think so. What we are lacking is putting into practice. We must remember that. So whenever you talk, don’t gossip so much. This is very powerful.
I remember one of my teachers, who have become Ganden Tripa, normally doesn’t talk much except dharma. One of his teachers advised him “Always watch your speech and don’t gossip” and he remembered that all the time. He did not gossip but always do chanting, or do prayer or talk dharma. So he doesn’t create negative karma. 
This is very useful. So we can put in some effort always reciting Om Mani Padme Hung and don’t just talk. Like that it is useful.
Then the last verse is: Not to waste your mind. Do not let your mind under the control of the delusion. Most of the time, our mind is wasted and almost not using our mind but always let it control by the negative emotions such as anger, attachment, pride, and jealously. From morning to night, all the negative emotions are carried by that. So that is the meaning of wasting your mind. The advice here is not to let your mind being controlled by the negative emotions. 
Here the advice is that when the negative emotion arises, look at that negative emotion and let it dissolves into the mind. All these negative emotions come from the mind and are the play of the mind. You just recognize that. Only look at the negative emotions and not follow the negative emotion. Just look at the reality of the negative emotion. It doesn’t last long in your mind and sooner or later somehow it will subdue and dissolves into the mind itself. 
One can understand it in many different ways. Look at the reality of the negative emotion. It comes from cause and condition. It just appears and nothing truly exists. Once you meditate on the reality, the ultimate nature of the delusion mind, it will dissolve into the emptiness. You don’t really see negative emotion there. It dissolves into emptiness by itself. I think it can be understood in that way. So this is something very useful whenever negative emotion arises. 
The problem is that when the negative emotion arises, we try to look for the reason – why, what and then follow the negative emotion. This continues and become stronger and deeper. Here you look at the reality of the negative emotion, the ultimate nature of the delusion. If you meditate well, it dissolves into emptiness. It comes from the mind, so it dissolves into the nature of the mind. It doesn’t bother your mind so much. You recognize the negative emotion and just let it go. So this is the way to make your mind useful and meaningful. It is extremely important as we all have negative emotion arise all the time. It is very important not to carry negative emotion in your mind. When you follow then there is no ending. If there is an end then is wonderful, but there is no ending. You keep on carrying and it becomes stronger and stronger. The point here is to meditate like that and it really helps. If you practice like that, then your delusion or attachment will be subdued or pacified. 
Whatever sickness that one has will be recovered. Also any spirit harm will also be pacified.
Then you have some kind of inner experience arises in the mind. Also there is external sign that one doesn’t have much craving such as drinking and eating. All these will be subdued. Some people feel hungry after eating. So for those really hungry then it is helpful as this stop taking rebirth as hungry ghost and leave imprints to achieve Buddha’s nirmanakaya body.
This is simple in practice and don’t need to do too much. Everyday visualize yourself as deity and then recite Om Mani Padme Hung to control your mind.
This in Tibetan Mani Kabum which, I think it has two volumes with so many small pieces of advice. I think written by guru Rinpoche or from Chenrezig (*see below). It consists of two books with short and helpful advices. It is good to study extensively. However, we need some kind of practice. 
I did talk about the verse from the Diamond Cutter-sutra before at the beginning of the class:
A star, a visual aberration, the flame of a lamp,
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble, 
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud, 
See conditioned things as such
What I try to do here is not so much on teaching but little bit of talk. At the same time listen and try to get into your mind. Not so much writing tonight. Try to focus your mind with full attention. I try to make it as clear as possible and at the same time touching your mind. 
What this verse is saying? What is the use of the verse? What is the benefit?
Try to listen as much as possible with full attention. You really need to motivate yourself to listen to the dharma. The questions are:
What are you looking for?” We do practise the dharma, but look deeply and question yourself: 
Do I really practise the dharma? 
What does it really mean to practise the dharma?
Am I different from those who are not practising dharma so-called non-Buddhists?
It is a big question to ask oneself. It is extremely important to always thinking about this:
Am I less attached than other people?
Do I have less anger than other people?
Do I have less pride than others?
Compare those who are not practitioner and yourself as practitioner. Good to compare that. If it doesn’t make any difference, then what is that for?
Always need to ask oneself; include myself. Without that nothing changes. 
I have been teaching here for almost 19 to 20 years. It is a long time. I don’t think it is lack of understanding. You people have enough knowledge. In the one or two classes I try my best to encourage in short way. 
We all like that - just see some kind of temporary happiness. We just look at this life maybe a little bit in the next life. We are not really thinking so much about liberation. We don’t see our problem. Samsara is suffering but we don’t really see that much. We still believe samsara is pleasure. We don’t really see deep down to renounce this samsaric life especially this body pleasure and just clinging on that one after another. This is one of the biggest challenges. This is something that needs to think deeply. 
Therefore, at the beginning, the Buddha taught the first of the Four Noble Truths - true suffering. Without understanding that, then I think very difficult to practice and call oneself a dharma practitioner. This is something we all need to focus on and understand. It is not easy. So must understand that. This is one of the points. When we look deep down, we are just working for the survival of this life - day to day – and not so much of a dharma practitioner. We just survive this life and just passing this life hope to live a little bit longer. We always say “I live long to practice dharma” but I don’t know how true it is.  
I am not saying anything. What I am trying to say is asking oneself. Today is like asking oneself. Don’t think I am talking but think that the Buddha is talking. So like that it will be more effective to the mind. What I see is like that. In order to change the mind it really needs some kind of faith. Then any kind of advice will become very effective and hit right to the heart to change. 
In the Lamrim, when you think about guru devotion, at the very beginning it talks about guru devotion. 
One great master Gyalwa Ensapa advised that in any kind of realization - big or small - depend on the guru devotion. How much devotion do you have? 
Small devotion, you get small realization. 
If you have great devotion, you get great realization. 
If you have middle devotion, you get the middle realization. 
So the advice is that the guru who is the source of all attainments: always seeing the quality of the gurus and never think from the negative side. Make this stable decision and due to that “May I able to complete my wish”. Whatever decision you make, may it able to complete. This is from Gyalwa Ensapa  who is the great master who like Milarepa attained fully enlightenment in one lifetime. That is his practice and his realization. This is something to understand. We also know Lamrim. At the beginning of Lamrim it talk about guru devotion.
Don’t misunderstand that you have to devote to me. It is not the point. I am talking about the advice from Gyalwa Ensapa as his practice is like that. Analyze and think whether it is useful or not. For myself it is like that. When you have so much devotion to a particular guru then you will wholehearted listen to the guru. Any kind of advice is extremely powerful to change the mind. If you don’t have that devotion then it is just like learning the normal education in the school. You just listen and the heart doesn’t move that much. “I know I know” but this just a label. So it is important to recognize that you need to put in effort if you really want to change for a better way. That is an important advice from this great master. 
As for my simple story, when I was young 14 or 15, I was in the monastery. I became a monk at the age of 12. Then I stayed another 2-3 years at Kopan Monastery. At that time, we don’t have many good teachers. I just study and I don’t speak Tibetan. I was there for 3-4 years. My older brother always asks me questions when I went to his home at the town. Sometimes he listened to the Tibetan news and didn’t get one or two words. As he himself doesn’t speak Tibetan, he asked me some of the Tibetan words. I still remember he asked me the word jasa (?) which means town or kingdom. I said I don’t know as I actually don’t know. He said “You have been in the monastery for 2 – 3 years and you don’t know these words. What are you doing there?” Then he suggested that it is better for me to go to normal school to study instead of the monastery as it looked like I don’t know anything. Also my English was not good. I don’t know Nepali. I also don’t know much about Tibetan. Sometimes he asked me to read Tibetan letter as he don’t know how to read. He meant that but my parents don’t say much as they are not educated and don’t think much. Only my brother encouraged me to go to school. At the age around 15 I almost leave the monastery. No reason except my brother asked me to go to school. Then I explained to Lama Lhundrup of what my brother had said that it is better for me to go to school. He said “If you go to school, there is nothing much. It is better to stay in the monastery. Even chanting Om Mani Padme Hung in the monastery is more beneficial than going to the normal school.” That was the advice he gave to me. Somehow I don’t have the feeling of going out. As advised by Lama Lhundrup, I stayed at the monastery. He gave a very simple advice like “Om Mani Padme Hung” and just by that, I am here. What I mean is that a very simple advice can change your entire life. I was 15 year old then and I don’t know much about dharma. Somehow whatever the reason it is, I was convinced to stay in the monastery.
At one time Rinpoche went see Serkong Dorje Chang, a great master who lived in Nepal. When we were young we used to go to Swayamabhunath pilgrimage in a group. Rinpoche asked us to go and see Serkong Dorje Chang. At that time he was quite old and looked skinny and he don’t really talk much. He doesn’t really come out of the room. We just went to his room and offered kata. That is all. I think he was a great yogi. Rinpoche said that he took him as a teacher because Rinpoche asked Serkong Dorje Chang one questions about guru devotion:
 “What is the measure of having guru devotion?” How to measure whether you have guru devotion or not? 
Then Serkong Dorje Chang replied to Rinpoche:
If guru ask you to eat his kaka, immediately you rush and eat like a dog, yum, yum, yum. Yummy liked eating chocolate.”
That was the only one advice from Serkong Dorje Chang. From then Rinpoche took him as his guru. He received no other teaching. Rinpoche said this is a great advice. From just one advice, he took him as his guru. That is what Rinpoche mentioned in the teaching. Why I am telling all this? Must have pure view otherwise you are not eating.
For the very first time when I went to India in 1980s, I went to Ganden monastery with Lama Lhundrup. 
Four of us monks went to His Holiness’s teaching in Ganden monastery. After the teaching, then people were allowed to visit His Holiness’ room and toilet to offer kata. One of the monks who went with me went to the toilet. He put his hand in the toilet bowl and collected some water and drink. He took as a blessing. I think he must have great devotion but I didn’t see that. That depends on how pure your mind is, then that much you can do. In Tibet, when the guru pee people holding the bottle waiting for the pee. Drink pee is no problem. In Nepal they drink their own pee as pee therapy to cure some kind of sickness. 
The point is that it depends on how much faith and devotion there. Then the advice is more effective in the mind and in the practice. That is one of the important parts if you really want to practice and if you really want to change. 
In Nagarjuna’s “The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way” there are four a verses:
The first verse is “What is liberation?”
Liberation mean free from karma and delusion. When you have no karma, no delusion, then at that time you achieve liberation. 
How karma is created? 
Whenever we see an object, whatever as good, bad, nice, not nice, in reality all these - beauty, ugly or good, bad, nice, not nice - depend on the mind. 
What kind of mind you have then you see. Not so much from the object. It is from the subject of the mind because we have accumulated the karma to see beautiful, not beautiful, ugly, unpleasant, pleasant.
So because of karma we are able to see that. It is just the appearance on the mind. Reality is like that. What you see is just from the subject; your mind. In reality is like that. But what we see and what we believe is different. When you see beautiful or ugliness, perceive as enemy, we don’t see subjectively but what we see objectively. We see that. Only see is a problem but is not the biggest problem. Immediately when you see that objectively and you believe in that immediately but you never notice subjectively. In reality, it exists subjectively; not objectively. But we don’t see that. We see it exist objectively and nothing to do with the mind. 
We see that and believe in that 100% objectively. Only believes that much is also not too bad. Only belief in that is what we called as ignorance. In a very simple way, ignorance is about believing it exists from its own side. It objectively exists and has nothing to do with the mind. It exists from its own side. That believing is ignorance and that is the root of the problem. Rinpoche called it the King of the Delusion or King of Mara. This is the basis. So when you say ignorance is the root of the problems you must understand that.
Because of that, you think everything is the object. Then your mind plays on the object. Just like when you buy a house, you decorate it by putting this and that to make it nicer. Base on that, your mind decorates or superimposes so many things on the object. Then you believe and decorate it “Oh this is beautiful”. You have so many invalid reasons but you believe that is the valid reason. But in reality are invalid reasons. It is very interesting on how our mind play with so much logic. When you think on these things, there are so many logics and never ending thoughts to make that object beautiful. Once you believe in the object and your mind play so much on that, and the basis of that, you decorate it that you see much more beautiful compared to people. 
At the very beginning, it is not that much. Like an empty house which is not so beautiful. But after you have decorated it, the house becomes beautiful. The object is like this when you see it. When the object become beautiful, attachment arises and becomes stronger. And because of that, all sorts of karma are created. All the actions you do just to get that object. Believing so much on that, strong attachment rises.  This is how we create the karma. In order to achieve that, you do all sort of the actions such as harming others and we accumulate so many negative karma. Because of your belief, your goal is to get that object. Seeing everything on the object exists objectively. Because you believe that, you see such a beautiful object. In order to get that, you put in all your effort trying to get that.  “If I get that this will give me the peace, this will give me the happiness. This is my life”. Because of that, you put in full effort to achieve that. Then you get that and pleasure develops. When the object changes, your happiness and pleasure also change because you are 100% depending and believing on the object. At the beginning you never thought the object will change. You also never thought that will bring you suffering in your life. Sooner or later, it will show its own reality. Slowly you will recognize that and slowly you see the problem. The object doesn’t satisfy your mind. It cannot satisfy you 100% and the object did not fulfil your wishes. That is reality. You fully understand that and again you forget on that. Again same problem arises with different object. Just changing to the different object, then exactly the same kind of process happen - appear, believe, your mind make up so much, and again so much effort to get it. Therefore we never wake up from our hallucination. Sometimes we understand a little bit and again, so totally forgetting about it.
We have been doing all these. You don’t have to think so much in the past. Just look at your own present life. We live like that from morning to night. The big question is: How to achieve liberation? When will I achieve liberation? This is something to meditate all the time in order to wake up.
Rinpoche was giving an example of an insect going around the bowl. There is a opening but the insect doesn’t know how to come out. The insect just go round and round. It cannot see the opening but just circling round and round and cannot come out and finally die there. Rinpoche says “Exactly like that, one is chasing one object after another object and die and again taking another rebirth again and the same thing happens”. I don’t know how long we are going to circle there. 
Seriously, how much you think about this question? One after another following the hallucination and creating karma with almost no ending of samsara. We are doing exactly like that. Then there is almost no hope for liberation. Therefore, if you really want to practice dharma, you need to think seriously not to follow this kind of habit. The same thing when you talk about attachment, you look at other negative emotions likes anger and angry to enemy. I mean enemy do exist conventionally. Due to cause and condition, enemy appears in your mind and you label him as an enemy. It is just an appearance to your own mind due to karma. They don’t exist in your mind. The enemy appears and you believe the enemy creates harm to you. Again you believe all these objectively “The enemy is over there” and 100% believing is there. You never think your mind made up this. Then your mind thinks in many different ways; even on how the person looks at you, how people dress, how they walk and everything appear negative to your mind. “All these are doing on me” and with so much negativity. Anger arises because of this negative way of decorating. Then you go deeper and think that once you destroy the object, then that is it. You feel okay with that because that is your belief. Even you destroy this enemy, but that is not the end. Another one will appear due to cause and condition and is never ending. If your mind is like that, then when enemy or unpleasantness or whatever appears you cannot control. You have to destroy all the objects then you will be happy. It is impossible. There is a quotation in Shantideva’s text and I don’t have it here.
If there are thorns cover the universe, you are not able to find enough leather to cover all the thorns in the universe to protect your leg. It is not possible. The best is to put on leather shoes on your leg and walk. 
Just like you want to destroy the enemy, this is impossible. That is what you believe. Due to cause and condition and until our mind is under the control of the negative emotions, then the enemies will be always there. 
Same as that example, if you don’t have that kind of negative emotion, no object will come from your negative mind from your karma. When you understand that and able to subdue your mind then in that mind there is no enemy. It doesn’t called enemy because you won’t have this kind of mind. Like bodhisattvas who have bodhicitta mind, in their view, there is no enemy. 
What you considered as an enemy? For the bodhisattva, they become great friend and more dear to them. Never see as enemy because they are more kind for them to practice. Their mind sees differently. The point is what kind of mind do we have?  Because of the karma appear, until then we believe so much then. Not only that. Our mind place so much on the object in the different ways. Not in reality but just our mind hallucinates. We hallucinate but we don’t know that. That is how the negative emotion grows and then creates karma to take rebirth.
When you think logically, if the pleasant or unpleasant exist objectively and nothing to do with your mind, then whatever you see as pleasant or unpleasant, all the hundred person will see this from side of the object. The question is, if ten people or twenty people see the same object then they have to see exactly the same. The logic is there. If the pleasant object exist objectively and nothing to do with your mind then when we see the object, then hundred person will see the same because it has nothing to do with your mind. Then this pleasant object has to exist inherently. Then unpleasant also like that if it exists objectively from its own side; inherently exist.  Therefore, when ten people see the unpleasant object they will see the same kind of level that is unpleasant. Everybody have to see that. But it is not true. You have to use this kind of logic to meditate so then you have some idea that is not true. If everybody has to see, some can see it and some cannot see, why?  So that means it depend on the subject. What kind of mind you have then that is kind of thing that you can see.
It is really important to sit down and meditate like that. That gives different perspective in your mind. How you used to live is not right. Buddha said think in this way. That is the Buddha advice. Try that and be mindful on that. Whether is helpful or not? If you think this way “Due to my mind and not so much on the object, my mind is decorated and is not the reality. Even you don’t have realization but if you are mindful in this way, then whatever you doing, walk, sit, talk, eat, or shopping that will make a difference in life. 
Your anger will be reduced. Attachment will be reduced. Jealous will be reduced. Pride will be reduced. If you are just a little mindful of that it will make a difference. If we are not mindful of that and never think on this side but always think only at the object there, this become big problem. In a bigger way, circling endlessly in samsara. . If you are mindful in another way, i.e. is always the subject, your own mind creation is like an illusion. I think, relatively, your negative emotion will not powerful and less powerful. In this way, you don’t create karma. The point is that you don’t create karma. When your attachment or anger is not powerful then you don’t create karma. It is mentioned in the Lamrim. In order to create karma, the negative emotion has to be strong. When your negative emotion is very weak then it doesn’t create karma. Also good to understand that as much as possible.
You really have to think about that. If you don’t think deep then there is not much. How serious it is? How we used to live? From morning to night, we live like believing everything objectively and nothing to do with your mind. It is 100% from the object. We live like that. You look in long term like samsara. When you take rebirth, you don’t have freedom. What you want to achieve is impossible.  We don’t have freedom to choose what you want in the future. Because of the power of karma and delusion, we take all sorts of rebirth. It is impossible to wake up. Then you can imagine you take rebirth in the lower realm like animals, hungry ghosts, hell beings. You don’t see but you just imagine the animal realm. You take rebirth once in the animal realm. How that is possible?
Even as human being, we learn so much, we hear so much and yet we still believe like that. Then as animal, they will never understand how much you talk about things exist subjectively and objectively. You can even explain this sort of thing in eon of time. They have no idea and it is impossible to get that idea. 
As animal then has no mind to practice dharma and getting worse and worse. How to achieve liberation? Impossible. Therefore if we think like then this precious human rebirth especially this time when Buddha teaching happened, you still able to hear the dharma, you still able to meet teacher, you still have dharma friend and you still can have some kind of intelligent there. If somebody explain, “Alright, alright. I should do that.” At least we have this kind of intelligent. If you don’t do this moment, then when? That is another big question! This is all about the Lamrim. I think we have this homework to do the Lamrim meditation. Already done? I am not sure how you meditate. I think maybe just to get the mark..joking. 
You really need to think that. That is why in Lamrim it talks about precious human rebirth. Our human rebirth is so precious. You have to recognize that by sit down and think. Sit down and think. If you don’t do it now, then when you can do?
There is no certainty of how long you live. One year? Can you guarantee you can live for one year? There is no guarantee. Even six months, there is no guarantee. Even one month, there is no guarantee. In reality we never believe that. Always believing we will live this much and never thought about reality. We believe the wrong concept. Wrong believing and is not true. There is no guarantee. Life has no certainty. Anytime, any moment, next year, next month, next week, next day. If you look deeply you need to remind that we have this opportunity then must practice the dharma. So always be mindful on that. Not so much on teaching, talking and listening. Sit down and reminding oneself that whenever time we have, try to meditate. We should mindful on that in our daily life,. Whatever you do, walking, sitting, cooking and especially when you are doing prayers, always be mindful on that. If we live like that then we will create less negative karma. If there is less negative karma and you create more virtuous, then there is some hope to achieve some precious human rebirth again in the future. Then leave so much imprint in this life then there is some hope. Then in next life, life to life, then slowly there is some hope to achieve liberation. 
Nagarjuna said that creating so much negative karma through ignorant by seeing, believing and then decorate on that and anger and attachment becomes stronger then create karma. From karma and delusion then one take rebirth in samsara. How to free and whether it is possible to free oneself from this?  Nagarjuna’s answer “That is possible. When you see the emptiness then you are able to free yourself from this problem and not to circle in samsara.” 
Without understanding emptiness, whatever kind of practice you do is impossible to free oneself from samsara. Even you have bodhicitta, even if you have renunciation, how much you study, how much you meditate, how much retreat you did, at the end of the day if you don’t have the realization on emptiness, then it is impossible to free yourself from the ocean of samsara. Even the six perfections like generosity, morality, patience, concentration, so on. With all these five perfection but without wisdom, then it is almost no use to achieve liberation. With the five perfections  and without wisdom is like a blind cannot achieve liberation. So in order to achieve liberation, you must realize emptiness. Again there is a big question. Why you need this? In order to achieve liberation, why you need the understanding of the emptiness?  Again going back to the beginning of the teaching, by understanding how the samsara is created by the ignorance. There is ignorance, samsara exist. So must remove this ignorance. If we don’t remove the root of the delusion, ignorance, then that is impossible to achieve liberation. 
So in order to remove that, you have to understand what is ignorance. As I mentioned before, believe in truly existent, exist from its own side. Through logics, you think whether it exist from its own side or not? Using many different logics and prove it in your mind. Getting some kind of understanding through logics, this doesn’t exist objectively from its own side.
When you gets the conclusion, shaking up the ignorance because you see differently. Slowly when you understand, realize and then entering the five path, - path of accumulation, path of preparation, path of seeing, path of meditation, path of no-more learning. Gradually, you meditate like that. 
At the beginning at the path of accumulation, path of preparation you will still have this dualistic appearance. You still have the grasping that you create the karma. Then once you see the emptiness directly, then when you meditate then you don’t really see that. Truly just see the emptiness. Then you don’t see anything else. You see only emptiness. You don’t see the conventional object during the meditative equipoise when you see emptiness directly. When you realized emptiness directly then your wisdom will become extremely powerful. The ignorance becomes very weak. Ignorance has no power. The wisdom is extremely powerful then ignorance has no power to create karma.
Then you are on the way to liberation when you don’t accumulate karma. Therefore, seeing emptiness is extremely important to cut the root of samsara. Free from samsara then you must have this realization of emptiness. Then gradually meditate like that, slowly you achieve from the 1st ground up to the 8th ground. At the bodhisattva path you are able to remove the root of samsara. The ignorance is totally remove, you don’t have the normal grasping at the appearance of truly existent. You don’t have that grasping at all. At 8th, 9th and 10th ground, you will still have this appearance of true existence. It is still there, appear there, but you don’t really grasping on that anymore. No more grasping on that. Just only the subtle imprint of the ignorance is there. Due to that you will still have some kind of appearance. Truly existent, appear in the mind, but you don’t grasp on that. Then you can meditate slowly at the 8th, 9th and 10th and after that you are able to abandon even the appearance of true existence. You are able to abandon it. Then once you have abandoned that, you are fully enlightened. Then you are able to see the two truths - ultimate and conventional truth directly at the same time. Within meditative equipoise you are able to help sentient beings that time. So you can manifest and able to help numberless sentient beings when you are fully enlightened. Able to fulfil all sentient beings wishes like that. I am saying of how important you have to realize emptiness. So you get some idea on that. 
Next Thursday, I will talk about these verses about the stars…. I did mention before but maybe I talk a little bit, then we meditate a little bit. That is the idea for one or two classes. 
(https://sites.google.com/site/manikabumenglish/Home)
*The Golden Volumes of Zamatok Mani Kabum were imparted from the sky to human realm by Maha Bodhisattva Great Compassion Chenrezig
MANI KABUM contains the history of the world's evolution, including how Dharma came into this world, and how the sentient beings of snow Land was subdued by Lord Avalokiteshvara. 
A collection of precious Teachings arising from the heart of Lord Avalokiteshvara, emanation of Great Conmpassion, it uncovers the Great Compassion that lies deep within our own hearts and which is the very essence of our own wisdom mind.
The heart mantra of Lord Avalokiteshvara. OM MANI PADME HUM embodies the body, speech and mind and past, present and future Buddhas. 
The recitation of this Six Syllable mantra purifies our mind from the well the obscures it. It opens our mind to love and compassion, leading it towards awakening and supreme realization.
All fortunate ones count the mani, Om Mani Padme Hum