Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L53.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:18.207229
================================================================================

Before we go to the teaching, we always do the prayer of refuge and generating bodhicitta. That is to set our motivation. It is important to know how strong the motivation you have when you listen to dharma as it does make huge difference. It will goes deep into your mind and the teaching will really touch the heart. This depends on how strong the motivation you have, and that much the teaching is effective to your mind.
Why we need to practise dharma? We have to question ourselves: “Why I need to practise dharma”. Here I am talking about the emptiness. “Why I need to learn about emptiness?” You must have clear answer in your own heart. Most of the time is from the mouth and not from the heart. What I am trying to do here tonight is about that. Not just listen but think from the heart. So this is something I think is useful for everyone. Especially about the emptiness, Buddha said in one of his sutra. I can’t translate everything. Maybe those who can understand Tibetan, then it is very good. 
(Khen Rinpoche recited in Tibetan)
So I can’t translate word by word.  Buddha says:
Not knowing emptiness or not knowing the reality of the existence. Because of that, sentient beings “khempa(?)” I don’t know “khempa” in English but in Chinese is “kai kai.” 
Because of not knowing the emptiness or not knowing the reality on how things exist, we circle in the samsara without any choice and not feeling happy. We circle in samsara with pain and suffering.
The compassionate Buddha shows many different methods and using different logics on emptiness to the sentient beings. Buddha said this in the sutra. 
That day I was talking about the quotation from Nagarjuna in Chapter 18. I did explain the meaning and is good to read. You can read in English. In the last class I already explained the meaning. It is good to know the quotation also. 
(Khen Rinpoche recited in Tibetan)

Release occurs when action and defilements cease. 
            Actions and defilements are derived from thoughts. 
            And these come from the mind’s constructions. 
            Emptiness is what arrest or stops them. 
Nagarjuna wrote this quotation in the root text of the Madhyamika. It is good to write down this quotation and meditate on the verse will be very useful.  Here it says that not knowing the emptiness, we circle in samsara. 
The Buddha teaches many different methods to us to show emptiness. That means Buddha shows us that we have to learn from four different tenets as different level of tenets talks on different emptiness. 
When you sit down, you think about the physical pain and mental suffering that we all are experiencing. When you talk about the suffering, why does the suffering of pain happen? Why this suffering of pain happens to me?  It is good to meditate on that. Sometimes when I talk, not just listen but think about it. We all have some kind of pain and some kind of suffering in our life which is something that we don’t like and we don’t want. When you ask why and look deeply, the answer is because of having this body and mind. Not just any kind of body, not just any kind of mind. We have this contaminated body and contaminated mind. That is the reason we have suffering and pain. 
We have some kinds of suffering - suffering of suffering, suffering of change, and suffering of pervasive compounded. Suffering of suffering and suffering of change happen because of this pervasive compounded suffering; which means our physical aggregate.  
Then the question is: By having this body and mind, why do I suffer? Why I get pain? 
The answer is: This aggregate possess the mind, which is the product of the contaminated karma. 
Again by going deeper into the question: Why this karma happens to me? How does this karma exist happen to me? 
Due to the negative emotions such as strong desire and anger, we create the karma. Whether physically or verbally all these are based on the mind. All these physical and verbal actions are created by your thought. When you think about it then your action comes from your body and speech happens. So you have to understand that the physical and verbal actions are based on the thought. The thought is based on the mind. If you don’t have the mind then thought doesn’t arise. When the thought arise, then you follow the thought. Then negative emotion becomes stronger. Because of your mind, all sorts of actions from the speech and body create karma. Again all these active thought and negative emotion thoughts such as attachment and anger become strong. 
Why these become stronger and stronger? 
When you look deeper, all these are because of your mental projection. Your mind made all these. The mental emotion is made up by our own mind. Since beginningless rebirth and even this life from birth up to now, you are habituated with this kind of negative emotion. Because of that, as mentioned in the Lamrim, you are controlled by the mind. Your mind is controlled by the delusions.
Again you look deeper on that negative emotion, where all these negative emotions really come from? What is the root of that? 
Then the answer is: Not knowing emptiness or not knowing the reality of the existence such as how I exist or how the object exists? We really don’t understand that. What we see and what we believe is beyond the reality. 
Again you look how the attachment arise, how the anger arise. Look deeply to something that is related to the “Ï”, or me. For example, when somebody says nice pleasant word, then this person becomes friend to you and you label as a friend. Upon dependent on that pleasant word, then you label such and such as “my friend” because this person said nice words to you. So “me” is important and because of me, you regard him as a friend. 
Similarly, if somebody says unpleasant word, then you label that person as an enemy. Again you have to understand that due to the condition by just depending on this word, you label the person as enemy. Upon dependent on this word which relates to the “I” and yourself, saying nice thing to “me” or saying unpleasant thing to “me” and then label the person as friend or as enemy. The friend or enemy exists as mere label and it doesn’t exist from the object inherently. That is the reality of friend and enemy. All the friends exist and all the enemies exist in the mere name but we don’t understand how the friend and the enemy exist.
We see friend exists from the object by itself and it appear like that in the mind. The friend exists out there from its own side and as a very solid friend and we believe in that. This is the very basis. Once appear as enemy or friend from its own side, and we believe it exists in the way of how we see them. We believe in that way i.e. it exists from its own side. That is the ignorance which is the root of the problem and it start from there. 
So understand that all the problems come from ignorance - the mistaken mind. As mentioned today, based on that we have all kinds of thoughts arises. Based on that your thought becomes very active and your mistaken mind makes up so many things about the object. This object becomes beautiful or pleasant or unpleasant, 100% pleasant or 100% unpleasant, all depend on how much your mind decorate and label on the object. Then the object becomes very solid pleasant, solid unpleasant, solid friend, very stable friend, very unpleasant enemy. Due to that strong attachment or anger arises. Then your mind is very disturbed by that and when it is very strong, verbal and physical action happens. So this is how the karma is created. Harming oneself and harming other. Harm not only this life but from life to life. 
So it is extremely important to understand how we suffer in samsara. This is all about the Four Noble Truth - truth of suffering and truth of origination which is talking about karma and delusion. Because of that, it is truth of suffering. This is one of the very important topics to understand. If we don’t want suffering again, what can be done? Whether we have choice or not is another question here. Whether there is any choice or you want this continually? So this is the very big question for us to ask day and night. This question is very serious. How serious it is depend on how you ask the question.
Does our practice work? How serious the question for oneself? 
Also I have mentioned in the last class that you need to look deeply as it is really not only this life, you have to think about life to life; almost eons with countless of rebirths that we have to take in the future. What we suffer now and the pain that we have now is nothing compared to hungry ghosts, compared to animals, compared to hell beings – it is nothing. So it is good to think like that. If you take rebirth in the future as hell beings, hungry ghosts, animals, are you able to accept that kind of suffering in the future? When you meditate like that, you know very clearly the root of the problem. We know that. Therefore, if we don’t want suffering, we don’t want to suffer for eons and eons, what can we do? In order not to suffer in this life and from life to life, the only way is to cut the roots of problem; which is ignorance - believing everything is truly existent. Therefore, studying on emptiness or meditating on emptiness and believing in emptiness, then you can understand how important is to meditate on emptiness. When you meditate on that, then you really see “I really need to meditate on emptiness.” When you meditate well on that, the conclusion is “I really have to meditate on emptiness.” It has to come deep down from your heart. 
When you read the Heart Sutra at the beginning of the class, you meditate like that for 15 to 20 minutes. First meditate and then read the Heart Sutra. “I am able to free from the ocean of samsara and cut the roots of the samsara. Therefore I’m going to read Heart Sutra.” That is why I mentioned that motivation is very important. With this motivation really deep from the heart, then read the sutra with concentration, for example, the Heart Sutra. Even if you don’t understand every single word, but due to your motivation, it becomes a very effective and powerful prayer. When you do your commitment or even you listen to Dharma with motivation like that then it is extremely powerful. Here you have to understand why it is so important to understand emptiness. When you look at this, then you really need to meditate on emptiness; otherwise there is no other way. With that kind of conclusion, then you see how important it is, then you put in effort on that. 
If you understand emptiness, what is the benefit? What do you get? What do get for your life if you understand emptiness or you meditate on emptiness? What change it make in your life? If you don’t meditate, what do you lose? What benefit I get? It is like doing business, what I get or what I lose? So the same thing here, when I meditate on emptiness, what is the benefit do I get? If I don’t meditate what do I lose? 
Buddha mentioned in one of the sutra on the many benefits: “If you meditate on emptiness, then you gather all the collection of virtues”.  Until you achieve enlightenment, whether you are ordinary being or arya being, all the time your wishes will be fulfilled. 
Buddha said to Manjushri: Just meditating on the Six Perfections for eons and eons, you have so much merit. However, if you have just little doubt towards the reality on emptiness, the merit is much greater than meditating on Six Perfections for eons and eons. When you say doubt, there are 3 different types of doubt. 
If you make offerings of jewels diamonds with the numbers equal to the sand grains in Ganges River, also can be the number of sand grains in the Pacific Ocean, and you collect that much merit with that amount of precious jewels offering to the numberless Buddhas in eons. However, if you are explaining four verses of the meaning on emptiness or you think about or meditate just 4 verses of the teachings on emptiness, that merit is much greater than before. So Buddha explained this much benefit one would have. If you don’t meditate o emptiness, you think you don’t lose anything. You may think “If I meditate I get benefit. If I don’t do, then I don’t lose.”  As I mentioned before, when you look deeply there is great loss. There is a great loss if you don’t meditate on emptiness. You should understand this. As I mentioned earlier, circling in samsara endlessly is the kind of loss we can get. We also take Highest Yoga Tantra initiation, one of the precept is “not remembering the view” that means not remembering emptiness. That is one of the downfall in tantric vows. That is why it is extremely important to meditate on emptiness. 
So it is important to see the reasons:
Why do I need to learn about emptiness? 
What is the benefit I get if I meditate? 
What will be losing if I don’t meditate? 
You really need to sit down and meditate on that. You really have to understand from the heart seeing the importance of learning about emptiness. Then meditate on emptiness so you can understand what emptiness means. 
What does emptiness mean? You say “I have to meditate on emptiness. Is it necessarily?”
Again question arises: What is emptiness? 
Sometimes there is some misunderstanding when you say “emptiness.”  Many people may think it is nothingness, but that is not the meaning of emptiness. When you say emptiness, it means empty of something. You have to understand empty of something. Therefore, you have to recognize the object of negation, what is the object of negation to refute. First, you have to understand that. Here, when all the phenomena include I and the object appear to your mind, it appear from its own side, over there from the object or somewhere there. It doesn’t depend on others and it exists by its own side. So that is the object of negation. Emptiness means empty of that. So this is something you have to understand. 
When you say empty of true existence, nothing exists truly, everything exists depending on others. So the meaning of emptiness is empty of truly existence. As mentioned before, in relation to I, my friend, my enemy, pleasant to me, unpleasant to me, because of me the true self, somewhere in there existent my own self somewhere within our body. We believe is somewhere there, truly there. Then based on that, whatever happen related to that I, good or bad, our emotion go up and down because of believing truly existent I. How much strong belief you have that true existent I, so that much you have up and down emotion. 
From the different views of the lower tenet, the Buddha teaches that self is not permanent, unitary and independent. It is impermanent and empty of that.
At the very beginning Buddha teaches “I” is empty of permanent, unitary and independent.  
Then when you look at the I, I is something outside of the body.  When you look where is the I, is it within your body or something different from body? Not the body, not within body, but something different from the body. Something separate from the body and the mind. 
That was non Buddhist belief - existent of the self which is something permanent, unitary, and independent - separate from the body. The non-Buddhist philosophers think and meditate about what is self. They think about that. Since there is other way because of their strong belief that self must exists, then they have to come out with some kind of reason or belief to accept that kind of self. The I or self cannot be one with the body or same as the body, not within the body, not the body. If I and the body is the same then it would be difficult as they cannot really explain how the existence of past and future lives. They are not able to explain that. 
Non-Buddhists also think about that.  There are also many non-Buddhists believe in past and future lives and what really goes from life to life. They have to think about something and to say something. That is why they believe this kind of permanent, unitary and independent self does exist; something separate from the body. When you die, the body leaves behind but the self that refers as soul or atman goes on to the next life but the self doesn’t change. That is their belief. But according to Buddhists, this is not correct. Unchangeable self is not possible. Independent self is not possible. Unitary self is not possible. Therefore, empty of that self is empty of these three things. Buddhists believe that kind of self doesn’t exist. 
Then on self-sufficient substantially existent which is empty of the selflessness as explained by the Autonomous Middle Way School. They believe that empty of the self. That kind of self doesn’t exist. So what does that mean? That means when you think about the self, I or me, it is not something outside of the body or something different from the body or outside of the body. Then you have another view. The self, I, me is somewhere in the collection of the body and mind. Somewhere in the substantially existent I.  Buddhists also doesn’t believe this kind of I that is somewhere inside the body and mind, the I or self existing from its own side within the body or somewhere exists from its own side. That kind of self doesn’t exist and self is empty of that. So that is the meaning of self-sufficient substantially existent.
Then you look at the Cittamatra (MOS) view, when they look for the I or self is not within body then it must be inside the mind. The body cannot be I or self then it must be the mind because self must exist. They believe self must exists inherently by its own way. Therefore, when you look for it you must find. That is the fundamental belief of this tenet. When this tenet look for the self and they found it, then they have to say something. That is why the mind is the self; not the body. Then again they look deeply and there are so many different minds - sense consciousness and mental consciousness. Within sense consciousness there are five types and all these cannot be self. Then they have to find deeper and then they found the  mental mind. Again there are so many different minds within the mental mind. Then the MOS say that there is another consciousness – the mind-basis-of-all- is the self, I or the person.
Then you go to Autonomous Middle Way School (AMWS) says that one type of mental consciousness is the self. That is what they believe. In the final view, the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS) says that all these are not correct. Nothing exist from their own side include the I, the self. The logic is that if it really exists from the object own side then when you search for that I then you are able to find it. But you are not able to find any kind of object when you look it. It is impossible to pin point and is impossible to find any kind of object. Therefore, everything is empty from its own side. This is what you have to understand.
When you look deeply at the I or self, it cannot be found within the body or within the mind either you look everywhere for it or you meditate on it. When you are so emotional – “I am miserable and I am suffering” we see the independent self right there, truly existent. The emotional I that experience the suffering is somewhere in the body.  But in reality, there is no such emotional I existing from own side and doesn’t exist at all. When you look deeply, there is no such I and you are not able to find it at all. When you see that, the view of the ignorance/the object of ignorance is not there. There is no ignorance. The object of ignorance is no longer there. If that happen then your attachment or anger will be subdued, pacified, lessened, reduced or weakened. So you meditate like that when you are emotional. Look at the I. When you see that there is not such an I there, it does make huge difference when you have so much emotion in difficult time. If  you really meditate like that, immediately you will be at peace. 
So meditating on emptiness is extremely powerful. It not only reduce attachment but it able cut the root of the problem. Then we don’t need to suffer again and again in samsara if we are able to meditate on emptiness. Whatever kind of big problem happens in our life, we can live in peace. Nothing much really can disturb us and no up and down. So this is something we have to understand. If you really understand the point and then you put effort trying to meditate. When you look at I that is so emotional and feeling suffering, and when we look at that I, it cannot be found within the body and within the mind. It is not the mind and is not the body. Also the I who is experiencing the suffering is also not different from the body and mind. Not inside, not outside. Not the body, not the mind. When you look at the I and you cannot find it, it doesn’t mean that the I who is experiencing the suffering doesn’t exist. When you look for it and you are not able to find it, the point is that the sutra mentions “not finding is the best of the finding”. When you look for it, you cannot find it. But what you find is the empty of true existence I. You found something there. It doesn’t mean that you don’t find anything. It doesn’t mean that. When you look at that, you don’t find the true existence I but what you found is empty of that I. So, you found something. You are looking at the reality of the I - nature of the I is empty of that. The conclusion is that this I who is experiencing the suffering is there but cannot be found within body and within mind. But it is there. Then again the conclusion is that this I exist in just mere name. Then you understand the merely labeled I who experiences suffering.  When we look at the I who is suffering, the I cannot be found. Then I who is experiencing the suffering and look at the suffering, the suffering itself cannot be found; empty of true existence. These include the I who is suffered, object, subject, action everything is empty.
This is the same meaning as “form is empty” in the Heart Sutra which is related to the I or self that is empty. When you read the verses and meditate, the I that is empty means the inherent independent I doesn’t exist and I exist in the mere name. When you have this kind of deep understanding and just by understanding the emotion, the negative emotion becomes weaker so that you create less negative karma if you have deeper understanding of emptiness and have realization. It would be much better if you have direct realization of emptiness. Then there is no way you can create negative karma to take rebirth in samsara. When you realize emptiness directly the mind becomes extremely powerful. You won’t create any throwing karma in samsara. Then you are confirmed to achieve enlightenment or liberation. You are on the track to enlightenment and liberation. With others, there is no guarantee.
You did meditate or no? I just talked? There is one student of Milarepa who did some meditation on emptiness. After that he went to see Milarepa and report on his meditation to the master on how he has meditated and what happened during the meditation. It can be related to the nature clear light of the mind or meditate on emptiness. Meditate on emptiness or meditating on the clear light. 
This student told Milarepa that when he meditates only on space, it is quite comfortable. But when the clouds appear in the space then he felt little bit uncomfortable. Then he asked: How do I meditate the space with the cloud”. 
Then Milarepa replied to him: When you are meditating on the space and you are comfortable then the cloud is just the manifestation from the space. Then place your mind back to space”. That is the answer given by the Milarepa to the student.
I have also roughly mentioned this in the last class and the meaning is about that. When you meditate on the clear light or meditate on the mind with the mind as the object, and when your mind is very quiet, you are able to see the clarity of the mind like seeing the space. When you meditate quietly with the concentration, look at the mind and you are able to see the clarity of the mind. Your mind is not disturbed, quite stable, and quite comfortable. When we meditate, sometimes some kinds of emotion thoughts or some kind of thoughts just arise from nowhere. It just pop-up. So, that is the clouds. Then it becomes problem. When you are at peace and suddenly some thoughts come in and you are not so comfortable with it. Then what to do? One needs to look at the thoughts. When you look at, this is just a thought that arise from the mind. It is just like that. Just notice and don’t bother by it. Just go back to the clarity of your mind. Just notice but don’t follow as it is just a thought. Don’t follow the thoughts and  just go back to your meditation. Recognize the thought arises and then back to meditation on the clarity of the mind. So, that is one way to meditate. When the thoughts arise, how to deal with that?  One method is not to follow but just notice it. Then go back to meditate on clear light. The thought just arise from the mind. It is part of the mind and nothing to surprise. When you recognize that then go back meditate on clear light. That is the advice given by Milarepa.
It is the same thing when you meditate on emptiness. There is another method called 8 verses mind training – be vigilant the moment the delusions appear in my mind endangering myself and others. I shall confront it and avert it without delay. This is a slightly different method. You have to understand that is one way to do the meditation. Here it is slightly different. Always be mindful whenever the negative emotions arise during the meditation. Always be vigilant and recognize as it endangers yourself and others, so it is very bad. Try to kick them out. That is one of the methods that immediately applying antidotes upon recognize it and get it out and then go back to the meditation. 
Student: Let’s say a thought arises when you are trying to meditate, shall we cut ??? the intention to this thought? 
Khen Rinpoche: Cut? I have already told you. There is two ways to meditate. You got the first one? Anyway, you meditate first and then you ask later. Before meditation, don’t ask. You go back and meditate then after you have the experience like Milerepa’s student then come. After you meditation then come back, clouds appear disturb my mind, what to do master? How to chase out the cloud? 
What I have been talking is nothing new but my point is I just want you to think more deeply.
Sometimes we talked about the importance of emptiness but if we really don’t think deeply why it is so important to meditate on emptiness, and we just say okay okay and just that. Then time just passed, and we don’t see how important and the need to meditate on emptiness. We just take it for granted.  We just take it easy. When the time comes then we just regret. This is our life.  So try to put in the best effort as much as possible. I think that is all about today. 
I thought to talk about the stars but it didn’t happen. The verses from the Diamond Cutter Sutra is another extremely important to meditate. When you see star, visual aberration, a dew and a lamp, it is all have some kind of meaning there. For the star, what you do have in your mind? Is it just a star, that’s all? There is something we need to meditate on that. 
I am not sure whether we need one more class on Tuesday to talk on this. If you really want then myself will talk on Tuesday.  I heard about the translation through the Skype for the time being. I hope to finish this tantric Salam within 3 to 4 months. If Skype does happen then maybe we need to change the time because the translator is at overseas with different time zone. I think SPC Committee will send you email. I think we can finish the Highest Yoga Tantra in 2 to 3 months and will end the BP in this year.
Then you will have the final exam maybe in December or January or whenever you want. Then then you will graduate. 
On Tuesday I will talk about the star. I will tell the story of the star. How the star happens in the sky. You all know this thing. My point is to sit down and try to have a deeper understanding on why you have to meditate on emptiness. You don’t meditate what you will lose. The idea is to encourage you to go deep down from the heart..