Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L54.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:20.039645
================================================================================

(Khen Rinpoche gave a guided meditation and followed up with chanting of Shakyamuni Buddha mantra)
What we have done just now is a very simple practice in which everyone can do. Whenever we have difficult time especially when you are stressed with so much problems in your life, try to sit down and do breathing meditation for a few minutes. Visualize the Buddha in front of you sending light to your body and mind. Let go whatever problems you have from your mind and body.  You can meditate like that for 10 minutes to bring peace in your mind. It is extremely powerful. So try to do that. It is very effective. This is something you have to try it out for yourself and feel it. Let go the mind made problems to relax your body and mind. That will bring you a healthy body and healthy mind.  Then you are able to function better. Your life can be better. Otherwise, there is no quality of life and always miserable. So it is good to do this short meditation.
Today I supposed to talk about the stars.  Do you know how many stars is in the space?  Anybody know how many stars in the sky?  You don’t know?  
Before going to the topic, in the last two classes I did talk about the importance of emptiness. Why is it so important to study emptiness?  Why is it so important to understand emptiness? First, you must understand that, otherwise not much point.  Very simply, we all have mental and physical problems. There is no question about this. We all have that and we all experience that.   It is very clear. Because of having this physical body, the five aggregates, we create all the problems and pain. It would be different if with this body but with no mind. With the body and mind come together, all sort of negative thoughts arises because of having this mind. Due to having this body and mind we experience physical pain and mental suffering that we don’t like. We don’t want this type of suffering but we don’t have a choice.  How does this body happen?  How this mind does come about?  When you look deeper, all these come from the cause which is karma and delusion.  Because we created karma, then we got this physical body and mind. So what we have now is because of karma.  How this action of karma happened?  It is due to the delusion, attachment, and anger, we create different negative karma.  So all karmas are created by attachment and anger; the deluded mind.  Again when you look deeper on how this anger and attachment arises? It is coming from ignorance which is the root of the problem.  The root of the delusion is ignorance.  So we need to understand that ignorance is not understanding reality or how things exist in reality.  We can understand ignorance in that way. Not only do we not understand reality but totally believing the existence of thing in the wrong way. We totally believe that something doesn’t exist.  Not only that, on top of that believing in the wrong existence.  
At the very beginning, it is all about "me" and "I".  When you think about "me" and how it appears to the mind, it is "me" within the body and exists truly somewhere there.  This appears to our mind and we truly believe the appearance of the self or "I" as something that is solid and independent. This is the very basic of all the problems that start from there.  Because of that, when you see others, others is something that is not related to you, and as something on the other side and something independent. When you say other than yourself exist truly from the object appear to your mind and believing on that.  So the solid independent "I" is at one side and the solid independent others is at the other side. These two are different and are totally not related. The independent self and others appear to our mind and we totally believing on that.  Because of that, if something good happens to anything related to that independent I then it is considered as good and attachment arises. When the independent others who say nice thing to oneself, it then become friend, independent friend, real friend and always friend and believing in that.  
When the independent others criticize oneself, then one label him as enemy, truly enemy, independent enemy over there. This is how it appears to us and we believe in that. On the basis of that, strong anger arises in the mind and strong attachment arises in the mind. We believe like that. What we think, we are right and we believe as truly like that. This is the very root of delusion that gives rise to all our negative emotion, such as attachment, anger, jealousy, pride. All the negative emotions are bases on that. Because of that, we created so many negative karmas. Due to the negative emotions, we harm others and harm oneself and creating negative karma. Because of that, we take rebirth in samsara and experience all the different types of suffering: physical and mental. All these happen in the life.  So this is something that is extremely important to understand.  If you truly understand that, then when you hear the teaching of emptiness, it becomes very tasty - something you really want. So you see why emptiness is so important in our daily life.  You may get the kind of feeling if you understand it correctly. 
When you listen to teaching, make sure you really understand the teaching that is for your life; nothing like teaching something that is beyond your life; which is of no use at all.  It is teaching that relate to your life like “I must have this practice in my daily life”. So this is something extremely important.  
First you have to understand that:
all the unwanted sufferings come from this physical body and mind 
the physical body and mind come from karma
karma come from delusion.
the root of delusion is ignorance
That simply existing truly from its own side and believing in it is called ignorance.  It is a wrong way of believing of how things exist.  Not only not knowing that, on top of that believing in it. Because of that all the negative emotion arises and creates karma and take rebirth. Then there is no choice to avoid sufferings - physical and mental suffering. It is difficult to avoid. You don’t have a choice.  If you don’t want all these physical and mental suffering, then it is better not take rebirth in samsara. Once you take rebirth in samsara, the suffering come with it together. When you take rebirth in samsara with karma and delusion, there is no choice to take this body and mind. Once you have that, all these pains come.  Therefore, if you really don’t want suffering in the future lives and from life to life, there is no other supreme method than meditating on emptiness. That is the only way to free oneself from the ocean of samsara and to achieve liberation - nirvana. Even if you meditate on great compassion, even  with so much compassion, even you have so much generosity or even you keep pure morality, even you have deep concentration, but by itself cannot free yourself from ocean of samsara.  Therefore, the only way to get out from samsara is to meditate on emptiness.  
Again, you have to ask question: Without emptiness, why I cannot be freed from the ocean of samsara? Why I cannot be freed from suffering? You must understand that. As I have mentioned before, all these sufferings come from karma. Karma comes from delusion, attachment and anger and these come from ignorance.   
So what is ignorance?  Ignorance is believing everything truly exists from its own side.   So that is the wrong believe and is called the ignorance.  So in order to remove ignorance, you must have the wisdom realizing emptiness.  When you realize emptiness, only then you are able to remove the wrong concept - the ignorance. We can remove ignorance when we have wisdom realizing emptiness.  Otherwise, there is no way. Therefore, it is extremely important to understand emptiness if we don’t want suffering.  We all don’t want suffering. We only want happiness.  Without meditation on emptiness, just by praying does not remove your suffering. We don’t want suffering from life to life then we must study and understand emptiness. We must meditate on what is emptiness?  Therefore, emptiness is important in our daily life.
The Diamond Cutter Sutra says: 
A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp, 
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble, 
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud,
See conditioned thing as such!
The first one is an example of a star. This shows that any kind of phenomena have two realities: ultimate truth and conventional truth.  So these two realities exist in all objects. For example, a flower, when a bodhisattva (arya being) who have realized emptiness directly meditate at the nature of a particular flower, they contemplate on the flower; how is the flower, what is the flower, and they are able to see the ultimate nature of the flower within their meditation. During that moment, what they see is only the ultimate nature of the flower. The conventional flower doesn’t appear in their mind. When arya bodhisattvas who have realized emptiness is in meditative equipoise, their mind and emptiness become one. They don’t see their mind and emptiness as two separate entities; there is no dualistic appearance in their mind. Their mind is totally absorbed in the ultimate truth of the flower. Then there is no dualistic appearance. They see only ultimate nature of the flower. 
As for the given example of the star here, during the daytime when you look at the clear sky with no cloud, you are not able to see the star even it exists in the sky. So during daytime when it is bright, you don’t see the stars. What you see is just empty space in the blue sky. You don’t see the stars at all. So when arya bodhisattva looks at the ultimate nature of the flower, they don’t see the conventional flower. They only see empty of true existence flower. They only see the emptiness of the flower. That is one of the realities of the flower in ultimate nature - the emptiness of the flower, ultimate truth. The conventional mind like our mind doesn’t see the ultimate reality of the flower but just see the conventional flower.  So during daytime we don’t see star but only empty space. When the sun set and become dark and then totally dark in the nighttime, when you look at the sky then you see all different types of star - big, small, bright, not so bright. That is exactly like our conventional mind. Our mind is obscured by the ignorance and the imprint of ignorance. Our mind sees so many different types of conventional objects. 
Our minds see so many different things when our mind is totally obscured by the ignorance and the imprint of ignorance. Due to that, our mind sees so many appearances. Some of them really exist, some doesn’t exist and all sort of things appear in our mind. When we see flower, we know flower. So conventionally we see flower. Conventionally flower exists. It functions and we can use it and we can enjoy it. When we see flower, conventionally we know that. We do understand the conventional flower. The problem is not only the conventional flower but within our mind is obscured by ignorance and also the imprint of ignorance, and due to that, so many things appear in our mind. For example, the flower appears to our mind. Not only that much, but even more than that - real truly flower exist from the object side. Nothing that is related to your mind exist from its own side. That is something not true and that kind of thing doesn’t exist. 
When we talk about the star, just like the flower in your conventional mind, flower appears and flower exists. Within the flower, there is two realities: the ultimate reality and the conventional reality. One is the real true nature of the flower seen by the arya bodhisattva directly. The conventional flower seen by the conventional mind exists. The star also shows two realities. But our mind cannot really see the ultimate nature of the flower. We cannot see the emptiness of the flower because our mind is totally obscured. 
The next example is the visual aberration. I don’t know what the English word “visual aberration” means. In the text, it give an example of people have problem with their eye see the appearance of hair falling down. In reality, there is no hair falling down but the eye really sees that. In reality, the hair is not falling down at all and that doesn’t exist there. In that person vision, he really sees the hair is falling and believe in that. But it doesn’t exist. 
The flower truly exists from the object and nothing to do with the subject - our mind. Flower exists independently from the object side. When we see flower, the flower exists independently appear in our mind. Then we believe in that. When we see, immediately we believe that. But that is not how the flower exists. We believe that but that is not true. That kind of flower doesn’t exist at all. Exactly like the visual aberration, the person seeing hair falling down but it doesn’t exist at all. 
Here, truly existent flower exist independently from the object side. The flower is empty of that - the appearance and your belief. So that flower is empty of truly existent flower. When you say the flower is empty of that, it means the flower doesn’t exist as how we see it and how we believe it. So flower is empty of that. 
The point is what you believe and what you see is not true. It is non-existent. The flower is empty of that. That kind of flower doesn’t exist. What you see and what you use to believe the inherent existent flower doesn’t exist. Like a visual aberration, the person seeing the falling hair falling doesn’t exist. So this is the example of the visual aberration.
If the flower exists independently from its own side becomes the ultimate nature of the flower, then arya bodhisattvas who see emptiness directly will be able to see that very clearly. But that is not the case. When the arya bodhisattvas who see emptiness directly, they are not able to see that at all. What they see is empty of that. When they look for the ultimate nature of the flower, they see empty of true existence. Similarly, if the falling hair appear in the person’s eye exist, then those persons who have a good eye will be able to see clearly but they don’t see that. Similarly here, if the flower exists truly from its own side becomes the ultimate nature of the flower, then the arya bodhisattvas who see emptiness directly should be able to see clearly on that; but they are not able to see it. So this shows the flower is empty of true existent. Therefore, the flower doesn’t exist truly. 
The next example is the flame of the lamp. When we say flower doesn’t exist truly, then flower doesn’t exist from its own side. The meaning is the same. So it doesn’t exist truly, doesn’t exist from its own side, then the flower doesn’t exist. When the flower is empty of existing from its own side, then we may think the flower doesn’t exist. We may conclude like the flower doesn’t exist. That is not the correct conclusion. Here the example just saying that flower doesn’t exist from its own side. 
The flame of the butter lamp arises due to many different causes and conditions coming together. Due to that, then the flame of the lamp exists. Similarly the flower exists due to many different cause and condition; its parts, thought and the name. The flower doesn’t exist independently. It exists dependently; not independently. Just like the butter lamp, it exists due to dependent on all different cause and condition. So by understanding the examples like that, when you look at problem like samsara or unwanted suffering, its existence is exactly like that - due to different cause and condition coming together. Due to that, samsara rebirth, samsaric body, samsaric mind exist. Samsara or sufferings do not exist independently. When Buddha explains on emptiness, he explains it in this way. 
In one of the sutra, the Buddha says: 
Something that is produced by condition therefore is not produce. 
It sounds contradicting. What the Buddha is saying is that something that is produced by cause and condition, any kind of this thing is not produced, which mean it does not produce inherently. The reason is because it is produced by conditions. Therefore, inherent product doesn’t exist. That is the very easy way to understand on emptiness.
So here, inherent existent product doesn’t exist because any product that exists is due to cause and condition. Therefore independent product doesn’t exist. Product is empty of true existent.
Here the flame of the lamp is to understand samsaric rebirth and all sufferings come from cause and condition and do not exist inherently. To understand that, Buddha gave the example of the flame of the lamp. 
Next is an illusion. These three things first explain about the reality of how things exist. Buddha explains using the star, visual aberration, flame of the lamp. 
Buddha explains about the reality of existent:
is empty of true existent
it exist due to cause and condition
one object have two realities: ultimate and conventional. 
Next is an illusion. When the magician make something from some kind of trick to shows some illusion such as beautiful object, unpleasant object, peaceful object, or scary object. The magician can show many types of object. When the object appears to you, sometimes scary object like tiger or snake, what you see is the real tiger or snake there and believe that. When the tiger comes near to you, you are scared. Very deep down, you believe that. But in reality the tiger doesn’t exist at all. In the illusion the tiger doesn’t exist and the snake doesn’t exist. Nevertheless, due to that appearance and see as real and believing as real; something doesn’t exist but we believe and due to that, fear arises in our mind. All the samsaric suffering of pain appears in our mind. True suffering, true body and true I exist from its object and appear truly to our mind. 
The big problem is that what you see, you immediately believe 100% of what you see. True “I”, true suffering, true body. But in reality it is empty of that. True suffering, true body, true “I” doesn’t exist. When I say ‘true’ it means really true and I am talking about independent “I”, independent suffering and independent body. That doesn’t exist at all. Because we believe in it, then we suffer. When you see true suffering, true body, true “I” exist from its own side and believing in it, and based on that so much different thoughts arises. Then you make the object true body.  All the superstitious thought making the object much more beautiful than in reality. “Oh, this is beautiful” and you label so much on the object and making this object extremely beautiful as if it exist from its own side. But in reality is not like that. Your mind label so much on the object with your wrong concepts. You believed is the right concept but it is totally wrong concept. You just make up so much on the object. Then this object, the body or I become very beautiful -“I am beautiful. My body is beautiful”.  We don’t understand our mind make up so much on that object. Not truly existent beautiful object. After that we want that object so much. Without the object you can’t live. And believing if I get this object I will be happy and satisfy.  Then you run after the object, look for the object, and get the object. At all time you try with all your effort and believing the true happiness is over there; “if I get that, my life will be peaceful and happy.” You then put all the effort and truly believing that is so beautiful and will be happy if get that.  You never thought the object will change and turn to suffering. You never thought of that in the beginning. When you get the object, that you believe it will 100% satisfy your life and will give happiness to your life. Sooner or later – after days or weeks or months or years have passed by, slowly you see it differently. If the object is truly exists from its own side, you will see the beauty and get the satisfaction from the object at all time and there shouldn’t be any change. The object shouldn’t change at all. But from our daily experience, the object will change. Month or year later, the object will change. You experience the object change. That truly object that you used to believe doesn’t exist in that way. It shows very clearly. If it is truly exists from its own side then there is no change. Not only that, you will see the beauty and goodness of the object with 100% satisfaction. 
If what you see is truly existent, the logic is that whoever sees that have to see it exactly the same, truly beauty and 100% satisfactory because it has nothing to do with your mind and exist from its own side. But that is not the case. If it is truly exist then the object will never change and will always give happiness and full satisfaction. That is what we believe but it is not true. It will change after months or years later. Then we will see the object differently - slowly seeing more unsatisfactory, more ugly and you label it “This is bad.” You decorate so much on the object with your flawed mind see the object become totally ugly, and anger arises. Our lives are like that. Therefore, it clearly shows the object doesn’t exist from its own side. What you believed is totally wrong. The object is empty of what you think. So emptiness is about that. So when you say emptiness, it is about empty of what you see, empty of what you believed. So there is the emptiness means that. 
The truly existent beauty and truly existent unpleasant doesn’t exist exactly like the illusion shown by the magician. The illusory elephant or the illusory tiger doesn’t exist. So truly existent body, truly existent suffering doesn’t exist at all. So that is the meaning of the illusion. 
Next is “drop of the dew”.  Here it is also showing emptiness and one way we can understand it is it show impermanence. So ‘drop of the dew’ mean the drop of the dew on the leaf disappear due to the heat when the sun rise. All the compounded phenomena came from cause and conditions. The five aggregates, the suffering, are impermanent just like a drop of the dew which doesn’t last long. It will disintegrate moment by moment. All the suffering, samsara, includes your body is impermanent, which is product of karma and delusion and it depends on the cause and condition. Therefore, is not ever lasting. Suffering is not ever lasting. It will change because the cause and conditions can be changed. Therefore suffering can be changed. All the suffering, samsara exists because of cause and conditions. One way we can understand that is empty of true existent and it exist dependent on it cause and condition. So doesn’t exist inherently. Impermanence could be understood as emptiness. 
Next is the example of “a bubble”. Here we can understand the three types of suffering: suffering of suffering, suffering of changes and suffering of pervasive compounded or conditionality suffering. So we have three different types of sufferings in reality. 
Suffering of suffering is easy to understand. When headache or stomachache arise as suffering, that is suffering of suffering.
Then suffering of change is something like samsaric pleasure. It is a suffering of change but we don’t understand that. We truly believed that is true happiness and we never understand that is a suffering. 
Water bubble is like that. The water bubble comes from the water and is the nature of water. 
Suffering of the change is also like that. At a look, the water bubble doesn’t look like water. But reality it is water. The water bubble look so beautiful and nice and doesn’t look like water but it arise from water and its nature is water. It is the product of water so it is still the nature of the water.
Similarly, samsaric pleasure that is based on this body is pervasive compounded suffering; and the physical body is the conditionality. Suffering of change in reality is suffering and it is based on this body.  It is a product of that. So in reality it is suffering. To understand suffering of change, suffering of pervasive compounded which is a physical aggregate showing true suffering. So it is called the truth of suffering in the Four Noble Truths. What does Truth of suffering mean? Here, the Truth of suffering means when the arya bodhisattva looked at it, it is like the water bubble. Suffering of change, suffering of conditionality, then they see true suffering and they don’t see any pleasure there. That is why it is called True Suffering. They see that but we don’t see. 
The water bubble is about everything impermanent. It also shows that everything is true suffering. So when you say true suffering, you can understand is from cause and condition. Because of that, it can be changed and we can understand that is impermanent. Therefore, it exists due to that cause and condition. So therefore do not exist independently. 
Next is “the dream, the flash of lightning, the cloud”. 
Here the dream shows the example of the past. When you dream, sometimes you have nice dreams, and sometimes you have bad dreams. When you wake up, you are still clinging on the experience of the dream. You remember the dream. If the dream is pleasant then your mind has happy feeling. When the dream is not good and when you wake up, you are not so happy because of remembering the past dream. But in reality it is just a dream and nothing exist there at all. Whatever good, bad, in reality it doesn’t exist. Similarly, all the past and the cause of samsara exist but it do not exist inherently. Whatever you experience in the dream, whatever you see in the dream doesn’t exist. All the past and the cause of suffering don’t exist inherently. 
A flash of lightning show the present moment also doesn’t exist inherently. When you look at the present moment, you are not able to find. Like a lightning, where this come from?  How it disappear? If you look at it deeply, you are not able to find. So present moment also like that. When you look deeply you are not able to find truly existent present moment. 
The last one is a cloud which is the future. Sometimes in the empty space, the cloud slowly comes together and then rain happens. The future is also like that. Within our clear mind, all different types of thought gather like a cloud and due to this, all the different types of suffering exist in the future. Therefore, the future sufferings also do not exist inherently. 
These three examples giving past, present, and future don’t exist inherently. The whole point of the teaching here is to understand how we suffer, where the suffering coming from, how we suffer in our daily life, how do we create karma in daily life. It is important to understand that. 
Like a dream and like an illusion that we used to believe which is not true. Exactly like a dream, you just believe so much there but in reality is not there. When you understand it is like a dream, then your attachment or anger may be reduced or become less. When you dream, whatever you see as beautiful or unpleasant in the dream mind, you really experienced it. You believe 100% in the dream. You really experienced that. Even if you go through that in the dream, you can’t differentiate real or not real. Your mind is only that, and you don’t see any other option there. 
If it is pleasant, you wake up feeling happy. If you have nightmare, you will experience so much difficult time in the dream. When you wake up, you can feel your heart beat faster. So that is how the dream mind experience at that moment, but not in reality. Something happened in the dream but it is nothing there. When you wake up and understand that it is just a dream and not real, then your mind is not more difficult and you can relax. In the dream, you are totally scared with the nightmare. When you wake up and recognize it is just a dream, then you won’t feel that kind of difficulty in the mind and you can breathe gently. All these suffering that we experience in samsara is like a dream. Pleasure, pleasant, unpleasant, good, bad, or anything happen in life look like a dream. All these things don’t exist truly. The ignorant mind made this. In reality it doesn’t exist truly; like a dream, like an illusion.
So it is extremely important for you to meditate like that. You can meditate on impermanence when you are in pain and suffering. You just think all is impermanent and is not ever lasting. When you have this kind of mindfulness, it is really helpful. Then go deeper meditating on emptiness, think like that, you meditate like that; like a dream, like an illusion. We will be able to relax our mind whenever we have difficult time.  Bad and good exist and whatever happens in your life, your mind will not be so emotional with up and down. You are able to keep your mind balance. When the mind is very balanced, whatever happens in life, the mind doesn’t go up and down. When you wake you up and understand it is a dream then it doesn’t move your mind up and down. Therefore, this is really helpful. That is why it is so important to meditate on emptiness. Think about that and try. Learn, read, listen and meditate. Then in this way, you are able to free oneself from the ocean of samsara. Otherwise, it is extremely difficult. We circle in samsara numberless times in future. Compare to now, the future lives suffering is much greater. What we experience in this moment is nothing. Future won’t be same. So like that, think about that then try to read, think, and meditate on these verses as much as possible.