Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L55.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:26.211653
================================================================================

Regardless of whether we are listening to the dharma or explaining the dharma, we need to generate a pure motivation in the beginning. Please generate the motivation of wanting to achieve the highest state of full enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings. With that motivation, think that you are going to listen to the dharma. 
Among the six realms of beings, it is very clear that we have been born as human beings. Among the many human beings, we have been reborn in a situation where there are buddhas and we are able to meet the Buddha’s teachings and we are able to practise the Buddha’s teachings. So we should think that we are very fortunate.
We having born as human beings, what should we do with this life? Is it sufficient for us to simply use our existence to seek the happiness and wellbeing of this life? What is dharma? What does it mean for us to engage in dharma? These are questions that we should ask ourselves and we should seek answers to these questions. We have to ask those questions to ourselves and try to find their answers. It is not sufficient for us to simply seek the happiness of this life. What is the reason? Why is it insufficient for us to simply strive for this life’s wellbeing? If you think about it, you will realize that we do not simply want happiness for this life. We want happiness for the next life, the life after that and so on. So since we want happiness for all our lifetimes, it makes sense for us to make effort to achieve the happiness of other lifetimes as well. 
If you are able to reflect on the points above, then you are reflecting on the small scope of the Lamrim; in other words the path of the being of small capacity in the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment. In the small scope of the Lamrim, we are taught the various methods to engage in order to reborn in the upper realms as a human being or as a god. For example, there is a practise of going for refuge to the Three Jewels; there is the explanation of karma and its results and so on. So based on those reflections, we are able to understand that it is not sufficient simply to strive for the happiness of this life alone. It is necessary for us to think about how we can attain good rebirths in the future. It is not that we do not want a good rebirth in the future, we definitely do want a good rebirth in the future. This is because if we do not have a good rebirth in the upper realm, then it will be very difficult for us to practise the dharma. Just imagine you know if you are reborn in the lower realm, it will be very difficult to practise the dharma. So even though a good rebirth in samsara is not our final goal, but it is a desirable goal. 
We do want a good rebirth in the upper realm. However, even if we are reborn in the upper realm in our next life, we will not be free from the three types of suffering. We will not be free from birth, ageing, sickness and death. This is clear. We should strive to become free from suffering. And we need to become free from the three kinds of suffering especially the suffering of pervasive compounded suffering. This is because if we do not become free from the root of suffering, then there is no way we can become free from suffering. Therefore, it is not sufficient for us to simply aim for a good rebirth. We have to aim to become completely free from all suffering. It is in this context that the teachings of the medium scope become relevant. So these are the teachings of the path of the being of medium capacity. In the medium scope, we find explanations of the presentation of the Four Noble Truths as well as the 12 links of dependent arising. From those presentations, we are able to understand how we circle within samsara. We need to identify that the root of cyclic existence is the conception of self. The conception of self is not something that is in the nature of our mind. It is an erroneous state of mind and it can be eliminated by our cultivating of true path. By generating the wisdom realizing selflessness, we are able to apply the antidote to the conception of self, thus reducing and eliminating it. In that way, we are able to attain the true cessation of suffering. So reflecting on these points, we should generate this conviction that such a true cessation of suffering exists.
Based on a correct understanding of the Four Noble Truths, you are able to appreciate the existence of true cessation of suffering or liberation. Since we are able to generate this wisdom realizing selflessness, we are able to attain liberation from samsara. So thinking about these points, we should generate this determination wanting to make effort to attain liberation. So it is on this basis that we are able to generate the courage that we can attain liberation from samsara. If we are dharma practitioners, then we should be able to bring such thoughts to our mind. If we are not able to think about liberation and so on, then it is difficult for us to qualify as dharma practitioners. The attainment of a good rebirth in the upper realm as a human or a god is not a unique teaching of Buddhism. So the small scope of the path can be found in most other religions. However, the teachings of the Four Noble Truths that explained how we can attain liberation and how we can attain everlasting freedom from suffering is a unique feature of Buddhism is not found in other religions. Therefore, reflection on the medium scope of the path involves arriving on this understanding that it is possible to attain liberation: “Liberation exists and I can attain liberation from samsara”. 
However, this is still not sufficient. This is because we have been sustained by kind mother sentient beings. If we attain liberation ourselves and leave them behind, then basically they will still be tormented by suffering. So we should think “It is not enough for me to simply attain liberation from suffering myself. I must generate the mind of enlightenment. I must attain the state of Buddhahood in which all faults have been eliminated and all excellent qualities have been fully developed”. We should generate this thought of wanting to attain highest enlightenment for our kind mother sentient beings. So this then is the context of the great scope of the Lam Rim.
We should ask ourselves: What is wrong with just attaining the mind of liberation? If I can attain liberation in which all suffering has been extinguished, what is wrong with that? Why is that insufficient?” So we have to think in terms of our welfare and others’ welfare. If we simply attain our own liberation from samsara, we will not have completed our own purpose or our own welfare. If that is the case, then there is no way we can accomplish others’ purpose, and there is no way we can fully accomplish the welfare of others. 
When one attains liberation from samsara, one severs the root of cyclic existence or cuts the root of cyclic existence and one has completely removed the ignorance that is the conception of self. So the Hearers and Solitary Realizers (shravakas and pratekabuddhas) who have attained the state of foe destroyer, they have attained such an abandonment of the conception of self. However, they are not able to fully understand the dispositions, the mentality and faculties of all sentient beings. Because of that, they are not able to fully benefit the sentient beings. Such Hearers and Solitary Realizers foe destroyers still have knowledge obscuration or obscuration to knowledge which is why they are not able to fully understand the dispositions/mentality of sentient beings. So these are knowledge obscuration, the latencies or the imprints of the conception of self and so on. Because of having such obscuration, they are not able to perfectly accomplish the welfare of sentient beings. Understanding this, then we should resolve to enter the Mahayana, the Great Vehicle and by gradually making progress through the ten grounds (bodhisattva bhumis). Then you will be able to eliminate all obscuration including the imprints of the conception of self or the imprints of the afflictions and so on. So by removing all knowledge obscuration, we will be able to attain the state of omniscience; that is the nature of the four Buddha bodies. 
Thus in the sutra system, we find such a presentation of the paths of the three scopes - the paths of the beings of three capacities- and such paths will eventually lead to the state of Buddhahood; that is the nature of the four Buddha bodies. 
In the four tenets, we find explanations in the Hinayana tenets (the Hinayana philosophical systems) of the Vabhashika (GES) and the Sautrantika (SS). We will not find presentations of the attainment of Buddhahood that has the nature of the four Buddha bodies. However, in the Mahayana tenets, namely the Cittamatra (MOS) and Svatantrika (AMWS) and the Prasangika (CMWS), we find detailed explanations of this Buddhahood in which the four Buddha bodies are attained.
So in the sutra system, we say that in dependence on the Paramitayana (the system of the perfections), there is a presentation of how Buddhahood can be attained. Given that that is the case, then what does Tantra have to offer on top of what is already available in the Paramitayana? The Paramitayana claims to be able to lead one to Buddhahood. However, we understand that it is not sufficient to merely rely on the Paramitayana (Sutra vehicle). Why is it necessary then to rely on Tantra in order to attain Buddhahood? Although the Sutra system claims to have the means for us to attain Buddhahood, but in reality, the sutra paths are not sufficient for us to attain Buddhahood. 
If we ask: “Is it possible to attain Buddhahood by relying on sutra paths?” 
The answer is: No, it is not possible according to the Tantra system. So you must understand the reasons for Tantra. Because if you fail to understand why Tantra is distinct and necessary, then this discussion of Tantra will not be relevant. 
In the Sutra presentation, one has to alternate meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment in order to accumulate the collections of merit and wisdom. Moreover, one has to accumulate two collections over a long time, over many eons. In Tantra, there is this explanation of method that enables one to attain Buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body. Such explanations are not found in the sutra system. In Tantra, we find explanations of how to attain Buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body without having to rely on a long period of time lasting 3 countless great eons.
You may think: What is the problem with taking 3 countless great eons? What is the hurry? Why do I need to attain enlightenment quickly?” The reason is that if we take a long time to attain Buddhahood, during that time, sentient beings will continue to be tormented by suffering. So thinking about how you want to be able to help them as quickly as possible, you can make this determination wanting to attain enlightenment swiftly as quickly as you can. This gives you an extraordinary courage and you generate this extraordinary mind of enlightenment thinking: “May I attain enlightenment quickly, quickly”.
So reflecting on the reasons above, we should think there is no choice but to attain enlightenment as quick as possible in this lifetime because “I cannot bear the suffering of sentient beings”. So then there is this sense of not being able to stand the fact that sentient being will suffer for a longtime. 
To attain Buddhahood, we need to attain the dharma body (truth body) and the form body. 
In the sutra system:
the uncommon cause of attaining the dharmakaya (truth body) is the mind realizing emptiness or selflessness. 
the cause for attaining the rupakaya (form body) is the method of compassion, bodhicitta the mind of enlightenment and so on. Included within the causes for attaining the form body, the practices of generosity, ethics, patience and joyous effort.
So in the sutra system, we find such a presentation of the causes of the two Buddha bodies.
Therefore, in terms of the basis, path and results:
the base are the two truths, 
the paths are method and wisdom and
the results are the two Buddha bodies.
According to the Paramitayana (Perfection Vehicle or the Sutra System), by generating true paths, the mind directly realizing emptiness, you will be able to achieve the dharma body (dharmakaya). Then there is explanation of how you can achieve the form body (rupakaya) through methods such as compassion and so on. So we need to ask ourselves:
Is it possible that we can attain the two Buddha bodies by relying on such causes? 
Is it sufficient for us to practise these causes and attain the two Buddha bodies? 
It is said that through such means, we will not able to create the substantial causes of the two bodies. For example, in the sutra vehicle, it is explained that you can attain Buddhahood by relying upon coarse mind. There is no explanation of the need of subtle mind in order to attain Buddhahood. However, in the Tantra system, we see an uncommon presentation of subtle level of mind. So in Tantra, you find detail explanations of very subtle mind that are not explained in the sutra system. 
In the sutra system, we see presentations of what are called the five sense primary consciousnesses, the six kinds of operating consciousnesses and so on. But there is no subtler mind than those minds. However, in tantra, with respect to the mental consciousness, mainly subtle levels are explained in tantra. In tantra, we find 3 levels of consciousnesses explained:
coarse minds, 
subtle minds and
very subtle minds
As examples of coarse minds, we have the 3 poisons – attachment, aversion and ignorance. 
According to the sutra system, when the coarse minds have stopped, then a person is considered dead; death has arrived. However, according to Tantra, even after such a coarse mind has stopped, the person has not died. This is because there are subtler mental consciousnesses that exist, for example, the white appearance, the red increase and the black near attainment. 
The minds of the five sense primary consciousnesses such as the afflictions of attachment, aversion and ignorance are coarse minds. There are also minds such as the white appearance; red increase and black attainment that are temporal minds (occasional minds). In other words, these minds are not primordial minds.  Such temporal minds (occasional minds) are not everlasting minds in the sense that they are not stable and do not last in a continuous way. 
From the point of view of Tantra, the mind realizing emptiness that is explained in the sutra system to be the substantial cause of the dharmakaya (dharma body of Buddha)  cannot have that ability because this mind realizing emptiness is an adventitious mind (occasional mind). In order to serve as the substantial cause of the dharmakaya, you need a different kind of mind of a similar type that can continue on to become the dharmakaya. Therefore, the mind realizing emptiness as explained in the sutra system cannot serve as the substantial cause of the dharmakaya. 
So using the Perfection Vehicle, you can directly realize emptiness. This mind directly realizing emptiness will enable you to traverse the ten grounds. In other words, you would be able to reach the 10th ground and overcome the 3 poisons and also be able to overcome the coarse dualistic appearances. However, such a coarse mind directly realizing emptiness cannot abandon the subtle dualistic appearances. Even though, you may familiarize with such a direct realization of emptiness for a long time, you would not be able to counteract the subtle dualistic minds of white appearance, red increase and black near attainment. Therefore, with the Perfection Vehicle alone, no matter how powerful it is, it can only abandon the coarse dualistic appearances and it is not able to abandon subtle dualistic appearances. So you must understand that the Perfection Vehicle alone is not enough for you to attain Buddhahood.  
If you think about it, the reasoning is quite clear. Because we are relying upon a coarse mind directly realizing emptiness, it can only abandon coarse afflictions and the coarse dualistic appearances. It cannot abandon the subtle ones. A mind like a mental consciousness that is coarse and adventitious cannot serve as similar type that will go on to become the mind of a Buddha. So if you think about the explanations in sutra carefully, you will see that the explanations of the mind directly realizing emptiness serving as a substantial cause for the dharmakaya are an awkward one. In order to create the uncommon substantial cause of the dharmakaya, you need to look into the detailed explanations provided by tantra. 
We have spoken about coarse minds and we have spoken about subtle minds such as the minds of white appearance, red increase and black near attainment. There is a very subtle level of mind which is called the clear light mind. For example, there is a clear light mind of death, and such a mind manifests after the minds of white appearance, red increase and black near attainment. This very subtle mind of clear light is called the primordial mind. Such a mind is:
clear and knowing
will never discontinue
is an everlasting mind 
will always exist
has no beginning and it has no end. 
Such a very subtle that exists continuously is of a similar type to its previous instance. We have to use such a mind to realize emptiness. Because with such a very subtle mind realizing emptiness will be able to counteract the subtle minds of white appearance, red increase and black near attainment. Therefore, using such a mind to realize emptiness will be able to overcome the subtle minds that cannot otherwise be abandoned. This primordial mind existing in an everlasting way can realize emptiness. Then the continuity of a similar type will gradually become the substantial cause of the dharmakaya. This is exactly the mind that will become the Buddha’s mind, the dharmakaya. Such explanations are found in tantra. 
That is the essence that I want to convey to you. We have to apply reasoning to understand why tantra is necessary. We have to ask ourselves the question: 
What is the substantial cause of the dharmakaya?
Such a substantial cause has to be a consciousness. 
It has to be a very subtle mind.
It has to be a mind that exists continuously; not just occasionally
It should be a mind that is able to last forever. 
For this reason, we need to posit such a primordial clear light mind as the substantial cause of the dharmakaya. Since such an explanation is not found outside of tantra. This is why we need tantra. You need to have a good and fine quality explanation of what the uncommon substantial cause of the dharmakaya is.
Having discussed the substantial cause of the dharmakaya, how about the substantial cause of rupakaya (form body)? 
In the sutra system, it is explained that the factor of method serves as the substantial cause of the form body. So by practicing compassion, bodhicitta and so on, you are able to create the causes of the form body. However, we need to bear in mind that the form body appears as form and factors such as compassion, bodhicitta are consciousnesses. How can a consciousness serve as a substantial cause of a form? In the sutra explanations, we find the presentation of the Arya’s body that is of the nature of mind serving as the substantial cause of a Buddha’s form body. However, such a mental body or a body of the nature of mind is caused by the levels of latencies or imprints of ignorance. How can something that has such causes serve as the substantial cause of a Buddha’s form body? Therefore, the sutra explanations that bodhicitta can serve as a substantial cause of the form body or the mental body - the body that is in the nature of the mind- can serve as the cause of a form body is unacceptable. It is difficult for bodhicitta and such mental body to be the substantial cause of a Buddha’s form body. 
So what is the uncommon presentation in tantra? 
They said that the uncommon cause of a Buddha’s form body is the illusory body that accords in aspect with the Buddha’s body. In other words, the mind directly realizing emptiness is a cause to arise in the aspect of the deity’s body. Through such a cultivation, one can develop a full fledge illusory body which continuity of a similar type becomes the Buddha’s form body. 
On the generation stage, one is simply imagining or visualizing the Buddha’s body. However, when you reach the completion stage, then you are actually able to accomplish the illusory body. This illusory body then is what will become the Buddha’s form body. Therefore, in tantra you find this unshared presentation of how to attain rupakaya. 
The explanation of the path as being method and wisdom is still relevant and sufficient. In this case, wisdom will be the very subtle clear light mind directly realizing emptiness. Abiding with such a mind is the illusory body. Then the illusory body is posited as the method. Every living being has this very subtle body and mind that is with him/her all the time. It exists continuously in an everlasting way continuing onto Buddha ground. This very subtle mind is accompanied by this very subtle wind called the life bearing wind. Such a very subtle body and mind exists within each and every sentient being and they lasts into Buddha ground. With that serving as the basis, if we engage in practice, then we would be able to achieve the clear light mind and the illusory body even on the path. This means that we would be able to achieve what is called the learners union of clear light and illusory body on the path. 
Such is the presentation of the union of method and wisdom in which method and wisdom are inseparable or indivisible. Therefore, in tantra you find this very good quality explanation of how the illusory body can serve as the substantial cause of the form body of a Buddha. Similarly, you can find good quality explanations of how there is this uncommon cause of the dharmakaya in tantra. Therefore, these detailed fine explanations are offered in tantra. 
We were saying how in tantra we find good explanations of how the illusory body and clear light mind serve as the substantial causes of the two Buddha bodies. You must understand this essential point that it is not enough to simply rely on the sutra path. It is necessary to enter the tantra path in order to attain Buddhahood. One of the reasons is being that with a very coarse mind, you cannot abandon the subtle dualistic appearances of white appearance, red increase and black near attainment. In order to abandon them, you need a very subtle mind realizing emptiness. If you are able to cause the clear light mind to directly realize emptiness, it will be able to abandon such subtle dualistic appearances.
In tantra, there is explanation of how you can generate method and wisdom in an indivisible manner within one mind. Even though in sutra, you have explanation of method and wisdom, you are not able to generate both of them inseparably within a single mind. In tantra, you are able to generate such indivisible method and wisdom within a mind that is called indivisible bliss and emptiness. So this exalted wisdom is a very subtle mind that is in the nature of bliss. At the same time, it realizes emptiness. So you are able to combine method and wisdom indivisibly in such a very subtle exalted wisdom. Therefore, with such a mind you cause the appearance of the aspect of a deity. Therefore, in the practice of tantra, there is this generation of the mind in the aspect of the deity’s body. 
In the four classes of tantra, we have:
Action tantra, 
Performance tantra, 
Yoga tantra 
Highest Yoga Tantra. 
The three lower classes of tantra do not have such a thorough explanation that you find in Highest Yoga Tantra. In the three lower classes of tantra, we find explanations of attaining Buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body. However, such a presentation is different from that of Highest Yoga Tantra. This is because in the lower tantras, in order to attain enlightenment in a single lifetime, they rely upon long life practices so that they can remain for eons. In that way, they are able to attain Buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body. However, in Highest Yoga Tantra, when it is said that one can attain Buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body, it refers to being able to attain Buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body during the degenerate age. 
In the practice of Highest Yoga Tantra, we want to make use of the clear light of death. We want to generate it into the nature of a path. So instead of letting it be an ordinary clear light of death, through our practice we try to generate it into the nature of the realization of emptiness. In this way we are able to transform it into the nature of the path. Through such practice, we will be able eventually to attain what is called the final example clear light. Using such clear light, when you pass into the intermediate state into the bardo, we will be able to arise as the illusory body. So instead of having an ordinary intermediate state, we have this intermediate state that arises as the illusory body. Once we have attain that, then we can go on to attain Buddhahood. 
So by manifesting clear light, we use it to accomplish the illusory body and on that basis we attain Buddhahood. So, this is the uncommon feature of tantra, especially the technique for accomplishing the illusory body is uncommon in tantra. So, that is the essence of the generation stage. Through these practices you want to transform ordinary death, intermediate state and rebirth. Then you try to bring death, intermediate state and rebirth to the path as the three Buddha bodies.
If you are able to practice these meditations then this means that you will be able to actualize this clear light as explained. In the previous classes I have already explained how during the death process the elements will dissolve. Similarly, the consciousness will also dissolve or absorb. In the meditation you imagine or visualize arriving at the clear light state. At that point you should place yourself in the meditative equipoise realizing emptiness. Through such meditation and practice when death actually arise then you will be able to meditate on emptiness when the clear light of death manifests. If you have done very consistent and good quality practice then what will happen is that when the clear light of death manifests you will be able to meditate on emptiness using that mind very easily. So that is the purpose of us meditating on the generation stage.
For example, at the time of death, your four elements will become weaker in terms of their potential. We must bear in mind that our body is accomplished due to our karma. We have these four elements in our bodies. When the karma for that body becomes weakened and exhausted, similarly the potential of those elements also become reduced. We have various kinds of appearances due to our karma. When that karma becomes diminished then also those corresponding appearances will become diminished, and they will eventually vanished. 
In the beginning, the earth element becomes weakened; the capacity of the earth element is reduced. As the result then we receive certain kinds of vision as explained previously. With the dissolution of the earth element, it is said that we receive the appearance of a mirage.
The essential point here for you to understand is that the various kinds of appearances we have are due to karma. When that karma becomes weakened and becomes extinguished, similarly those appearances will also become diminished and they will vanish. So, if you are able to feel interested in this explanation then you should practice the generation stage as explained in the previous classes. For example, you visualize going through the death process imagining what happen when the earth element dissolves, what element dissolves and so on. The benefit of doing this practice taking such images to mind and meditating on them is that when death actually arises, you will be able to recognize what is happening. You are able to remember this meditation that you have been practicing so you will be able to exercise vigilance. This means that you will not feel afraid. Your mind will not be disturbed. That is the benefit of doing the practice.
As our karma for certain appearance becomes diminished, like that appearance will diminish. So, this is something you have to bear in mind. When you undergo the death process, and if you are able to recall the presentation of karma, if you are able to recall the presentation of emptiness and so on then that will be very useful. By relying on the mindfulness and vigilance, there is hope that you are able to realize emptiness easily using the clear light of death. However, this is not something that is easy to achieve and it is certain not something that comes about through just some kind of overnight practice. You need to familiarize with the meditation again and again while you are well and alive, not just when you are about to die. When you are well and alive, you have to practice again and again until your meditation becomes very stable. In that way, you can have the hope that at the time of death, you are able to realize emptiness easily and your mind will be undisturbed.
If you don’t practice then what will happen is that at the time of death, you will experience fear and worry. You may receive all kinds of disturbing visions and your mind becomes very unpeaceful. In such a state of mind when the clear light of death manifests then there will be little chance that you will be able to meditate on emptiness. If that is the case then your death will become just an ordinary death. If you have an ordinary death then you will have just an ordinary intermediate state; so powerlessly without any control then you enter the intermediate state. Once that happens then you will take an ordinary rebirth and again you will reborn into samsara, and again you have to experience endless sufferings.
If you practice well then you are able to realize emptiness with the very subtle mind of clear light. Once you are able to do that then you will not have to enter an ordinary intermediate state. Instead you will be able to accomplish the illusory body. Once you are able to do that then there is hope of attaining Buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body.
The important point that you have to take away from this whole discussion is that it is insufficient to practice the sutra path alone. This is because the path to Buddhahood should enable you to abandon the subtle dualistic appearances. With the sutra path, you are not able to abandon the subtle dualistic appearances. What you need is a very subtle mind realizing emptiness and this technique is explained in HYT. This method is not available in the sutra presentation. It is not available even in the three lower tantra. You definitely need HYT.  If you are able to understand this structure of the tantra path then you are very fortunate. It is said that anyone who is able to form such an understanding will easily complete the accumulation of merits. 
We have completed the study of the three lower tantra so now we are in the section of Highest Yoga Tantra. It will take several months, two months, three months or however long we take, we will go through the HYT explanation and I will give commentary on it.
Khen Rinpoche: Until enlightenment. Teaching commentary until enlightenment. 
Student: What I heard just now it seems to me the illusory body as I understand it can only realize after death process. So my question is can the mind of clear light of death that experience the illusory body, can that be experience in the living body itself, in the meditative state? Is that possible to realize the illusory body while you are alive in the meditation state?
Translator: Your question: According to the explanation we just heard, one realize the illusory body during the intermediate state. Can we accomplish the illusory body while we are alive?
Answer: It is possible for one to achieve the illusory body while one is alive. There is a presentation of how you can practice the path and actualize the illusory body before death. While you are alive it is possible to accomplish the illusory body. This presentation will be covered later on when I am explaining the completion stage. You will get a clearer idea of how this can be attained.
You should bear in mind the reasons:
- Why HYT is so powerful
- Why it is indispensable for us to practice HYT
In order to enter the practice of tantra, you need to enter by receiving an initiation or empowerment. The entrance to tantra is said to be receiving initiation. In other word, if you have received an initiation, this means that you have entered tantra. However, this does not mean that you have entered a tantric path. In other to enter a tantric path, you need to have generated a tantric path in your continuum. For example, if you have generated the generation stage in your continuum then you are said to have entered the tantric path.
In order to practice tantra, you need to receive tantric initiation. This tantric initiation is referred to as a ripening cause. So the ripening cause of this tantric initiation (empowerment) involves various procedures. For example, there is this cleansing of the body, speech and mind.  Then you are empowered or authorized to meditate on the generation stage and the completion stage and also latency are deposited so that you are able to attain the four Buddha’s bodies in the future. 
The four empowerments are the usual four empowerments that we talk about:
vase empowerment, 
secret empowerment, 
wisdom empowerment 
word empowerment. 
The function of the vase empowerment is to cleanse the trainee of the stain of the three doors of the body, speech and mind. 
With the next two initiations, the secret empowerment and wisdom empowerment, the trainee is empowered or authorized to meditate on the generation stage and completion stage. 
Independent on the 4th empowerment - the word empowerment, the latency of the four bodies are placed upon the continuum of the trainee. 
So that is the purpose of receiving the four initiations. By completing receiving these four initiations (empowerments) then you are able to cultivate the tantric path. Also you are empowered to cultivate the paths and these paths are called the liberating paths; paths that act to liberate. These are the generation stage and the completion stage. Finally through the practice of the path of generation stage and completion stage you will be able to attain the result of liberation. This then become empowered with respect to the result. 
In order to attain the result of final union, the non-learner union, union of no more learning, you need to rely on the generation stage and the completion stage.  So those stages are to the liberating causes.  In order to engage in those liberating causes, first you need to have the ripening cause, and that involves receiving an initiation.  That is why in the beginning, you need to first receive an initiation (empowerment). When you think about this word “initiation” or “empowerment”, what it does is that it empowers you to engage in the hearing, contemplation, and meditation of the tantric path.  Therefore, one needs to receive the full-fledged empowerment from a qualified vajra master (vajra Acharya). 
You need to enter the mandala to receive the empowerment.  In the beginning, there is the vase empowerment.  You obtain such a vase empowerment by entering any of this mandala, such as the painted cloth mandala, colored sand mandala, body mandala, or the meditative absorption mandala. Usually the painted cloth mandala or the colored sand mandala is used.  So by entering either of this mandala, one received the vase empowerment.  
The second empowerment is called the secret empowerment, and you obtained it by entering the relative bodhicitta mandala, or the conventional bodhicitta mandala.  
The third empowerment, the wisdom empowerment is obtained in the bhaga mandala (Translator: I think in your English book is the translated as the lotus mandala)
The fourth empowerment, the word empowerment is obtained in the ultimate bodhicitta mandala.  
In HYT, you will find the presentation of these four empowerments.  
Within the vase empowerment, there are other initiations. In other word, you can innumerate within the vase empowerment, six empowerments or nine empowerments, eleven empowerments and so on.  With the vase empowerment, you able to purify the stain of the body, and you become empowered to meditate on the generation stage i.e. between the generation stage and the completion stage and you posit latency to be able to obtain the emanation body or the nirmanakaya in the future. 
What are these vase initiations, i we talk about them in term of six empowerments?
the water empowerment of Akshobhya
the crown empowerment of Ratnasambhava
the vajra empowerment of Amitabha, 
the bell empowerment of Amoghasiddhi 
the name empowerment of Vairochana.  
In addition, there is also the empowerment of the  vajra master (vajra Acharya)
So these are the six vase empowerments.  
In the next class, I will explain in greater detail what these six vase empowerments are.  For example, how would you attain the water empowerment of Akshobhya?  So what is the nature of the empowerment?  How do you attain the empowerment?  In this way, we will discuss the practice of the generation stage.  You should pay attention to this topic of the empowerment because we attempt empowerment and we say we obtain empowerment.  But what are you supposed to think during an empowerment?  What is the nature of the empowerment? You have to understand all these points.  With such an understanding then you will be able to attempt an empowerment and then single pointedly receive the empowerment in a pure way.  Therefore, you should take interest in this matter.  So it is important for you to develop a good understanding of what an initiation (empowerment) is all about.  With that kind of correct understanding then you will be able to receive an initiation with mindfulness and vigilance.  In that way you will be able to deposit very special imprints or latencies within your own continuum and you will be able to effectively purify the seeds.  Such latencies and purification will enable you in your future lifetimes to continue to practice tantra.  Then through doing this properly, there is hope that you will be able to engage tantra in the future. Therefore, there is great benefit in understanding this and studying this topic properly.    