Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L56.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:03.473720
================================================================================

As we were discussing in last week, in order to practice tantra, you need to enter tantra. The way to enter tantra is by receiving empowerment (initiation), and to do that you have to enter the mandala.  The usual types of mandala are:
the painted cloth mandala and 
the colored sand mandala.  
So by entering either one of these mandalas, one receives the vase initiation.
As mentioned last week, there are different types of vase empowerment.  The vase empowerment is made up of the empowerment of buddhas of the five lineages plus the vajra master initiation.  
The first of these initiations is the water initiation of Akshobhya.  
You enter the painted cloth mandala and receive the water initiation of Akshobhya where the initiation substance is the vase water.  Such an initiation is called the water initiation of Akshobhya.  
One begins by purifying oneself as well as the initiation substance into emptiness. In this context the initiation substance is the vase water.  From the state of emptiness, the vase water is generated as Akshobhya and oneself is also generated as Akshobhya.  
The vase water which has been generated as Akshobhya again dissolved into vase water. It is in the nature of Akshobhya even though it has the aspect of vase water. That is the essence of ritual.  
Given this vase water that is obtained from the dissolving of Akshobhya mother and father, you taste it in your mouth.  As the master is giving you instructions during the initiation, you must try to the best of your ability to do the visualization.  So when you taste the vase water, you have to try to visual or imagine that you have generated the exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness. If you are able to do that then you obtain the vase empowerment. 
Through receiving this water initiation of Akshobhya:
You purify the stain of hatred. 
You are able to transform the aggregate of the consciousness from among five aggregates. What that means is that your aggregates of consciousness will become nature of Akshobhya in the future. 
Also you are able to manifest the wisdom of dharmadhatu (the sphere of reality) in the future. You are made to deposit the potential to achieve the attainment of the lineage of Akshobhya.
Associated with Akshobhya are:
the seed syllable Hum 
the hand implement is the vajra  
The second initiation from among the vase empowerment is called the crown initiation of Ratnasambhava.  
Here, the deity is Ratnasambhava. The substance which is the crown is generated as Ratnasambhava mother and father. They dissolve and become a crown. When that crown is given to you, and as soon as it touches your head, you have to imagine you have generated the special exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness.
The seed syllable of Ratnasambhava is Tram and the hand implement is jewel
The function of this crown empowerment is:
It purifies stain of miserliness. 
It also transforms your aggregates of feeling among the five aggregates, and what that means you will be able to become Ratnasambhava in the future.
From among the five wisdoms, the wisdom of equality will be manifest.
The third initiation is called the vajra initiation of Amitabha. 
As before, you should purify yourself as well as the initiation substance, in this case is a vajra into emptiness, and then generated as Amitabha father and mother.  The vajra that has been generated as Amitabha father and mother will dissolve into light and the light is transformed into vajra. When the vajra is given to you, as soon as you hold it in your hand, you have to imagine that the special exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness is generated.  By doing that visualization, you obtained the vajra initiation.
The function of this initiation is that:
it purifies the stain of attachment,
it transform the aggregate of discrimination from among the five aggregates, 
it will manifest as the wisdom of the individual analysis from among the five wisdoms.
As for Amitabha, the seed syllable is Hrih and the implement (symbol) is lotus. 
The fourth initiation is the bell initiation of Amoghasiddhi. 
As before, you do the visualization to purify yourself as well as the initiation substance, in this case is the bell, into emptiness. From the state of emptiness you are generated as Amoghasiddhi father and mother. The bell is also generated as Amoghasiddhi father and mother. Then the Amoghasiddhi father and mother generated from the bell dissolve into light and arise as the bell. When the bell is given to you and as soon as you hold it in your hand, imagine that special exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness is generated whereby you obtain the bell initiation. 
The function of this bell initiation is that:
it purifies the stain of jealousy,
it transforms the aggregates of compositional factors from among the five aggregates
it manifest the wisdom of accomplishing activities from among the five wisdoms
The seed syllable of Amoghasiddhi is Kham, and the implement is a sword.  
The fifth initiation is the name initiation of Vairochana. 
In this case, there is no particular initiation substance. In the beginning, you purify yourself into emptiness and then generate yourself as Vairochana.  As previously having tossed the flower, you have determined your connection with a particular lineage and based on that you are given a name. When that name is expressed and upon hearing that name then you should generating the special exalted wisdom of the same emptiness. Through such an imagination you obtained the name initiation of Vairochana.  
The function of the name initiation is that:
it purifies the stains of ignorance, 
it transforms the aggregates of form among the five aggregates
it manifest the mirror-like wisdom from among the five wisdoms. 
The seed syllabus of Vairochana is Om and the implement is wheel.  
The reason for me explaining these procedures is so that you can receive initiation properly.  You have many opportunities to receive initiation and many of you also perform self-initiation. In order to do that, you have to enter the mandala and receive the initiation. Therefore, when you do those practices, you should be thinking of the meaning that I have explained earlier.  
Those are the empowerment of the buddhas of the five lineages.  The significance is that the purified form of our five aggregates becomes the buddha of the five lineages. For example:
the purified aggregate of consciousness is Akshobhya.  
the aggregate of feeling is transformed and become Ratnasambhava,
the aggregates of discrimination is transformed and become the nature of Amitabha,
the aggregates of compositional factor is transformed and becomes the nature of Amoghasiddhi and
the aggregate of form is transformed and become the nature of Vairochana.
In that way, we have these five aggregates whose purified forms arise as the buddha of the five lineages.
After the five initiations of the buddhas of the five lineages are done, then we have the sixth initiation, which is the vajra master initiation.  
In the vajra master initiation, the disciples is generated as the Vajradhara and is placed on the throne and then given the three mudras.  
What are these mudras? They are the three commitments:
bell - the commitment of speech, 
vajra - the commitment of mind and 
mudra - the commitment of body.
It is through the understanding of being conferred of these three mudras that:
one can engage in the study and later in explaining of these to others and 
one can confer initiation to others.
So by receiving empowerment then you are able to cleanse the defilements (obscurations) preventing you from accomplishing the particular buddha lineage. 
For example, by receiving the initiation of Akshobhya then you are able to cleanse the defilements preventing you from become enlighten in the Akshobhya lineage.
The crown initiation of Ratnasambhava establishes potential for you to be able to attain one of the signs of the buddha's body called the crown protrusion (unisha).
By receiving the vajra initiation of Amitabha, the potential is deposited for you to achieve the final wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness, which is the mind of the buddha in your own continuum in the future.
The fourth initiation, the bell initiation of Amoghasiddhi deposits the potential for you to actualize the speech of buddha and to turn the wheel of dharma.
The name initiation of Vairochana deposits the potential for you to achieve enlightenment and become a buddha with that particular lineage.
The vajra-master initiation deposits the potential for you to achieve dominant over the kingdom of dharma. 
So those are the six vase empowerment.
In the context of the four empowerments, the six initiations that we mentioned earlier are counted as one, called the vase empowerment.
Having received the initiation of the buddha of the five lineages, you have to keep the commitment of the five buddha lineages. 
So first of all in the lineage of Vairochana, there are six commitments:
commitments are practicing the three kinds of ethic, 
keeping the commitment of going for refuge to the Three Jewels.
The four commitments of Akshobhya are those that are related to the deity Akshobhya. The four commitments are:
Vajra, 
Bell, 
Mudra 
The master.
With the Buddha Ratnasambhava, there are four commitments.
Four types of giving, 
For Amitabha there are three commitments:
the outer commitment, 
the secret commitment 
the commitment of the three vehicles
The outer commitment refers to upholding the dharma of the two lower tantras – action tantra and performance tantra.
The secret commitment refers to upholding the dharma of yoga tantra and Highest Yoga Tantra.
The two lower tantras emphasize on the outer whereas the two higher tantras emphasize on the inner.
The commitment of the three vehicles refers to upholding the dharma of the three vehicles - the dharma of the Hearer, Solitary Realizer and the Mahayana vehicle. In other word, you have to engage in hearing and the contemplation of all the Buddha’s teachings. 
His Holiness the Dalai Lama has mentioned in the context of the Kalachakra tantra that:
outer refers to non-Buddhists. Then one has to engage in the non-Buddhist scriptures
secret refers to the four classes of tantra,
three vehicles, as before, the vehicles of Hearer, Solitary Realizer and the Mahayana vehicle.
Khen Rinpoche:  I heard something like that? You heard? No? At the Kalachakra initiation he was saying something like that. The ‘outer’, one commentary mentioned that. 
The commitments of Amoghasiddhi are two: 
To uphold all the vows. If you have the three types of vows, you should uphold them properly. If you have the two types of vows, then you should uphold the two types of vows properly. 
To make as many offerings as you can. 
Therefore, those are the 19 commitments of the buddhas of the five lineages. 
From among the four empowerments, the second empowerment is called the secret empowerment. The secret empowerment which takes place in the mandala of conventional bodhicitta, you are given a secret substance to taste. As a result of tasting the secret substances, your winds are made serviceable. So then you should think you generate the exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness. In that way you receive the empowerment. 
In dependence of the secret empowerment, in the future your wind and mind will become indivisible and you will be able to achieve the sambhogakaya (complete enjoyment body). 
The sambhogakaya (complete enjoyment body) mentioned here is not the same as the enjoyment body mentioned in the context of sutra. In the context of sutra, we say that the complete enjoyment body is the final body having the five certainties. In this context of tantra, this is not what we are talking about. Here we talk about the achievement of wind and speech becoming indivisible. So that then is the attainment of sambhogakaya (complete enjoyment body).
Among these five certainties explained in the context of sutra, one of them is only teaching Mahayana dharma. That is the quality of speech. So it is reasonable that here in the context of tantra, the attainment of speech is called the sambhogakaya (complete enjoyment body).
In the third of the four empowerments, we have the wisdom empowerment; sometimes is called the knowledge-wisdom empowerment. This takes place in the bhaga mandala. Once inside the mandala, a knowledge woman is given. As a result of that, generate the exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness. As a result of receiving the wisdom empowerment in the future, one will achieve the dharmakaya. 
The fourth empowerment, the word empowerment, takes place in the mandala of ultimate bodhicitta. In this empowerment, the master introduces the meaning of union to you. He explains the meaning of union as the union of the clear light and illusory body. By developing a good understanding of what union means you attain the word empowerment. 
So those are the four empowerments of Highest Yoga Tantra. So entering the mandala of HYT one can receive those four empowerments. You should try to remember the significance and in the future when you are receiving initiation or if you are taking self-initiation, you should try to the best of your ability to recall the various meanings. At the appropriate occasion you should think “I have generated the exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness and in the future I am going to attain the state of this and that, and have deposited the latencies to be able to achieve this and that”. If you are able to recall these meanings properly, even if you do it for just one minute you will receive great benefit. 
(Principles of Buddhist Tantra text starting from page 99)
The system of mainstream highest yoga tantra
This has four parts:
1. How to become a vessel suitable for meditating on the path
2. How to keep the vows and commitments purely
3. How to practice the path
4. How to manifest the fruits of practice
How to practice the path
1 How to meditate on the two stages
2 The practice of enhancing these two stages
   How to meditate on the two stages
   1 How to meditate on the generation stage 
   2 How to meditate on the completion stage 
How to meditate on the generation stage
Debating the definition of the generation stage 
Panchen Losang Chokyi Gyaltsen states that the generation stage is defined as “a yoga that matures the mental continuum for its resultant completion stage that does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation but newly investigates any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death, and the intermediate state.”
Reply: I think he means only the main generation stage because it is not logically necessary that the generation stage engages in meditation on any aspect related to birth, death, or the intermediate state.
In the definition posited by Panchen Losang Chokyi Gyaltsen, he talks about this generation stage as something that “does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation’. 
The first part of the definition mentions that it is ‘a yoga that matures the mental continuum for its resultant completion stage’ and therefore the generation stage matures or acts to ripen the completion stage or generates the completion stage. 
The last part of the definition says ‘but newly investigates any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death, and the intermediate state’ - this means that the generation stage is a yoga that newly imagined any aspect that is concordant with birth, death and the intermediate state. 
That is the definition set forth by Panchen Losang Chokyi Gyaltsen. However, the author Ngawang Palden does not agree. He says the definition applies to the main generation stage but does not apply to all generation stage. Because a generation stage does not necessarily fulfil the definition in that it does not have to engage in meditation that has a concordant aspect with birth, death or intermediate state. 
What is the most important in this context of the generation stage is the practice of bringing birth, death, intermediate state to the path as three Buddha bodies. Therefore, this meditation that accords in aspect with the three stages of death, intermediate state and birth are the most important practices. 
These meditations are very clear if you look at the sadhana. For example, you can see in the long sadhana of Yamantaka or Vajrabhairava. 
It begins by visualizing oneself as Vajrabhairava and at one’s heart is the syllable HUM.
Light radiates from this syllable HUM pervading the world, environment, inhabitants, causing them to become the nature of light. 
As a result of this light from the syllable HUM, the world, environment, inhabitants become the nature of boundless purity and the inhabitants themselves become male and female deities. 
Then one visualizes that one absorb into oneself and then oneself also dissolves into light. 
When the world of environment and its inhabitants are absorbed into oneself, then one thinks that the earth element is absorbing into the water element, and one receives the sign of mirage-like appearance. 
When we are doing this meditation, this is simply an imagination. It is not actually happening. It will actually happen at the time of death. So one is simply visualizing and having this appearance. 
Therefore, it is beneficial for you to engage in this series of visualizations. 
First, you are generated as the deity. 
Then light radiates from the HUM of your heart pervading all the environment and its inhabitants, transforming them into infinite or boundless purity. 
Then they also dissolve into light and that light absorbs into you. 
So then that previous appearance of boundless purity then vanishes. 
You have to visualize that if the earth element absorbing into water, the appearance you get is a mirage-like appearance. Besides that there is no other appearance. 
At that point, you as Vajrabhairava. You are alone because everything else has already absorbed into you. 
Then you also start to melt into light and then absorbing towards the HUM at your heart. So that only Hum is left. 
At that point you should think that water element is absorbing into the fire element. The appearance that appears to your mind is that of smoke-like appearance. 
Next is the visualizing the SHABKYU of this letter Hum. (Shabkyu is the vowel sign at the bottom of the letter) That absorbs upwards leaving the HA. You should think the fire element is absorbing into the wind element and you receive the appearance of fireflies.  
You should think that besides the appearance of fireflies, nothing else appears. There is no appearance of the environment and its inhabitants whatsoever. There is only the appearance of fireflies. 
The next step, the letter HA absorbs into its head. This letter HA has a horizontal stroke right at the top. This means that the letter HA absorbs upwards leaving only the horizontal stroke at the top. When this is happening, the wind element is absorbing into the white appearance. At that time you get this appearance of butter lamp. 
During these processes, the four elements dissolved or absorbed. When you meditate in this way, you are performing a meditation that accords in aspect with death. By doing such visualization, you are meditating with an aspect that accord with death. 
The four elements serve as the support for consciousness when one is alive. But during the death process their ability or capacity to support consciousness becomes diminished. Due to the karma diminishing then these four elements become weaker in terms of their ability to support consciousness. That is why you have these appearances. As the consciousnesses become more and more subtle, then such appearances as described will arise:
First, there is the mirage-like appearance, 
follows by the smoke-like appearance, 
follows by the fireflies-like appearance, and
the butter lamp appearance.
At the next stage, the head of the HA, the horizontal stroke that remains from the letter HA, also absorbs into the crescent moon above it. At this point there is only white appearance. 
Next is the crescent moon absorbs into the drop above it. This drop looks like a little circle. When this is visualized you should think that you receive this appearance of red appearance. 
Next is the drop which is the little circle absorbs into the nada. The nada is the little squiggle having three curves. At that point you should visualize the appearance called the black appearance, this thick darkness and nothing can be seen. 
The nada or the squiggle with three curves also absorbs upwards and finally it becomes invisible; completely vanished. You should think that now you receive this appearance of vacuity, there is just nothing. You generate the thought that the clear light of death has manifested. At this point there is just clear vacuity. You should think there is nothing except this clear voidness. 
Some masters say that emptiness appear at this point. Some say emptiness does not appear. It seems like most masters say that emptiness does not appear during this clear light of death.  
If you have studied about emptiness, then at this point you should think about what this emptiness is. You shouldn’t think that there is just void and nothing, but rather you should think about how this is an emptiness of the object of negation. So then there is this emptiness of true existent, emptiness of inherent existent. You try your best to recall the meaning of emptiness that you have studied. Then you think this is the dharmakaya -the truth body, and try your best to generate clear appearance and divine pride.
You have to think what the benefit of doing such a practice is. You placed yourself in meditative equipoise on this dharmakaya. What is the benefit? 
As I have mentioned earlier, the nada or the squiggle with three curves absorb upward and then it completely vanishes. At that point you have to meditate on emptiness using whatever understanding you have on emptiness. You have to place yourself in the meditative equipoise on emptiness then you can give rise to this thought, “The mind realizing emptiness is the actual truth body; the actual dharmakaya.” Then you try to generate divine pride based on it.
You can cultivate divine pride after you have meditated on emptiness or you can do it even while you are meditating on emptiness. While you are meditating on emptiness, at a corner of your mind, you can think “I am the actual dharmakaya.” So this is one way to do it. Another way to do it is to first meditate on emptiness and after having meditated well then you cultivate divine pride by thinking that “I am the actual dharmakaya.”
Try your best to place yourself in this state of emptiness free from laxity and excitement; this vacuity in emptiness that you set yourself in. That is the way to meditate on the dharmakaya.
If you are able to cultivate this meditation and become very familiar with it such as you have a very fine quality meditation, then when death arise, you will be able to recognize it and you will be able to meditate on emptiness. When this clear light of death occurs, you will be able to actually meditate on emptiness. By realizing emptiness during that stage, you will be able to stop ordinary death and actualizes the special potential for realizing emptiness there.
When this very subtle mind manifest, you are able to use it to realize emptiness, then you will be able to make great use of this very special potential. Because at that point, you will be free from dualistic appearances and through this very subtle mind realizing emptiness, you will be able to achieve all the various stages - illusory body, clear light and eventually union. That is very extraordinary way for you to attain enlightenment quickly.
However, if you are placed in such a state of meditative equipoise, you will not be able to enact the welfare of sentient beings. Therefore, you have to arise in the form body. This is when you practice the bringing of the intermediate state to the path as the sambhogakaya (complete enjoyment body). In term of the sadhana of the Vajrabhairava, at this point you will generate the complete celestial mansion or the inestimable mansion of the deity. In the center of this mansion on this palace, you will generate the youthful Manjushri. That is the way to practice of bringing the intermediate state to the path as the complete enjoyment body.
With a mind that is free from laxity and excitement you have to focus on the body and think “I am the resultant time sambhogakaya. I am the actual complete enjoyment body of the resultant time”. At that point cultivate clear appearance and divine pride of being the sambhogakaya.
Even after having arisen as the sambhogakaya, you are not able to enact the welfare of all sentient beings because you can only benefit the arya bodhisattvas. You think “I need to arise as the emanation body so that I can benefit all sentient beings. According to the sadhana “I arise as the complete form of Vajrabhairava. You see all the details as described in the sadhana in a very extensive way like the number of faces, the number of hands, and number of legs or the implements and so on. So that is a way to bring rebirth into the path as the nirmanakaya (emanation body). Then you focus on this full complete body of Vajrabhairava. You have to cultivate divine pride and clear appearance. You should think “I am the actual emanation body of the resultant time”.
We talk about the three bodies that are the bases of purification. What are these? Those are the ordinary death, intermediate state and rebirth.
It is necessary for us to stop ordinary death because if we fail to eliminate ordinary death, then an ordinary intermediate state will follow. If that happens, then an ordinary rebirth in samsara will follow. In that way we will experience uninterrupted samsara by being reborn in cyclic existence. This is why it is necessary for us to put a stop to ordinary death. In order to purify those three bases of purification, we need to rely on the purifying paths - the paths that are the purifiers. These purifying paths there are two types:
They occur on the generation stage 
They occur on the completion stage.
By relying on these paths, that purify the bases of purification, then we will be able to attain the results of purification. These results of purification are the resultant three bodies:
Dharmakaya (truth body)
Sambhogakaya (complete enjoyment body)
Nirmanakaya (emanation body)
That brings us back to the definition of page 100:
…newly investigates any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death, and the intermediate state
In the definition, it is stated that generation stage newly investigates any aspect related to or concordant with the three stages of birth, death, the intermediate state.  While this is hard to do in reality, we imagine that we are cultivating this aspect that accords with birth, death and intermediate state. Death is the main meditation of the generation stage.
So to practice the generation stage, you have to try to meditate on these aspects that are concordant with birth, death and the intermediate state. In another words, you have try your best to meditate on bringing birth, intermediate state, death to the path as three buddha bodies. You have to look at the sadhana and then you have to do this meditation. You should understand clearly:
at which point you are meditating on bringing death to the path as the dharmakaya,
at which point you are bringing the intermediate state to the path as sambhogakaya and
at which point you are meditating or bringing rebirth to the path as the nirmanakaya.
In this definition posited by Paṇchen Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen, he is saying that “generation stage is yoga that newly investigates any aspect related to the three stages of the death and intermediate state”. 
Reply: I think he means only the main generation stage because it is not logically necessary that the generation stage engages in meditation on any aspect related to birth, death, or the intermediate state.
Ngawang Palden reply: “It is not necessary”. So there is no pervasion. That is not necessarily the case that a generation stage has to newly investigate an aspect concordant with birth, intermediate state or death.
To support his statement Ngawang Palden gave the following reason. 
For instance, yogas following union with a knowledge consort do not meditate on any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death, and the intermediate state. Likewise, meditation on the protection wheel is not meditation on any aspect related to these three.
At the beginning of the Vajrabhairava sadhana, there is a section on the protection wheel. That is quite a long section. It does not accord in aspects with birth, intermediate state or death. 
If you ask: “Is this a generation stage practice?”
The answer is “Yes”. 
Is it included in the generation stage? 
The answer is “Yes”. 
But it does not meditate on any aspect that accord in aspect with birth, death or the intermediate state. Similarly, there is a section of the text of the sadhana called “The Concentration of The Supreme Conqueror Activities.” During that section, you visualize performing of the various activities of a fully enlightened Buddha. Those activities also do not accord in aspect with birth, death or the intermediate state. However, it is part of the generation stage of the Thirteen Deities of Vajrabhairava.
To substantiate the first reason, Ngawang Palden says:
The first reason is established because Explanation of the Graded Presentation states:
Those yogas following union with a knowledge consort are activities of a buddha; they are not stages of ordinary existence . . . and so on.
Explanation of the Graded Presentation is a text by Lama Tsongkhapa.
This means that they do not accord in aspect with birth, death or the intermediate state.
To substantiate the second reason:
The second reason is established because that text states:
The protection wheel is merely a branch or preliminary level of the generation stage that is cultivated in accordance with ordinary existence in the generation stage. Therefore you do not need to take them [the protection wheel meditations] as activities related to the stages of ordinary existence.
To summarize what had been explained, Ngawang Palden is saying that there is this one part of the definition in the definition of the Panchen Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen, that has no pervasion as in:
…newly investigates any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death, and the intermediate state
So Ngawang Palden is saying that it is not necessary for generation stage to have that. This is because, for example, yoga following union with a knowledge consort and the meditation on the protection wheel does not meditate on any aspect related to those three.
Further debate on the definition of the generation stage
Someone says: The protection wheel and yogas following union with a knowledge consort are not actual generation-stage practices because the generation stage engages in meditation that takes any of the three bodies as the path, and it is not logically necessary that any path in the mental continuum of someone on the generation stage must be a generation stage [path].
The point here is if someone says that any path in the mental continuum of someone on the generation stage is a generation stage. Then the opponent will reply: “No pervasion” meaning it is not logically necessary.
Reply: That is not logically necessary
However, your reason is established because there are many shared paths of the Perfection Vehicle and the lower tantras in the mental continuum [of someone on the generation stage].
Your first reason is unacceptable because it contradicts the explanation of the outlines of the four branches of approximation, the four yogas, the six branches, and the three concentrations in the general outline summarizing the generation stage. These may be understood by consulting the extensive presentation in Mantric Stages.
The essence of the argument here is that in order to be a generation stage, it is not necessary to meditate on an aspect concordant with birth, death and the intermediate state. 
Then this person gives his objection and his reply is that: “Your explanation is unacceptable because you said that certain practices are not actual generation stage practices. 
But however if you look at the outlines as mentioned:
the four branches of approximation:
the four yogas, 
the six branches, and 
the three concentrations.
All these belong to the path of generation stage. You should not say that these practices do not belong to generation stage and they are not actual generation stage practices.
Here Ngawang Palden is saying that if you insist that a generation stage necessarily meditates on an aspect concordant with birth, death or intermediate state, then this is something that needs to investigate. 
I guess so he is saying it is not necessary that generation stage has to meditate on an aspect concordant to birth, death or intermediate state. He refutes this person who claims that these practices such as protection wheel, the union of a knowledge consort, are not generation stage practices. They do belong to the generation stage.