Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L57.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:05.199067
================================================================================

In the last session, we went through the definition of the generation stage. In the Principles of Buddhist Tantra (page 100),
Panchen Losang Chokyi Gyaltsen states that the generation stage is defined as “a yoga that matures the mental continuum for its resultant completion stage that does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation but newly investigates any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death, and the intermediate state.”
So the generation stage is defined as:
 “a yoga that matures the mental continuum for its resultant completion stage that does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation but newly investigates any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death, and the intermediate state.”
There was a discussion on whether it is necessary for a generation stage to newly investigate any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death, and the intermediate state. 
The author of the text says that although this is stated as necessary by Panchan Losang Chokyi Gyaltsen in his definition. That refers only to the main generation stage. It is not necessary that the generation stage engages in meditation on any aspect related to birth, death or the intermediate state.  
In the definition, it is stated that it is necessary that such a generation stage does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation. 
So, if it is generation stage, it does not need to arise from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation. 
If you look at the definition that says:
“that does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation”. 
So according to this definition, if it is a generation stage, then it necessarily does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation. 
However, if someone is on the generation stage, is it necessary that this person certainly does not have the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel due to meditation? 
The answer is: No, it is not necessary. 
Khen Rinpoche: You see the difference between first sentence and the second sentence? Or no?
If it is a person on the generation stage, this person can have the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel. However, this may not be due to meditation. So that is the difference. 
The point is that if it is a generation stage, then it definitely does not have the winds entering, abiding, and dissolving in the central channel due to meditation. However, on the generation stage, it is possible to have the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel. So in other words, it can occur but not due to meditation on the generation stage. 
For example, there are sharp facultied trainees of the generation stage who are able to practise the subtle yoga and upon completing it, they are able to use the condition of an outer mudra or outer consort and by entering into union, such a practitioner can cause the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. 
There is such a sharp facultied practitioner on the generation stage who is able to cause the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel through entering into union with a consort, and in this way generate the four joys. 
This person is on the generation stage. But when he generates such a path in his continuum, there is question whether this path is a generation stage path or a completion stage path. 
In Lama Tsongkhapa’s Lamp to Illuminate the Five Stages, he says that there is a generation stage practitioner who has completed the subtle yoga of the generation stage. As a result, he is able to cause winds to enter into the central channel. Then by entering into union with a consort, this practitioner causes the four joys to arise. 
Lama Tsongkhapa continues to say: The person who is able to accomplish this on the generation stage, belongs to the generation stage. But how about the path in his continuum? Is this a completion stage path?
By using the condition of outer consort on the generation stage, this practitioner causes the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel and he generates the four joys. While this person is still on the generation stage, this path within his continuum generating these four joys can be considered completion stage path. 
However, Ngawang Palden says that a person on the generation stage who is able to generate such a path is generating a path that belongs to the class of completion stage. So instead of saying that it is a completion stage path, he simply says that he belongs to the class of completion stage. 
Back to this definition:
A generation stage is necessarily a yoga that does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation. However, it is possible for generation stage to have the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel due to, for example, union with an external consort or due to vitality exertion. 
As for the third part of the definition which says:
“newly investigates any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death and the intermediate state”. 
We spoke of this in the last session, and we say that it is not necessary. 
The author Ngawang Palden says that it is not necessary that a generation stage investigates any aspect that is concordant with birth, death or the intermediate state. For example, we have the yoga of union with knowledge consort or meditation on the protection wheel. Even though these are examples of generation stage, they do not meditate on any aspect related to birth, death or the intermediate state.
With that, let us continue reading the text (page 106). 
The generation stage is classified in two parts:
1) The yoga of coarse single recall
2) The yoga of subtle investigation
These are the divisions of the generation stage into:
the coarse generation stage 
the subtle generation stage. 
First, the yoga of coarse single recall is equivalent to the coarse generation stage because Lama Tsongkhapa’s Precious Bud of Final Resolution states:
It is not called single recall because it recalls a deity once or recalls just a single deity but because it recalls the deity alone or it recalls oneself and the deity as
one. Though in general it engages both subtle and coarse deity meditation, here it refers to deity yoga of the coarse supporting maṇḍala and supported deities . . . [up to] . . . when you train in the generation stage, you first generate concentration possessing clear appearance of coarse objects up till the supreme- conqueror
maṇḍala.
So the first of this division is actually the coarse generation stage. The reason is given because Lama Tsongkhapa’s Precious Bud of Final Resolution states: “It is not called single recall because it recalls a deity once or recalls just a single deity but because it recalls the deity alone or it recalls oneself and the deity as one”. 
In the name of the first yoga, we see the expression single recall. This explanation says that single recall does not mean recalling the deity once or recalling just a single deity. 
What does it mean? It means recalling the deity alone or recalling oneself and the deity as one. 
“Though in general it engages both subtle and coarse deity meditation, here it refers to deity yoga of the coarse supporting mandala and supported deities” - this means that in general, on the generation stage, one engages in both subtle and coarse deity meditation. 
Here, in the context of the coarse generation stage, it refers to the deity yoga of the coarse supporting mandala and supported deities. 
Then the citation ends by saying: “When you train in the generation stage, you first generate concentration possessing clear appearance of coarse objects up till the supreme conqueror mandala” - here there is this mention of the supreme conqueror mandala. This is one of the three concentrations. 
The first of these is the concentration of initial application (initial union):
The second is the concentration of the supreme-conqueror mandala. 
It seems here it is saying that you first generate concentration possessing clear appearance of coarse objects up till the supreme conqueror mandala. This means that the first concentration - concentration of initial application (initial union) - should be included there. 
The first of these two yogas, the yoga of coarse single recall is the coarse generation stage. 
How about the second one - the yoga of subtle investigation?
The yoga of subtle investigation
The second is equivalent to the subtle generation stage because Precious Bud of Final Resolution states:       
When you train in the generation stage, you train in conceptual yogas such as meditating on the maṇḍala inside a subtle drop. Although conceptual or contrived yoga are general names for the generation stage, in this context it is called subtle yoga
In the same text Precious Bud of Final Resolution states:
When you train in the generation stage, you train in conceptual yogas such as meditating on the mandala inside a subtle drop. Although conceptual or contrived yoga are general names for the generation stage, in this context it is called subtle yoga - This is saying that when you have trained in the generation stage well, you can go on to train in the conceptual yoga such as meditating on the mandala inside the subtle drop i.e. you can train in the subtle yoga. 
In general, the expressions conceptual or contrived yoga are the general names of the generation stage. But in this case, the conceptual or contrived yoga is also called the subtle yoga. This is because between the two stages of the generation stage, this subtle generation stage is the main generation stage. For that reason, the general names for the generation stage may also apply to subtle yoga. 
The point is the general names are applicable to the particular instances. What it is saying is that the general names apply to the particular instances. For example, the general name is Man or mankind, and included within mankind are women. So woman is a particular instance (division) but you can also refer to woman as mankind. Similarly here, conceptual or contrived yoga is a general name. Subtle yoga is a particular division. You can also call subtle yoga by the general name conceptual or contrived yoga. 
The point here is that the expression conceptual or contrived yoga refers to the generation stage. So subtle yoga is a division of generation stage. However, it can also be referred to as conceptual or contrived yoga. Why? Because between the two types of generation stage, subtle yoga is the main generation stage. Therefore, the general name for generation stage can also be applied to subtle yoga. 
Question: Do those training in the generation stage progress to more advanced focal objects after they have attained stable meditation on less advanced focal objects as in the completion stage? Or do they meditate on the entire sadhana from beginning to end in a single session?
In the completion stage, one progresses to more advanced focal objects after one has attained stable meditation on the less advanced focal objects. For example:
Start by meditating on the isolation of body. 
Once you are done with that and have attained stable isolation of body then you move on to the next stage which is the isolation of speech. 
When you are done with that, you move on to the isolation of mind.
After that illusory body.
After that clear light. 
After that learner’s union
Then you move on to the union of no more learning. 
The four levels of practitioners
Question: Do those training in the generation stage progress to more advanced focal objects after they have attained stable meditation on less advanced focal objects—as in the completion stage—or do they meditate on the entire sādhana from beginning to end in a single session?
The question here is: Is the training in the generation stage is like that in the completion stage where you meditate on something less advanced, and after you have completed that, then you move to something more advanced?  Is it like that or do you meditate on the entire sadhana from beginning to end in a single session?
Reply: There are four types of practitioners differentiated according to when the path is generated in their mental continua:
1. Beginners
2. Those attaining some pristine wisdom
3. Those attaining partial control over pristine wisdom
4. Those attaining perfect control over pristine wisdom
There are four different kinds of practitioners. What are their differences? The explanations will come. 
You must understand the different presentations of how long and in what way they meditate.
1. Beginners
The first, a beginner, must fully meditate on all the generation-stage rites in the sadhana. Further, all practitioners from those first meditating on the generation stage up to but not including those capable of generating the clear appearance of all aspects of the coarse mandala in an instant are called beginners. 
Taking the example of the Yamantaka or Vajrabhairava sadhana, you meditate on the entire mandala and the deity until you have all those aspects in your mind so those should be visualized or focused. 
A beginner is able to visualize all these aspects of the mandala clearly but the practitioner can only do so in stages. If this person has to do it in a very short period of time, then that person is not able to do it. 
Having received an initiation, then one can meditate on the sadhana, reading all the descriptions and then trying to visualize all the various aspects. If you are able, then you should use the long sadhana with all the details. Then you read the sadhana, think about it, and visualize the supporting and supported mandala. So going through these steps, you would be able to arrive at a clear visualization that arises from your meditation. However, if you have to do it just very quickly without this progressive procedure, and if you are required to just bring up this entire visualization of the supporting and supported mandala in a short instant of time, such as during the time of a finger snap, you are not able to do it. This means that you are still a beginner. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay? You still beginner. Until you cannot like that (gesture of snapping a finger), so don’t think you are very high practitioner. Once you can do like that all visualizations, then okay, the entire deities, entire mandala. 
2. Those attaining some pristine wisdom
Those attaining some pristine wisdom are those who when visualizing the celestial mansion and all the coarse deities arranged within it are capable of generating the clear and stable appearance of all the main and secondary limbs instantly, but are not yet capable of doing that for the deities of the bases—Kṣitigarbha and so on.
This means that someone who has attained some pristine wisdom (exalted wisdom) is able to have a clear visualization of the celestial mansion and all the coarse deities within. For example, if you are meditating on the Guhyasamaja mandala, you are able to cause all the 32 deities of the Guhyasamaja mandala to appear clearly. Not only that, you are able to have all the hands and implements, even the eyes and ears and so forth appearing clearly in the short period of a finger snap. However, you are not yet able to do that for the deities of the sense sources or the sense bases. For example, Ksitigarbha is set at the eyes and so on. But you are not able to do that for these deities that are set at the various places of the deities body.  So if you have this level of attainment, then you are at this stage of having attained some pristine wisdom. 
Someone who has attained this 2nd level is able to cause all the celestial mansion and the mandalas to appear clearly within a short period of time. However, this person is not able to generate, for example, Kṣitigarbha at the eye sense power and so on within a short period of time, 
There is a difference in the mode of meditation between beginners and those attaining some pristine wisdom. Beginners must visualize the entire supporting maṇḍala and supported deities slowly and in stages. Those attaining some pristine wisdom recall the coarse aspects instantly
but then they must visualize the subtle aspects, such as the deities of the bases, in stages.
Someone who is still a beginner has to visualize the entire supporting mandala and supported deities slowly and in stages. So a beginner would read the sadhana and visualize the various aspects slowly and in stages. 
Someone who is on the 2nd level who has attained some pristine wisdom does not need to do that. Instantly, in just a very short instant of time, this person can cause all these coarse aspects to appear. But when it comes to the deities of the sense bases, the eyes and so forth, then they have to do it slowly in stages. 
So these two levels, the levels of the beginners and those who have attained some pristine wisdom, belong solely to the generation stage. They are not on the completion stage. 
3. Those attaining partial control over pristine wisdom
Those attaining partial control over pristine wisdom includes all the practitioners from those capable of instantly generating clear and stable appearance of not only the coarse visualization but all the main and secondary limbs of the subtle deities of the bases up to but not including those capable of attaining perfect control.
When does one reach this 3rd stage? A person in a very short period of time in a finger snap is able to generate clear and stable appearance of the coarse deities. On top of that, even the subtle deities can be generated very clearly and in a stable way very quickly in a finger snap. One can see all the main and secondary limbs of even the subtle deities of the sense bases in a very short period of time; up to but not including those capable of attaining perfect control. 
It is said that this person practices both the generation and completion stages. 
This means that a person who has attained this 3rd level can either belong to the generation stage or the completion stage. This person does not have to be just on the generation stage. This person can be on the completion stage. 
Moreover those who attain this level need not distinguish meditative sessions from post-sessions, for such practitioners are permitted to perform a single self-generation for each day. Having generated such a realization of themselves as the deity, they do not need to perform the self-generation again.
A practitioner who is on the first two levels, either on the level of a beginner or on the level of those who have attained some pristine wisdom need to distinguish between the meditative sessions and the post-meditative sessions. This is because for beginners they have to meditate on the coarse deities slowly and in stages. They are not able to do it instantly. 
For those on the 2nd level, they need to generate clear stable appearance of the subtle deities; the deities of the sense basis in stages. Therefore, they do need to have these meditative sessions separate from post-sessions. For example, they need to meditate in four sessions every day. However, once one has reached the 3rd stage, those who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom, then there is no such need. 
Previously, one has to meditate on the sadhana with some difficulty in order to cause the various visualizations to appear clearly. However, once one has reached the 3rd stage, then simply by thinking instantly, in this very short time, then the entire mandala and all the deities appear clearly. There is no need to reflect on this over many times. So just once and then in this short instant of time, everything appears clearly. Once one has reached this stage, then there is no hardship no matter how many initiations one receives and how much recitations one has to do. So having generated such a realization of self as a deity, one does not need to perform the self-generation again. 
Therefore Mantric Stages states:
You do not complete the stage of generation merely by reaching this point. You must complete the stage of generation first and then meditate on the stage of completion.
After having completed the generation stage, then you can go on to meditate on the completion stage. 
4. Those attaining perfect control over pristine wisdom
It is said that some who attain partial control over pristine wisdom are on the completion stage while those who attain perfect control over pristine wisdom reside on the higher levels of the completion stage.
As I mentioned earlier, those on the 3rd stage who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom can belong to either the generation stage or the completion stage. 
What is stated here is that:
there are some who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom who are on the completion stage, 
those on the 4th level who have attained perfect control of pristine wisdom, they reside on the higher levels of the completion stage. 
What is considered the higher levels of the completion stage? 
As I mentioned earlier, in the completion stage:
first you have the isolation of body,
then isolation of speech, 
then isolation of mind, 
illusory body, 
clear light and 
union. 
The higher level of completion stage refers to:
having completed the final isolation of mind of the example clear light, then you have attained impure illusory body. 
This 4th stage is attained upon attaining the impure illusory body. 
So this means that those who are on the 3rd stage who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom can belong to the isolation of body, isolation of speech and isolation of mind. 
To reach this higher stage of impure illusory body, then they would have to have attained perfect control over pristine wisdom. 
There are some explanations that say that it is possible for this person who has attained perfect control over pristine wisdom to reside on the isolation of mind. However, this is not the widely accepted explanation. 
We have gone through the four levels of practitioners:
they are the beginners,
those who have attained some pristine wisdom, 
those who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom and 
those who have attained perfect control over pristine wisdom. 
When one reaches the 3rd stage and has become one who has attained partial control over pristine wisdom, one is said to have attained stability in the coarse generation stage. Because at the 3rd stage, one is able to instantly generate clear stable appearance of the entire mandala of the coarse and subtle deities. So upon attaining this 3rd of the four levels, one is said to have attained stability in the coarse generation stage. 
At the 3rd stage then one has this ability able to just instantly in the short period of time generate all the aspects of the mandala - the supporting and supported mandala - clearly. This is said to be having attained stability in the coarse generation stage. 
According to Khedrup Je, there is a slight difference between having attained stability in the coarse generation stage and having culminated or completed the coarse generation stage. For some masters, these two are the same. However, for Khedrup Je, there is a slight difference between having attained stability in the coarse generation stage and having completed or culminated this stability in the coarse generation stage. 
On the 3rd level having attained partial control over pristine wisdom, one is able to generate all the coarse visualizations instantly. On top of that, even the subtle deities can all be generated clearly in a very short period of time. In addition, this person is able to just perform a single self-generation each day. It is said that this meditation can be maintained for 4 hours. 
For a single day of 24 hours, this person is able to maintain the meditation for 1/6 of a day. Since there are 24 hours in a day, 1/6 of 24 hours would be 4 hours (1/6 x 24 hours = 4 hours). So having attained that, then one is said to have attained stability in the coarse generation stage. 
If one is able to remain on this meditation on the mandala for a month, even up to a year, then one is said to have completed or culminated the practice. 
So stability is attained when one is able to maintain this focus on the mandala for 4 hours. 
If one can maintain this focus on the mandala for a month or up to a year then one has completed the coarse generation stage. 
Up to this point, it is the coarse generation stage. After this, then one moves on to the subtle generation stage. 
On the subtle generation stage, one generates bliss and places the entire mandala - the supporting and supported mandala - within a subtle drop the size of a mustard seed and meditates on it. One visualizes the entire supporting and supported mandalas within the subtle drop the size of a mustard seed on the subtle generation stage. 
If one is able to cause this visualization to appear clearly in a very short instant of time and to maintain that for 1/6 of a day, meaning 4 hours, then one is said to have attained stability in the subtle generation stage. 
If one is able to meditate in this way for up to a month or even a year, then one is said to have culminated or completed the subtle generation stage. So there is a distinction made between attaining stability in the subtle generation stage and having culminated the subtle generation stage. 
Student1: Having completed the subtle generation stage, then one moves on to the completion stage?
Khen Rinpoche: After having completed the subtle generation stage, then you will move on to meditate on the completion stage. You would meditate so that you can cause the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. 
Student1: If the generation stage and completion stage of HYT is applied to the five paths:
the generation stage would be HYT Path of Accumulation and 
the completion stage would be the HYT Path of Preparation onwards
Is that correct to say?
Khen Rinpoche: I think it should be roughly like that. The generation stage is cultivated on the Path of Accumulation. It seems like the rest of the five paths would correlate with the completion stage. But I cannot remember exactly in a very clear way. 
Khen Rinpoche: I think last time I give one chart.
Student1: It is stated like that. 
Khen Rinpoche: Stated like that then must be like that. 
Student1: When you first attained the completion stage, do you also attain the union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: The answer is probably not. This is because in order to attain the completion stage, it is not necessary for one to have attained the union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness. The reason is that it is said that it is possible for someone to meditate on the Cittamatra (MOS) view or Svatantrika (AMWS) view practice the generation stage and enter the completion stage. This means that such a person would not have attained the union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness. Therefore, it is not necessary for someone who has attained completion stage to have attained the union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness. What it boils down to is that you don’t need a realization of emptiness to attain the completion stage. The realization of emptiness is not required on the isolation of body, isolation of speech and isolation of mind. It is very clearly said that in the text that those who hold the view of MOS and the AMWS can attain the completion stage. Having practiced the generation stage and having culminated that then one can move on to the practice of the completion stage. One then can cause the winds to enter, abide and dissolve into the central channel. At that point, one can cause the exalted wisdom or the pristine wisdom of white appearance to arise. Tantra has some uncommon techniques. For example, in the sutra system, there is explanation of using the nine mental abiding or the nine mental states to achieve calm abiding (samantha). In the tantra system, there is a subtler way to achieve calm abiding and there is uncommon technique of achieving that. In fact, this point will come up later in the text. At which point is the calm abiding achieved? It is explained that it is attained on the 3rd of the 4 levels, those who have attained partial control of a pristine wisdom have attained calm abiding. 
Having completed the coarse generation stage, you will go on to meditate on the subtle drop. It is said that through doing that then you will definitely achieving calm abiding. The details will come later on but in brief after having completed the coarse generation stage then you meditate on this subtler drop you achieve calm abiding and you can also achieve special insight. 
It is stated in this grounds and paths of tantra composed by Yangchen Gawai Lodrö that when you attains stability in the subtle generation stage then you would attain also calm abiding. However, in this text by Ngawang Palden, it seems like he is saying even before you attain the stability in the subtle generation stage, you can attain calm abiding. 
According to Ngawang Palden’s explanation, those who have attained the 3rd stage, those who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom, can attain the calm abiding.
Student 3: In the meditative session and the post-session, the quality of the mind is the same. So this means that the collection of merits and exalted wisdom is the same whether one is in meditative session or post-session. 
Khen Rinpoche: This is saying that prior to the 3rd level, having attained partial control of the pristine wisdom, one has to meditate, for example, in 4 sessions. One has to make the effort to sustain this yoga by meditating on the sadhana. There is this difference between meditative session and post meditative session. But once you reached the 3rd stage then there is no need to rely on the sadhana to meditate because simply by thinking about the mandala, you can cause all the coarse and subtle aspects to appear clearly. So there is no need to meditate on the sadhana specifically. 
In the sutra system, there is explanation that during the session of meditative equipoise, you accumulate wisdom. After that during post-meditation (subsequent attainment), you accumulate merits. However, this explanation does not apply in the tantra system. 
In the tantra system, you cultivate the clear appearance of being the deity and also cultivate divine pride. The whole mandala appears clearly to you and you also cultivate divine pride. What it means is that you accumulate merits and wisdom at the same time. There was no need to separate the two accumulations. 
Now the accumulation of merits is mainly for the attainment of Buddha’s form body (rupakaya).This is true whether in sutra or tantra. In the context of tantra, one meditates on the deity’s body during the generation stage and one cultivates clear appearance and divine pride. This is the means of accumulating merits in the tantra system. Once you reached the 3rd stage then there is no distinction between meditation session and post-meditative session. Therefore, the question of whether or not one accumulates merits becomes irrelevant.
Student 3: Is somebody on the 3rd stage would have necessarily attained calm abiding?
Khen Rinpoche: It is not necessary a person who is on the 3rd stage has calm abiding. What I was saying just now was that such a person having attained the 3rd stage will go on to cultivate calm abiding and special insight. At the beginning, upon attaining the 3rd stage, this person does not need to have calm abiding yet.
Student 3: In the sutra explanation, when one attained the Path of Accumulation, one has attained calm abiding. In the tantra system, the Path of Accumulation correlates with the generation stage. Does it mean that a person on the generation stage already has calm abiding?
Khen Rinpoche: You need to think about it. So, the question that you have to ask yourself is, when we talk about these 4 levels of practitioners, the beginner and so forth, have they entered the generation stage? Do they have a generation stage path in their continuum? 
If you look at the definition of the generation stage and you check if the levels of the practitioners, probably you have to say that even the beginners on the 1st stage and those attaining some pristine wisdom on the 2nd level have attained the generation stage. Meaning they have some generation stage’s path in their continuum. 
By checking the definition, can conclude that the 1st level beginners, and the 2nd level, those who have attained some pristine wisdom are on the generation stage. In their continuum, there are generation stage path. 
Beings on the generation stage, they are on the Path of Accumulation of tantra. However, they do not need to have calm abiding yet. 
Whether or not you can say that someone on the generation stage has attained the calm abiding described in the sutra’s system, it is something that needs to be examine. In the sutra system, they talk about calm abiding being the attainment having passed through the nine mental abiding, having eliminated laxity and excitement and so on. So, it seems like this is only attainment like after having attained the 3rd level of the 4 levels of practitioners. Perhaps, there is this uncommon presentation of calm abiding in tantra that is not the same as in the sutra system. 
In the teaching of Guntang Rinpoche, he says that the calm abiding in the sutra system is only able to stop coarse conceptualization. The calm abiding described in the sutra system is not able to stop the subtle conceptualization. This means that when we talk about the attainment of calm abiding in tantra , for example by the practitioner on the 3rd level, this means that, that calm abiding is an extraordinary, powerful calm abiding. This is because such a calm abiding is able to stop the subtle dualistic appearances. This means that this calm abiding that is talked about in tantra is different from the calm abiding in the sutra system. 
Guntang Rinpoche clearly talked about the power of calm abiding that is achieved through the tantric technique. It has this special power to stop the subtle dualistic appearances that the calm abiding that is achieved through the sutra technique does not have. On the 1st and 2nd of the 4 levels, on the levels of the beginners and those who have attained some pristine wisdom, one is able to focus on the deity’s body and place one’s mind on it. This means that for sure one has overcome coarse laxity. However, this is not the attainment of the tantric calm abiding yet. What it means is, the sutra criteria of calm abiding are not the same as that of the tantra criteria.
Student 3: According to this definition about the generation stage, there is no mentioned of uncontrived bodhicitta and also the person who has attained generation stage doesn’t have to have the calm abiding that is described in the sutra system. Does it mean that the person can attain the generation stage without uncontrived bodhicitta?
Khen Rinpoche: It seems like this uncontrived bodhicitta is a necessary condition. In order to enter this tantric Path of Accumulation, you need uncontrived bodhicitta. That means that someone who is on the generation stage definitely should have uncontrived bodhicitta. 
In order to have entered the tantric path then you definitely must have entered a generation stage path. This means that you must have generated tantric Path of Accumulation. That means that you must have generated uncontrived bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: Something like that. I am not sure so we can discuss next Saturday. 
Next week, we will read the part of the text that talks about when calm abiding is attained. If you have time, please read ahead even though you may not be able to understand everything. If you have read the text before you come to class, it will be helpful. It will be easier for you to understand the explanations.