Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L58.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:20.856475
================================================================================

We have arrived in the section of the text where we are discussing the generation stage. 
There are two types of generation stage:
The coarse generation stage 
The subtle generation stage
We also have discussed the four levels of practitioners of the generation stage and the completion stage.
The first of these four levels of practitioner is the beginners. As explained:
The beginner is someone who is beginning to train in the tantra.  
This beginner will slowly read the self-generation sadhana, and then try to contemplate what is stated in the sadhana and meditates. 
In accordance with the stages of the sadhana, this practitioner tries to meditate and from time to time cultivates clear appearance and divine pride.
Such a practitioner meditates according to what is stated in the sadhana without any addition or omission. 
Through such a practice, eventually the practitioner will be able to get an uncontrived experience. This means that at any time this practitioner meditates on the sadhana is able to give rise to this uncontrived experience. When this occurs, this practitioner is said to have entered the path of the generation stage, i.e. this person has become the person of the generation stage.
Such a practitioner meditates on the coarse aspects of the supported and supporting mandala and tries to see the mandala clearly. 
Sometimes the practitioner can give rise to the divine pride in an uncontrived way. 
Through such practice, eventually this practitioner will be able to enter the path of the generation stage and become the person of the generation stage.
Such a description is found in the explanation of Yangchen Gawai Lodrö as well as Kirti Losang Trinle. By doing such a practice, the person will become a person of the generation stage.
A person who is at the stage of the beginner trains in clear appearance and tries to cultivate divine pride.  This is because the main objects of abandonment of the generation stage are:
the appearance of ordinariness and 
the adherence to ordinariness
So by cultivating clear appearance and divine pride then such practitioner wants to abandon these two objects of abandonment.
In the Yamantaka’s Vajrabhairava generation stage, in the commentary of Aku Sherab Gyatso, he talks about how by meditating on the supporting and supported mandala, one will be able to give rise to this clear and stable appearance of the mandala.  By generating the uncontrived experience of this, one becomes a person of the generation stage. 
According to Aku Sherab Gyatso, you will need to attain such a stage of becoming a person of the generation stage upon attaining the 2nd stage, upon having attained some pristine wisdom.  But according to some other scholars, on the 1st stage, the stage of beginner, you already able to eventually attain this attainment called a person of the generation stage.
The formal explanation is better. This means that the explanation given by Yangchen Gawai Lodrö and Kirti Losang Trinle of when this attainment of generation stage i.e. becoming of a person of generation stage is attained.  When you are able to generate clear appearance and divine pride in an uncontrived experience, then you become a person of the generation stage.  
If you read the description given by Ngawang Palden (middle of page 109), he talks about how all practitioner from those first meditating on the generation stage up to including and so on and so forth, he then set the basis for being included the level called the beginner.  Slightly before that he talks about the four types of practitioners (bottom of page 108):
Reply: There are four types of practitioners differentiated according to when the path is generated in their mental continua:
1. Beginners
2. Those attaining some pristine wisdom
3. Those attaining partial control over pristine wisdom
4. Those attaining perfect control over pristine wisdom
This expression is according to when the path is generated in their mental continuum. This means that even at the level of this beginner, we can talk about the path having been generated in their mental continuum. So it is better to posit this path having been generated during the level of the beginner, the 1st stage, rather than the 2nd level, those have attained some pristine wisdom.
Khen Rinpoche: You understand what I am talking or have no idea on what I am talking?  
As we have explained in the previous class that the beginner is a certain type of practitioner. This means that when we mention beginner, you have to know what this person refer to.
A beginner will read the sadhana slowly and try to meditate on the sadhana from beginning to end. The practitioner tries to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride in a gradual way.
So by cultivating this practice in this way, eventually this person will be able to have uncontrived experience, and without much effort this practitioner is able to mediate on the sadhana.  When this uncontrived experience arises this person is said to have entered the generation stage. So this is the initial realization of the generation stage.
That is an explanation by Yangchen Gawai Lodrö and Kirti Losang Trinle. But there is another explanation by other scholars. They say:
Simply having that experience is not sufficient for you to be considered as someone who has entered the tantric path.  In order to be considered as such a person, you should have attained the 2nd level, the level of having attained some pristine wisdom.
According to the later explanation, you cultivate clear appearance and divine pride, and you are able to cause this clear stable appearance of the mandala and so on to arise at a short instant of a finger snap. So without hardship, you are able to cause this to happen. It is at this stage that you are considered to have entered the tantric path. It is at this stage that you are considered to have initially generated the generation stage of realization.  
You need to know that there these two different explanations offered by different scholars.
In brief, 
There is one explanation that says you can become a person of a generation stage on the 1st level 
In the 2nd explanation, you only become a person of the generation stage at the 2nd level, the level of having attained some pristine wisdom.
Perhaps it is better to adopt the first of the two explanations. The reason being that when these four divisions of practitioners are spoken about, it is said that they are differentiated according to when the path is generated in their mental continuum as pointed out just now. This means these four levels of practitioners correspond to the occasion when the path is generated in their mental continuum. For that reason, it seems to be better to adopt the first explanation.
Khen Rinpoche: OK?  Or no?  The point I am saying clear or not? If there is anything that is not clear, you can ask.  I think should be clear. I don’t understand why not clear?  
Student 1: According to the first explanation, there is a difference between:
generating the uncontrived experience of meditating on the coarse mandala and 
being able to generate the coarse mandala within a finger snap.  
Answer: They are different in the sense that according to the first explanation, during the level of beginner, you are able to meditate on the coarse mandala.  However, this is done in stages and you are not able to do it in a short instant of time. That means you are not on the 2nd level.  When you are on the 2nd level, you can generate this mandala in a short period of time.  On the 1st stage, you are not able to do that as you have to do this gradually.   So there are differences between these two.  
Khen Rinpoche: What is your question?
Student 1: The boundary.
Khen Rinpoche: Boundary of which one?
Student 1: The beginner's boundary. For the first explanation, you can say coarse generation stage where there is uncontrived appearance of the coarse mandala.  Before that you cannot call the person a beginner.  
Khen Rinpoche: Can be called a beginner, of course
Student 1: That means there are beginners...
Khen Rinpoche: It is possible for those beginners who have not enter the path 
Student 1: So they are included within these 4 types of practitioner?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student 1: So that means in the beginner's stage, they can be divided into these two:
Those who have not entered the generation stage 
Those who have entered the generation stage.
Khen Rinpoche: You can do that.
Student 1: How long does those it takes for the beginner to generate uncontrived visualization of a coarse mandala? I am just trying to figure out whether there is a difference between generating uncontrived visualization of the coarse mandala and doing it within a finger snap.   
Khen Rinpoche: At the 1st level is gradually
Student1: How long does it take to generate uncontrived visualization of a coarse mandala?
Khen Rinpoche: I have no idea of how long it takes 
Student 1: As for the 2nd explanation, the uncontrived appearance of the coarse mandala and having it generates within a finger snap is simultaneous.   
Khen Rinpoche: Not necessary
Answer: You first have a contrived experience. Then afterward you can have an uncontrived experience.  It is not possible to generate an uncontrived experience from the very beginning. 
Student 1: Whether those beginners before they generate uncontrived, they necessary have to do all the preliminaries. When they generate uncontrived appearance of the coarse mandala, renunciation, bodhicitta excluding emptiness and including the appearance of the coarse mandala, all come simultaneously. Uncontrived means there is uncontrived renunciation, uncontrived bodhicitta and uncontrived appearance of the course mandala.  They come simultaneously.   
Answer: You can say that if this person is definite in the tantric lineage, meaning this person has not entered any path before, and before that this person has been training in the common path. When this person enters the tantric path, at the same time renunciation and bodhicitta are also attained. 
Student 1: The difficulty with that is you have the practices of the lower tantra, which the person who  enters the higher tantra from the onset who have to master, that means visualization of the action tantra, performance tantra,  and yoga tantra, which are considered as preliminary practices for the person who has entered highest tantra from the onset.  Would that be correct to say?
Translator: Are you saying that a person who is training in highest yoga tantra must be preceded by training in the lower tantras?  
Student 1: This is the difficult part because you enter it from onset yet you still need to do all these as a preliminary.
Khen Rinpoche: No need because there is such a person who is definite in the lineage of highest yoga tantra and this person does not need to go through the three lower tantras first. 
Student 1: That is what I understand. Would he be able to uphold and teach the lower tantras upon generating this uncontrived coarse mandala?  Because one of the 19 vows of Amitabha, a person necessarily needs to uphold the three vehicles together with the lower tantras.  In other words, he needs to know all of them.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. Can teach to others. 
Student 1:  I was wondering whether the uncontrived stage of generating the appearances, and Khen Rinpoche already said that one does not necessarily need to realize emptiness before entering the generation stage. Is that definitive or need interpretation?  
Khen Rinpoche: That is definitive.
Student 1: I find it difficult for someone who enters it without the realization of emptiness does not give up the path.  I mean there is a possibility of the person giving up the path but then we were taught that once we entered the path, we will not lose the path.
Translator: It is hard to understand that somebody can enter the tantric path without a realization of emptiness.
Student 1: Reconcile it with the statement that you will not lose the path once you achieved that.
Khen Rinpoche: In the sutra system, there is an explanation that it is possible to fall away from the path after you have entered it.  However, I am not sure about tantra. It also seems that it is possible.  I have not seen a specific explanation in the text.  Perhaps it is also possible to enter the tantric path and then degenerate and fall away.  It is very clear from the text that you don’t need a realization of emptiness to enter the generation stage.  Many texts clearly explain that one can enter the generation stage holding the view of MOS or AMWS.  So realization of emptiness is not needed for one to enter the generation stage or enter the tantric path.
Translator: I just try to clarify exactly what is the criterion for having entered the generation stage path.  Khen Rinpoche gave two explanations:
According to the first explanation, the criterion for someone having entered the generation stage path is having this uncontrived experience i.e. having trained in clear appearance and divine pride meditating on this coarse mandala. First generate a contrived experience and then moving on eventually attaining the uncontrived experience.  Once the person is able to do that then this person has entered the generation stage path.  
According to the second explanation, this is not sufficient because this person has to do so within a short period of time.  According to the second explanation, you need to meditate the coarse mandala, clear appearance, and divine pride. First generating the contrived experience and then later generating the uncontrived experience, being able to do this within a short instant of time. Only then you are considered to have entered a generation stage path. 
Khen Rinpoche: Still they are not clear? I think should be clear. I don’t know why you are confused?
The main difference between those two explanations: 
According to the 1st explanation, you are able to do this slowly or gradually and then you get the uncontrived experience. Then you are considered to have entered the tantric path or have initially attained the generation stage realization.
According to the 2nd explanation, if you get this uncontrived experience slowly or gradually, it is not good enough. You need to be able to get at this uncontrived experience in the short instance of time like in a finger snap then you are considered to have entered the tantric path i.e. considered to get the initial realization of the generation stage.
You have to understand exactly what these two levels are:
What is the level of the beginner? 
What is the level of those who have attained some pristine wisdom? 
You have to hold this in your mind. If you understand what those two are, then this explanation of the generation of the uncontrived experience should not confuse you. 
Student 2: For the case of Yamantaka practice, when you say generating yourself as a deity, does it include generating yourself the subtle deities like the eye sense into Kṣitigarbha, ear sense into Vajrapani?
Khen Rinpoche: Last class you are not here? You were here last class? You are not here, then different. 
Answer: On the 1st stage, the stage of the beginner, you are able to meditate on the entire mandala gradually and cause it to appear clearly. So you have clear appearance and sometimes you have divine pride. 
On the 2nd level, the level of those who have attained some pristine wisdom, you are able to cause the entire mandala to also appear clearly - you have clear appearance and divine pride. This takes place in an instant. You are able to do this in a very short instant of time. 
When you reach the 3rd level, the level of those who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom, not only are you able to have the visualization of the coarse mandala, you are also able to generate clear stable appearance of the subtle deities of the sense sources or of the sense bases e.g. Kṣitigarbha at the eye sense power and so on. You are able to do so instantly in this very short period of time. 
This means that on the 2nd level you are not yet able to cause this clear appearance and uncontrived divine pride of the deities of the sense bases to arise instantly. However, you are able to do that on the 3rd level i.e. in order to be able to do that, you have to be on the 3rd level. At this 3rd level, the person can exist on the generation stage or the completion stage. This person on the 3rd level does not necessarily have to be on the generation stage. 
At the 4th level, those who have attained perfect control over pristine wisdom, they only exist on the high levels of the completion stage. It is said that they need to have attained the impure illusory body. What this means is that a person attained the high levels of the completion stage will eventually attain the 4th level, the level of those who have attained perfect control over pristine wisdom.
On the 3rd level not only are you able to generate stable clear appearance of the coarse deity, you are also able to generate stable clear appearance of the subtle deity in a very short instant. When you are able to do this, focusing on 4 hours, then you are said to attain stability in the subtle generation stage. 
When you are able to this for a month, a year and so on, then you are said to have completed the subtle generation stage. This is explained by Yangchen Gawai Lodrö.
Having completed the coarse generation stage, then one will move on to cultivate the subtle generation stage. So then there are these two levels of the generation stage:
Coarse 
Subtle
After having completed the coarse one then you will move on to cultivate the subtle stage. 
In the meditation on these deities, if you are able to meditate not only just on the coarse deities but also the subtle deities, having this stable clear appearance for years, months, and in an instant a short period of time. Then you are said to have completed the subtle generation stage. 
Now taking the example of Yamantaka or Vajrabhairava, you meditate at your navel within this subtle drop or minute drop the entire supporting and supported mandala. If you can meditate the entire supporting and supported mandala inside this small drop, the size of a mustard seed, instantly which means in a short instant of time, and if you are able to do that with a stable clear appearance for 4 hours then you are said to have attained stability in the subtle generation stage. 
If you are able to meditate in this way for a month, a year and so on, you are said to have completed the subtle generation stage. 
So there is this explanation of four levels of practitioners and these are clearly explained in the text. 
Khen Rinpoche: That is just the review from the last class
4. Those attaining perfect control over pristine wisdom
It is said that some who attain partial control over pristine wisdom are on the completion stage while those who attain perfect control over pristine wisdom reside on the higher levels of the completion stage.
Abandoning ordinary appearance and conception
The specific objects to be abandoned on the generation stage are ordinary appearance and conception.
Ordinary appearance is not the appearance of the environment and its inhabitants to sense awareness but rather the ordinary appearance of the environment and its inhabitants to mental awareness. 
What are the uncommon objects of abandonment of the generation stage? They are:
the appearance of ordinariness and
 the adherence to ordinariness. 
This ordinary appearance or the appearance of ordinariness, does it appear to the sense consciousness or mental consciousness? 
It does not appear to the sense consciousness. It is said the appearance of ordinariness appears to the mental consciousness. 
This ordinary appearance or appearance of ordinariness is an object of abandonment in the generation stage. What is the antidote? 
The antidote to this ordinary appearance is the pure appearance of the supporting maṇḍala and supported deities. 
One meditates on the supporting and supported mandala using one’s mental consciousness:
One meditates on the mandala as mentioned: ‘this is the actual celestial mansion’ 
One meditates on the deities and thinks ‘this is the actual deity’
Such meditation is not performed by a sense consciousness. By meditating with the mental consciousness, eventually such an ordinary appearance will be replaced by this appearance of the pure supporting mandala and supported deities. 
The antidote to the conception of objects as ordinary is meditating on the pride of the pure supported deity and its supporting maṇḍala.
When there is appearance of ordinariness to the mental consciousness then the mental consciousness can adhere to this appearance of ordinariness. The antidote to this adherence to ordinariness is meditating on divine pride. So this means that one meditates thinking: I am the actual mandala. I am the actual deity. 
Further, it is stated that divine pride is the main practice and meditation on appearance is a secondary branch
First when one meditates, one meditates so that the supporting and supported mandala can appear clearly. Then afterwards, one cultivates divine pride. So this cultivation of divine pride is the main practice. 
As mentioned earlier, there are these four types of practitioners and are differentiated according to when the path is generated in their mental continuum. Starting from the stage of a beginner, one meditates gradually. One tries to generate clear appearance and divine pride, and also one has to combine the view of emptiness. If one can have this combination of the three:
clear appearance, 
divine pride 
the view of emptiness 
then one has the antidotes:
to the appearance of ordinariness 
to the adherence to ordinariness and 
the conception of true existence
In this way one meditates on the generation stage. 
How ordinary appearance is stopped
When equipoise in deity yoga is cultivated intently, other appearing objects do not affect eye awareness and so on, for it is said:
Consciousness that is attracted to something lacks the ability to apprehend other objects
Thus, when mental awareness strongly engages its object, the capacity of the immediate condition to generate eye awareness and so on degenerates. For a time sense awareness may not be generated, but the generation stage does not stop appearance to sense awareness.
On the generation stage, one meditates on the deity yoga. When such meditation is cultivated intently then basically there is this appearance to the mental consciousness. 
The mental consciousness is meditating. During such a stage, the eye consciousness does not manifest i.e.it is not operating; it does not do any work. Since this eye consciousness is not manifest then there is no appearance of ordinariness to the sense consciousness. 
In order to have a sense consciousness, this uncommon immediate condition is necessary. However, when the mental consciousness is strongly engaged in its object, is involved in equipoise and deity yoga intently, then the capacity of this immediate condition to generate an eye consciousness will degenerate. This means that there is no generation of eye consciousness. This means that there is no ordinary appearance to the sense consciousness. There is just this appearance that appears to the mental consciousness that is meditating on the deity yoga. 
Mantric Stages states:
Therefore, your purpose is accomplished when you obtain the capacity to stop ordinary appearance to mental awareness through causing exalted objects to appear. Though functional phenomena do not transform into deities, you accomplish your purpose when uncontrived divine pride is generated.
On the generation stage, you meditate on the mandala with your mental consciousness. This mandala appears clearly to your mental consciousness. When this happens, there is no ordinary appearance appearing to the consciousness. On top of that, you also cultivate divine pride thinking “I am the actual mandala. I am the actual deity”. By cultivating divine pride you are able to stop the conception of ordinariness or the adherence to ordinariness. In this way, you meditate on the generation stage. But it is not the case the functional phenomena turn into deities. So you accomplish your purpose when you are able to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride to stop the ordinary appearance and ordinary conception.
The main point here is that you meditate on yourself as deity, you generate yourself as the deity and you meditate with your mental consciousness.
When you have this clear appearance of yourself as the deity, then you are able to stop the appearance of ordinariness. 
When you cultivate divine pride thinking “I am the resultant deity. I am this body at the resultant time”, then you are able to stop this adherence to ordinariness or conception of ordinariness. 
When you are able to do this, it does not mean that you have become the deity. You have not become the deity. That is alright. There is no problem. The main point is that you are able to stop the two objects of abandonment: the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. 
Analytical and placement meditation
When meditating on clear appearance from among both clear appearance and divine pride, analytical meditation predominates since you need to practice analysis by frequently visualizing the various aspects of the supported deities and the supporting maṇḍala. After establishing clarity on those aspects, you practice both since you must generate divine pride thinking: “I am actually this deity.”
When you meditate on the mandala you have to focus on this pure supporting and supported mandala with your mental consciousness. You use analytical meditation to generate a clear appearance because you have to analyze how does the mandala looks, what are the deities, what are the colors of the deities, how many hands there are and so on. Through such analytical meditation you cause the supporting and supported mandala to appear more and more clearly. Therefore, analytical meditation predominates. 
By performing this meditation again and again in a stable way, then eventually you are able to cause the supporting and supported mandala to appear clearly. After you have caused the supporting and supported mandala to appear clearly, then you cultivate divine pride thinking ‘I am the actual mandala. I am the actual deities’. At this point what you are doing is placement meditation. There isn’t this previous analytical meditation going on. 
You place your mind on this thought ‘I am the actual mandala’. In this way you have to practice both analytical meditation and placement meditation. 
We have mentioned the uncommon objects of abandonment of the generation stage:
the appearances of ordinariness 
the adherence to ordinariness. 
There is a discussion of these two objects of abandonment. It is said that the appearance of ordinariness or ordinary appearance is knowledge obscuration (obscuration to omniscience), whereas the adherence to ordinariness, or the conception of ordinariness, is the afflictive obscuration of tantra.
The afflictive obscuration of tantra is posited as the adherence to ordinariness (the conception of ordinariness). 
The knowledge obscuration (obscuration to knowledge) of tantra is posited as the appearance of ordinariness. 
First the adherence to ordinariness is abandoned. Afterwards, the appearance of ordinariness is abandoned.
You can know this is parallel with the explanation of the Prasangika school (CMWS) in which it is said that:
the afflictive obscuration is the conception of true existence 
the appearance of true existence is an knowledge obscuration 
When we circle in samsara, the main cause of our circling in cyclic existence is not the appearance but rather it is our adherence that causes hatred, attachment and so on. That is our main cause of our circling in samsara. 
This is something you have to think about:
what is this appearance of ordinariness?
what is the adherence to ordinariness?
Are they the objects of abandonment? What are they?
Khen Rinpoche: Question - what are they? What does it means by ordinary appearance. What does that mean? Why are they objects of abandonment?
Ordinary beings have ordinary appearance. There is no need to abandon it, right? 
So we are ordinary beings and we have ordinary adherence. This means it is actually very agreeable. Why should it be a wrong consciousness? Why should they be abandoned? 
It should be a correct mind for them to be adherence to ordinariness, it is a factually concordant mind, and it is not a wrong consciousness. Since it is correct and since it is factually concordant, then there is no need to abandon it, and there is no need to get rid of it. 
Student 3:  Actually I do have this problem, because even if you do talk about divine appearance, I can make divine appearance looks very ordinary. 
Khen Rinpoche: What? Divine pride ordinary? 
Student 3: Appearances look very ordinary. 
Khen Rinpoche : Believe yourself as ordinary, so?
Student 3: I look like Tara but very ordinary. Before I come to Tibetan Buddhism, I only know how a Buddha looks like. It is only coming to Tibetan Buddhism then I know Buddha can be green color. Sometimes I really wonder: How do you know Buddha really looks like that? What makes it divine? 
Translator: How do you know, there is is Green Tara? What so divine about it? 
Khen Rinpoche: What? After a while you looked at Yamantaka not wrathful?
Student: No
Khen Rinpoche: Must be you like him. 
Student: How to differentiate ordinary being and divine being?  In essence, seriously we have no idea how a Buddha is? What is enlightenment? What is pure happiness with absence of suffering and with absence of obscuration? I do not know what that is? To say I am there, it is difficult to fathom. I can only guess what it would be like and try to be there. 
Answer: In order know what the Buddha really is, it is necessary to study the dharma. First, we have to study the Four Noble Truths. In order to have an introduction to Four Noble Truths, we need an introduction to the three objects of refuge. To understand the Four Noble Truths, you have to understand true suffering. You have to understand where the true suffering comes from. The origins are the karma and afflictions. Then you have to understand that there is a powerful antidote that can counteract the origins of suffering. It is on the bases of these that you can appreciate the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha.  That requires introduction to these topics.
It is not easy to really understand what these are. For example, we have to study the four tenets systems. The Vabhashika simply posit things based on what they can see. For example, they said that the body of the Buddha is not Buddha because the body is true suffering. However, the Buddha is posited mainly in terms of the mind, and the mind that has overcome all the afflictions, all the faults and so on. So the Buddha is not the body.
Even with respect to the enlightenment or the attainment of Buddhahood of Shakyamuni Buddha, the Hinayana tenets and the Mahayana tenets have different explanation. According to the Hinayana tenets, the Buddha newly attains enlightenment at Bodhgaya. According to the Mahayana tenet, the Buddha had become enlightened a long time ago. He was simply displaying the 12 deeds at Bodhgaya in India. It wasn’t the case that he newly attains enlightenment then.
In the Mahayana tenets, we have this explanation of the Buddha displaying the 12 deeds long after he had attained enlightenment. The dharma body that he attained, dharmakaya, is the empowering condition for the two form bodies:
the enjoyment body 
the emanation body
Mainly there is this dharmakaya in which the two obscurations had been exhaustibly abandoned. That gives rise to the enjoyment body and the emanation body.
In the Hinayana system, there is no such explanation. There is no talk of enjoyment body and the emanation body, dharmakaya and so on.
In the Mahayana tenets, you find the explanation of Buddha that is the nature of the four Buddha bodies. There is also the explanation of the union of body and mind. Wherever the mind of the Buddha pervades, the body of the Buddha also pervades. In tantra, you find very detailed good explanation of such a union of body and mind.
The body and mind of the Buddha is one entity. As I had mentioned previously, at the time of the cause, it is necessary to have the method and the wisdom inseparable in order to give rise to a Buddha body and mind that are one entity. 
In tantra, you can find techniques for practicing this method and wisdom inseparably within a single mind. Method and wisdom are one entity even at the time of the cause. This explanation cannot be found in sutra. It is found only in tantra.
If you think about this in the detailed manner, you have to be able to posit the potentials of the Buddha body, of the Buddha mind at the time of the bases in such a way that they are one entity. So we said that all sentient beings naturally have the potential for Buddhahood, for attaining the dharmakaya (dharma body) and the rupakaya (form body). This means that we have to be able to posit these potentials at the time of the bases in an inseparable way. In tantra, you find good explanation of what this is. So the very subtle wind and the very subtle mind exist as one entity. Here we are not talking about coarse wind or coarse mind, but the very subtle wind and the very subtle mind exist as one entity.
We have this potential to attain the Buddha body at the time of the bases. This means that these two potentials for the dharma body and the form body have to exist as a single entity. We said that all sentient beings have Buddha nature; all sentient beings have the naturally abiding lineage. We have this lineage that is suitable to transform into Buddha body. Such a lineage pervades all sentient beings. All sentient beings have it naturally. You have to think about these points.
We have to understand that at the time of the bases now, we already have the two potentials for attaining the two Buddha bodies - the dharma body and the form body - existing inseparable entity. 
During the generation stage, we engage in meditation through visualization or through imagination. 
On the completion stage, we are able to actually achieve this body and mind as we have meditated upon on the generation stage. When this very subtle wind arises as the deity body as an illusory body and the very subtle mind becomes the deity.
With that kind of attainment, then we will eventually attain learner’s union. After learner’s union, we have the attainment of the union of no-more-learning. This is a state of union of body and mind in which the two objects of abandonment have been overcome - the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. This is the state of Buddha. In tantra we find detailed explanation of how:
Wherever the mind of the Buddha pervades, the Buddha’s speech pervades. 
Wherever the Buddha’s speech pervades, the Buddha’s body pervades.
There is this explanation of union of Buddha body and mind in tantra. This explanation is not found in sutra. This explanation is not easy but you have to understand.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what I am talking here. So long talk after your question. An introduction of Buddha. You are asking about Buddha, yeah?
This is not easy at all. We say that the Buddha is omniscient, all knowing and his mind pervades all objects of knowledge. There is no nothing that is not known by Buddha. There is no place that is not pervaded by the Buddha’s mind. That being case, then we says that:
Whatever is pervaded by the Buddha’s mind is pervaded by the Buddha’s speech, 
Whatever is pervaded by the speech of the Buddha, pervaded by the mind of the Buddha
These points are not easy to understand.
Taking the example of our teacher, Shakyamuni Buddha, we have to ask: What are the powers after he had attained Buddhahood? Does he simply display one aspect? Or does he display many aspects? 
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? Always like that? When you see Buddha Shakyamuni, you only see like that - holds alm bowl, hand touches ground. Always like that? Or he can manifest many different forms? 
The Buddha displayed many deeds. The reason why he attained Buddhahood is so that he can perform the welfare of sentient beings. He became the Buddha for the sake of sentient beings. Now, since sentient beings are very varied in their dispositions, mentality and interest, he has to benefit them in accordance with their different disposition and so on. If he only displays one single aspect, he wouldn’t be able to benefit all these various sentient beings.
The Buddha has made different manifestation. But for us to be able to determine which is Buddha and which are not Buddha, this is difficult. We don’t know which is the Buddha, which are the manifestation of Buddha. This is difficult.
Regardless of which deity you practice; whether it is Tara or Yamantaka or some other deity, you practice a path first by engaging in the three principles of the path, and after that you enter the generation stage practice and you do all the practices of the generation stage. Indeed there are practitioners who through sincere practice obtained a vision of the deity. They engaged in purification of negative karma and accumulating merit and so on. They actually obtained a vision of the deity. However, it is hard for us to say whether this vision is true or not. The generation stage is very powerful. It is said that after you have practiced the subtle generation stage, you have achieved the high realization of generation stage, simply by thinking that there is a bridge over the river, a bridge will exist.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay? So you can walk.
It is all about the power of our mind. Our mind has immense power; tremendous power. Whether it is positive or negative, it has great power. Think about the fact that we have been suffering since beginningless time. Like over lifetimes and over eons. Now we are still suffering. As now, we are still ordinary beings. It is because of the mind. If we are able to practice the path, if we are able to practice generation stage, completion stage and so on, it is also the mind. It really boils down to the power of our own mind.
Indeed there are many accounts of how practitioners of generation stage are able to receive these pure visions of deities and so on. It is through the practice that they are able to receive these visions. For example, in the historical account of tantra, it is said that the Buddha Shakyamuni, when teaching tantra, displayed the aspect of having attachment with a consort. For example, in the Guhyasamaja Tantra, there is a description of how this King Indraputi came to receive teachings and so on. The Buddha did not take the aspect of a fully ordained monk like a bikhsu teaching the dharma. Rather he took on this aspect that is accompanied by attachment by having a consort to teach the tantra. The King Indraputi, had many queens. He requested the Buddha: “Please teach a path with attachment”. Buddha Shakyamuni took on the aspect with attachment arose from in the aspect of Guhyasamaja and taught tantra to this King.
In the Guhyasamaja tantra, that is taught and how it came about. This King was given instruction on how to meditate on the complete supporting and supported mandala. Those meditations are recorded in the sadhana and then pictures of Guhyasamaja deities are painted, the images are painted and so on. This is how the practice came about.
When we do the self-generation sadhana, we can recall the fact that this sadhana are composed or written by qualified teachers who have experience with the practice of the deity. So then they wrote this sadhana. By reading this sadhana, then we engage in the practice of the deity.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know whether I am answering you or not? Some ways.
It is not ready easy to introduce what a Buddha is. We say in Tibetan ‘Sangye’ so it is not so easy to introduce it.