Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L59.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:21.020884
================================================================================

The importance of calm abiding and insight
Also it is said that clear appearance is generated without your needing to first establish calm abiding focused on it, it is generated even if you do not become familiar with each deity in stages, and it is generated without your needing to become familiar with the meaning of reality
This passage is saying is that at the 1st level, the level of the beginners, you focus on the mandala, the deities and cultivate clear appearance and divine pride. This is saying that when you are able to do that, it is not necessary that you have achieved calm abiding. In other words, in order for you to achieve clear appearance and divine pride with respect to the deities, you do not have to previously have attained calm abiding.
Since I am providing commentary on the text, you need to have read the text.
Khen Rinpoche: Read the text? In the dream? 
The second phrase in the Tibetan text literally says “It is not that it will not be produced if you meditate on the deities one by one in stages”.
In the English translation, it not so literally says “It is generated even if you do not become familiar with each deity in stages” - this means that even if you do not become familiar with each deity in stages, clear appearance can be generated. 
The last part says “It is generated without your needing to become familiar with the meaning of reality” means that in order for you to give rise to clear appearance, it is not necessary that previously you have meditated on emptiness and become familiar with the meaning of reality. 
Essentially what this means is that on the 1st level, the level of the beginner, and on the 2nd level, the level of those who have attained some pristine wisdom, you cultivate this clear appearance and divine pride. 
So the main objects of abandonment of the generation stage are:
the appearances of ordinariness and
the adherence to ordinariness.
On the stages you will try to cultivate the antidotes which are divine pride and clear appearance. You will be able to attain clear appearance and divine pride. 
That attainment:
does not depend on you meditating on emptiness previously
does not depend on you having attained calm abiding previously.  
Indeed the mere frequent cultivation of attention focused on these aspects generates clear appearance, but it does not secure its stable abidance. You must secure stable abidance of clear appearance to stop ordinary appearance and conception.
The yoga of the subtle drop
Calm abiding is definitely established in the generation stage and achieved through the yoga of the subtle drop.
By focusing on the deities and so forth repeatedly using your mental consciousness, eventually those objects of observation will appear clearly to your mental consciousness. When you attained clear appearance in this way, it is not necessary that you have achieved stability. It is necessary for you to also attain the stability factor. If you do not have the stability factor, even though you have clear appearance, you will not be able to overcome the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness (conceptions of ordinariness). Therefore, you have to try to achieve a stable clear appearance. In order to do that, you must achieve calm abiding. 
How do you actually achieve this calm abiding if calm abiding is necessary on the generation stage? 
You have to achieve it through the yoga of the subtle drop. This explains that the object of observation has to be this subtle or minute drop. You will be able to achieve calm abiding during the 3rd level, the level of those who have attained some control over pristine wisdom.
Meditations involving the subtle drop and their purpose
Beginners and those attaining some pristine wisdom hold the mind on a subtle hand symbol or drop at the upper and lower opening. Those who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom and above meditate on the complete supporting maṇḍala and supported deities inside a hand symbol or subtle drop.
Further, those on the first two levels mainly engage in meditation on the subtle drop for the purpose of countering mental laxity and excitation in realization meditation
Translator: It should say when meditating on the sadhana
The yoga of the subtle drop involves the meditation of the entire supporting and supported mandala within the minute drop. Therefore, this is performed on the 3rd level and not before that. So this subtle yoga occurs during the 3rd level. The ability to meditate on the supporting and supported mandala within a subtle drop occurs on the 3rd level. On the first two levels, there is not such ability. 
What happens then on the first two levels?
“Beginners and those attaining some pristine wisdom hold the mind on a subtle hand symbol or drop at the upper and lower opening”:
The upper opening refers to the midpoint between your eyebrows
The lower opening refers to your secret place. 
In other words, those at the level of the beginners (1st level) and those attaining some pristine wisdom (2nd level) will focus their mind on this minute drop at either the centre between the eyebrows or the secret place.
It is said that establishing the stabilization of mind contracted to a subtle drop is achieved from the third level.	
Calm abiding is not established on the level of beginners. However, when they forcefully hold the mind on subtle letters, subtle drops, and so on at the upper or lower openings, the navel, or heart, this acts as a condition for the winds to gradually gather internally due to sustained meditation on the focal basis.
A unique method for developing concentration
Though the focal objects of analytical meditation are numerous or conflated, this system of establishing concentration is different from that explained in the Perfection Vehicle and the lower classes of tantra. In this system you can quickly stop mental excitation when meditating
on the supreme-conqueror maṇḍala and so on due to progressively taming the winds
Though you attain actual calm abiding in the Perfection Vehicle and the lower tantras, it is said that the component of stability declines if analysis is applied too strongly.
However, even before obtaining calm abiding in this system, you can attain stable abidance when analytical meditation cultivates and integrates numerous objects.
The range of the coarse and subtle generation stage
It is said that the coarse generation stage is completed when you reach the third level, and meditation on the subtle generation stage occurs after attaining mental stability through contracting the maṇḍala in drop yoga. It is said that calm abiding is obtained when you attain stability on the subtle drop at the upper opening.
In order for you to be able to understand this material, you must be able to retain in your mind the meaning of the four levels of practitioners. We have gone through these. On the generation stage and completion stage, we have these four levels of practitioners. What do these practitioners achieved? You must have some ideas in your mind roughly in order for you to understand the later material. Please retain that information in your mind. I will give some brief explanations. 
The coarse generation stage corresponds to the first two levels. The purpose of cultivation on these two levels is to achieve clear appearance and divine pride. In observing the mandala, one has to meditate again and again. 
The subtle generation stage is cultivated during the 3rd level. There you want to meditate on the deity within a very minute or subtle drop. This drop can be placed either at the upper opening or the lower opening. The upper opening is this point between your eyebrows. You place this drop there with the deity inside and you try to hold your mind on this very minute drop. The purpose of such cultivation is to attain stability. 
We meditate on the coarse and subtle generation stage. 
What is the purpose of doing so? What is the main purpose you want to achieve through meditating on the coarse generation stage and subtle generation stage?
The main purpose is to purify the basis of purification. One wants to purify ordinary death, intermediate state and rebirth.
Not only that, you meditate so that you be able to actually purify the ordinary death, intermediate state and rebirth. You have to do that by cultivating the path that brings death, intermediate state and rebirth as the three bodies. To do that, you have to generate the clear light, the example and actual clear light, the illusory body, the impure and pure illusory body and also the learner’s union. 
If you ask “Is that to the purpose of meditating on those stages?”
The answer is “No, because you also want to attain the three buddha bodies of the resultant time”.
So you want to be able to attain:
the resultant dharmakaya (the dharma body), 
the resultant sambhogakaya (complete enjoyment body) 
the resultant nirmanakaya (emanation body)
This means that there are actually many goals that you want to achieve through such meditation. There are many purposes of you doing these meditations.
Suppose you just cultivate the coarse and subtle generation stage and you do not meditate on the completion stage. Doing that you will not be able to attain the three buddha bodies, and you will not be able to attain the results of purification of the three buddha bodies.
To summarize:
the purpose of meditating on the coarse generation stages is so that you are able to create the conditions for giving rise to the three buddha bodies of the time of the path. 
By such meditation then you be able to ripen the three bodies of the resultant time. This means that by meditating on the coarse generation stage, you be able to meditate actually on the completion stage later on. 
By meditating on the three bodies at the time of the path, then you be able to achieve the three bodies of the resultant time.
The purposes of cultivating the generation stage can be described in so many ways. The main purpose is to overcome the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. 
How do you overcome the appearance of ordinariness? You cultivate clear appearance of being the deity. 
How do you overcome adherence to ordinariness (conception of ordinariness)? You cultivate divine pride.
Therefore, on the generation stage, during the first two levels, you cultivate the coarse generation stage.
You want to overcome ordinary appearance and ordinary conceptions. What you do? You cultivate clear appearance and divine pride on these two levels. 
One then goes on to try to cultivate the subtle generation stage. Previously, one focuses on a very tiny symbol, hand symbol or a hand implement. You meditate on this tiny symbol or implement at the upper or lower opening and then you focus your mind on that. On the first two levels, such meditation on the subtle drop is performed for the purpose of countering mental laxity and excitation (excitement). 
We need to ask “What is this ordinary appearance? What is the appearance of ordinariness?” This is something to think about. 
You appear in an ordinary way to yourself due to karma and afflictions. Mostly, when we appear to ourselves, it is due to our karma and afflictions. We appear ordinary. We appear in an ordinary way. This is posited as ordinary appearance. 
Due to your karma, you appear to your own mind in an ordinary way. This is ordinary appearance and it has to be overcome by meditating on the generation stage. 
Your form appears to your mental consciousness in an ordinary way. This ordinary appearance or the appearance of ordinariness has to be stopped. In its place, you have to generate a divine appearance.
Let’s say you are practising Yamantaka Vajrabhairava. In the place of that ordinary appearance, you want to generate the form or appearance of Yamantaka. You want to familiarize with that appearance of Yamantaka.
What is the ordinary conception (adherence to ordinariness)? 
When you appear in an ordinary way in your own mind, you appear to be bound by your karma and afflictions. You assent to these appearances and you hold yourself to be ordinary in the way you appear ordinary.
In order to overcome this adherence to ordinariness, you have to cultivate divine pride. 
In order to cultivate divine pride, you have to first stop this appearance of ordinariness.
Stopping that appearance of ordinariness, then you generate this appearance of Vajrabhairava. 
You generate the appearance of this deity who has extinguished all faults and whom you have perfected all excellent qualities. 
Having generated that appearance, you cultivate divine pride by thinking “I am the actual Vajrabhairava.” So you have to sustain such a thought in a strong manner.
This is not something easy to achieve. In order to achieve that, you have to first stop ordinary appearance (ordinary adherence). How can you stop them?
In the beginning of the sadhana, you will have this purification into emptiness where you recite the mantra “Om svabhava shuddha sarva dharma svabhava shuddho ham”. 
This is for the purpose of purifying everything into emptiness. Having purified everything into emptiness, you bring to mind the view of emptiness. This is why in the beginning you have this meditation in which you meditate on how everything becomes clear light emptiness. 
Having purified everything into emptiness you must remember the view of emptiness. This emptiness refers to the fact that when you look for the imputed object, you are not able to find it. There is no findable imputed object. In this way, you have to meditate on emptiness properly. 
After that, as in the sadhana you say, “From the state of emptiness and so on”, so you cause the appearance of Vajrabhairava or Yamantaka to appear, remembering that while it appears but does not exist inherently. From the state of emptiness, the appearance of the body of Vajrabhairava arises. Based on this appearance, you have to try to elicit clear appearance. This means that with your mental consciousness you have to familiarize with this appearance again and again. This is the way to train in clear appearance. 
Having produced this clear appearance, you have to cultivate divine pride thinking that this is the actual Vajrabhairava of the resultant time “I am the actual resultant Vajrabhairava”. So this is the way to give rise to divine pride. 
In the text you see this expression “the apprehended aspect of the realization of emptiness appears as the deity”. What is this apprehended aspect of the realization of emptiness? 
It is the mind realizing emptiness. That mind appears in the form of the deity. 
Alternatively, this expression “apprehended aspect” can be applied to the object. Instead of pointing to the consciousness, you apply it to the object emptiness. 
Emptiness here refers to the emptiness of the 5 aggregates. 
The 5 aggregates are purified into emptiness, and are empty of inherent existence. 
This is the object - the emptiness of inherent existence. Some scholars explained that from this object emptiness then the appearance of the deity arises. 
The basis of imputation of the person is the 5 aggregates. The 5 aggregates which are the basis of imputation are empty of inherent existence. So when you say “From the state of emptiness, Vajrabhairava arises”, that emptiness can be taken to be the object. Some scholars also say that you can take it to mean the consciousness realizing emptiness. So from the state of emptiness, the deity appears. 
There are two ways to understand this arising - from the object or from the consciousness. 
From between these two ways, the 1st way which is taking this apprehended aspect to be the consciousness, this means that from the mind realizing emptiness then the deity appears. This seems to be the better option from between the two. Different scholars have different ways of explanations and they have their own reasons. 
There are two ways of meditation:
The vast way of meditation
The profound way of meditation
- The meditation in which you cultivate clear appearance and divine pride is the vast way of meditation. 
- If you meditate thinking “I am like an illusion,” then that would be the profound way of meditation. 
There is this expression that we see a lot in Highest Yoga Tantra and this expression is translated as “the yoga of non-dual clarity and profundity”. But the English translation in the text (page 123) is translated as “the clear, profound, non-dual yoga”. Rinpoche just explained what this means.
Profundity refers to the profound way of meditation where you meditate on emptiness. 
Clarity refers to the clear appearance, the vast way of meditation. 
These two are non-dual in the sense that they are inseparable. 
This yoga is called the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. Non-dual refers to the fact that profundity and clarity are inseparable (indivisible).  
First you meditate on emptiness.
Then this mind realizing emptiness arises in the form of the deity. 
Then you cultivate clear appearance and divine pride. 
On top to that, you also meditate on emptiness. 
Therefore, you have the combination of profundity and clarity within a single mind. So you have within a single mind both method and wisdom. This is called the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. 
However, this expression “the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity” is not unique to Highest Yoga Tantra. Such an expression also appears in the three lower tantras. What is special in Highest Yoga Tantra is that you have the exalted wisdom (pristine wisdom) of non-dual profundity and clarity. 
On the occasion of the generation stage:
It is very important for you to train in clear appearance and divine pride. 
Not only is it important for you to have this clear appearance of the deity, you must also cultivate divine pride of being the deity. 
Not only that, you also need to have the awareness of emptiness. That refers to selflessness. 
You need to have all these three qualities complete. 
By practicing in this way using your mental consciousness, then you would be able to stop the appearance of ordinariness in the perspective of your mind. 
To cause clear appearance to arise, using your mind you have to become familiar with the object. By this repeated acquaintance with the object acting as a condition, then you would be able to see this object clearly. 
To give an example of how you would actually achieve this clear appearance of the deity, think of how you are familiar with what is in your room. For example, in your room, you can recall maybe the window is here, the door is there, there is a TV here, and so on. The fact that you are able to recall these appearances is because of previous familiarization with your eye consciousness seeing the window, the door, the TV and so on. Similarly, with your mental consciousness, you can become familiar with the appearance of the deity. It is through a similar process of habituation that with your mental consciousness you are able to have a clear appearance of the deity. 
So using this example that is based on our own experience, we can understand that clear appearance arises from habituation (familiarization). Therefore, if we become familiar with an object, then we will have clear appearance. With such clear appearance then we would be able to overcome the appearance of ordinariness.
It is still not enough to only have clear appearance. You need to cultivate divine pride. You should generate this thought “I am the Vajrabhairava or Yamantaka of the resultant time”.  You have to give rise to this thought strongly and for a prolong period of time. Just having this thought in a flash is not sufficient. You have to have this thought for a prolong period of time. Therefore, it is necessary for us to make effort to develop divine pride. 
On top of clear appearance and divine pride, you also need to remember that the object is empty of inherent existence. What this means is that if you were to look for the imputed object, you will not be able to find it at all. There is nothing at all that can be found. In this way single-pointedly, you should meditate on the meaning of emptiness of inherent existence. 
On top of clear appearance and divine pride, it is necessary for your mind to be stable. This means that you have to ensure that your mind does not become distracted. 
You need clear appearance, divine pride and stable mind. How do you achieve this stability? How do you achieve this non-distraction? As said in the sutra system when we were explaining calm-abiding, you need to practise mindfulness and introspection. You have to first place your mind on the object of observation, and when the mind gets distracted you have to bring it back and so on. You have to follow these steps as explained in the context of calm-abiding in the sutra system. 
If you are meditating on Vajrabhairava and you find that your mind has gone to another object. Because of this distraction, then you have to try to bring your mind back to the object and try not to be distracted. Even after you manage to keep your mind on the object it can be the case that the object is not clear. For example, the body of Vajrabhairava is dark blue in color. It can be the case that your mind is not distracted and your mind is holding onto this dark blue body. However, it does not appear clearly to you. This means that while you have the stability factor, you do not have the clarity factor. This means then you have to make effort at the clarity factor. 
Your mind can hold on to this object in a clear and stable manner. However, it can be the case that your mode of apprehension of the object is weak. As explained in the sutra text, this is a case of subtle laxity having arisen. Then you have to do something to counteract this subtle laxity. 
How do you overcome this subtle laxity? You have to uplift your mind. 
When you meditate on the deity’s form, the deity’s body, you need to have three attributes. 
1st attribute is clarity
2nd attribute is stability
3rd attribute is the mode of apprehension. 
So this means that your mode of holding onto this object should not be too tight or too loose. You must have the right amount of tension; not too strong, not too weak. These three attributes are necessary. 
When you meditate on the deity, you have to make effort to make this deity’s form more and more clear. At the same time, you want to make your mind more and more stable. Therefore, you have to practice this combination of stability and clarity. 
During the 1st level, the level of the beginners, you have to meditate through the preparations that I have described: You read the sadhana from the very beginning slowly and then you try to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride. 
During the coarse generation stage, during this 1st level, the level of the beginner, as you read the sadhana, you do the visualizations. In this way, you try to generate clarity and stability. 
This is hard to do because the sadhana is long. It is hard for you to immediately have clarity and stability right from the beginning. What you can do is you divide the sadhana into sections. You choose 1st section, and you train in clarity and stability. After you have trained well, then you can move on to the next section and then again train in clarity and stability.
A good meditator on the generation stage would practice in the way I have just described. 
The 1st section is meditated well
Then the practitioner moves on to the 2nd section and trains in stability and clarity while not forgetting the 1st section. 
In that way, the practitioner practices the sadhana. 
You have to meditate progressively without forgetting previous sections because at the stage of the beginner, you are training in your ability to have the mandala appear clearly and so on. If you meditate on the later stages and you forget the previous one, then it would be difficult for you to cause the whole mandala to appear clearly in the end. 
As we have mentioned in the previous session, in order to become a person of the generation stage, you need to be able to give rise to the uncontrived experience. This means that you meditate on the sadhana and you cause the various deities and mandala to appear clearly in a gradual way, stage by stage, without any additions or omissions. Eventually you would be able to give rise to the clear appearance without much effort. You achieve what is called an uncontrived experience. At that time, then you become a person of the generation stage or you have entered the tantric path, you have initially attained the generation stage realization. 
In order to practice the generation stage and then to be able to move on to practise the completion stage, in the beginning, you have to train in reading the sadhana. Then you have to generate clarity, stability, divine pride as well as the awareness of emptiness. 
While reading the sadhana slowly, you have to cause all these qualities to arise. Moreover, you train in this way in stages; meaning after you have obtained clarity for first section, then you move on to the next section. You add a new section while not forgetting the previous section. In this way, progressively, you add more and more sections while not forgetting the previous section. Eventually, you will be able to obtain clear appearance of the entire visualization of the supported and supporting mandala. This occurs during the level of the beginners. You can see that you have to train in stable memory as well. So without forgetfulness, you have to train in this visualization. 
If you find that you are not able to remember the previous section, this is the sign that your memory has degenerated. Your mindfulness has degenerated. Therefore, you have to train in such a way that your memory becomes more and more powerful. In other words, if you train in the latest stage, you have to ensure that you have not forgotten the previous stages. If you forget then this is because the power of your memory or mindfulness has weakened. Therefore, you have to train your memory in such a way that you do not forget the previous stages. 
We have been discussing this in the context of tantra. In general, for example, if you study something, you have to make sure that you study in such a way that you do not forget the previous parts when you study the later parts. It is on the basis of remembering the earlier parts then you add the later parts. If you are able to do that your study will be of good quality.
Khen Rinpoche: I did mentioned before not to have dementia in the future. This is the best method. Improving your memory and don’t forget what you learnt last Saturday. Remember today what I teach Saturday, remember today. You continue like that then there is no chance for dementia. What I taught Saturday you forgot today. What I teach today and you forget tomorrow, then dementia already there. No need to wait. After get older, come closer closer, what you eat just now you don’t remember. It gradually goes like that. If you worry about dementia then don’t forget what I teach Saturday 
If you don’t guard your memory then what will happen is that you will become more and more forgetful or more and more absent minded. Therefore, during the level of the beginners, you read the sadhana slowly and perform all the visualization until eventually you are able to visualize the entire supported and supporting mandala.  At that point:
you have a considerable amount of stability, 
you have a considerable amount of clarity and 
with that you will be able to also cultivate divine pride. 
You need to have a lot of familiarization in order for such an achievement to arise. You have to practice during 4 sessions daily. Through the force of habituation then eventually you will be able to cause the entire supported and supporting mandala to appear clearly in a very short period of time in duration of a finger snap. Without much effort as unlike the case in the past, instantly, in a very short instance of time, you are able to cause everything to appear clearly. Once you have that kind of ability to sustain that visualization then you are transferred to the 2nd level, the level of someone who has attained some pristine wisdom.
When you first visualize the deity, you have to visualize the shape of the deity, the color of the deity and so on. As it has been explained in the Lamrim, in the beginning, it will not all be clear. Right at the beginning, maybe you only have a rough shape. You have to make effort to cause this rough shape to appear. It is not the case that right from the beginning, it is clear. 
Once you have the shape of the deity then you should focus on that and train in stability - the ability to abide on that. Within the state of being able to stay on this rough shape then slowly you have to improve the clarity of that image. The same instructions from the Lamrim apply here:
You have this rough image
Then you try to make your mind stay on this image 
After that you work on the clarity
After a considerable amount of clarity has been obtained then you try to achieve clear appearance and the divine pride. 
In case that you find your mind becomes distracted then you have to bring your mind back to the object of observation. Similarly, if you detect the sign of laxity then you have to try to counteract that as well. In this way, you try to focus your mind on the object of observation. The procedure of meditation is the same. 
Therefore, the essence of the meditation is to cause this stability and clarity to arise. Based on that, you have to think “I am the actual Vajrabhairava” and in this way cultivate the divine pride.
When you meditate, you need to alternate between analytical meditation and placement meditation. 
After analytical meditation, you have to do placement meditation. After that you do analytical meditation and so on. It is not the case that you simply meditate analytically all the time without moving on to placement meditation. You have to practice a combination of analytical meditation and placement meditation.
If you simply do analytical meditation without moving on to do placement meditation, it will be difficult for your mind to remain on the object. On the other hand, if you practice placement meditation alone without practicing analytical meditation, it will be difficult for the deity to appear clearly. 
If you meditate on the circle of deities in this way then it is a matter of time that the entire of the circle of deities will appear clearly. Eventually in a very short instant of time, you are able to give rise to the clear appearance of the deity, the colors, the shapes, hand implements and so on. 
Your meditation should be sustained in such a way that you don’t try to change on the size of the deity or the color of the deity and so on. You are trying to meditate on the deity clearly and you should keep it the same size as you have meditated on in the previous session. It is the same as the color. You shouldn’t meditate in one color previously and then another color now and so on. Keeping those factors constant, you have to meditate until you see the entire supported and supporting mandala clearly and then you cause your mind to stay in this manner.
Training on the clear appearance and divine pride and then when you are able to visualize the celestial mansion of the deity, you must saying “This is the actual celestial mansion, the celestial palace of the deity. This is the self-appearance of the exalted wisdom”.
Similarly, when you meditate on the deity, you have to think “This is the actual deity of the resultant time with all the perfect excellent qualities”. It is crucial that you think decisively in this way.
This divine pride should be cultivated with respect to all aspects of body, speech and mind:
With respect of the body, you are saying that this is the actual body of the deity. 
With respect to your speech, you think that this is the actual speech of the deity. 
With respect to your mind, you think that this is the actual mind of the deity. 
You have to think by generating these thoughts in a very strong forceful manner and in a decisive way. With such a practice you will arrive at the point where the appearance of the ordinariness and the adherence to the ordinariness no longer arises to the perspective of your mind. Simply by thinking you are able to cause the deity to appear clearly and also you are able to cause divine pride to arise. Once you have reached this attainment, you are said to attain the uncontrived experience.
There is more for you to training even after you have attained this uncontrived experience. This is because you need to also train in being able to visualize the subtle deities - the deities at the sense sources or the sense bases. Similarly, you have to work on clarity, stability and divine pride through slowly meditating in stages.
Through such a gradual meditation, eventually you arise at this point where you are able to see all the deities, the coarse deities as well as these subtle deities of the sense bases or the sense sources, clearly in a very short period of time. In a short period of a finger snap, you are able to cause all of them to appear clearly. You are also cultivating the divine pride with respect to that. In this way, your ability increases more and more. 
When you are able to meditate clearly on all the deities and also cultivate the divine pride in this short duration of time then you are said to have attained the 3rd level, the level of those who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom.
Over the coarse generation stage, you practice a combination of a clear appearance, divine pride and your awareness of emptiness like illusion. These are all empty of inherently existence; they are like illusion. With this combination of the three qualities, you stop the 2 objects of abandonment: 
the appearance of the ordinariness 
the adherence to ordinariness.
Why is it important for you to have these three qualities when you are meditating on the generation stage? 
If you have these three qualities complete then it will make a big difference through your counteracting the different kinds of object of abandonment. 
When you have clear appearance then this will greatly contribute through overcoming the appearance of ordinariness. 
When you have the divine pride then that will contribute to overcoming the adherence to ordinariness (ordinary conceptions). 
When you have this awareness that all empty of inherent existence like illusion then you are able to counteract the root of cyclic existence. This will be very powerful in overcoming the conception of self. 
In the Paramitayana, the Perfection Vehicle, you do not have this practice of generating yourself as a deity and then meditating on the emptiness of the deity. This is because in the Perfection Vehicle, you don’t even generate yourself as deity. If you don’t do that, then you will not move on to meditate on yourself as a deity that is empty of inherent existence. 
In the three lower tantras, you do have this practice of generating yourself as a deity and then meditating on the emptiness of inherent existence. For this reason, it is said that the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity exist in the three lower classes of tantra. However, in the three lower classes of tantra, you do not have the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity that is conjoined with indivisible bliss and emptiness. Therefore, such a yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity that is conjoined with the indivisible bliss and emptiness can only is found in HYT. The generation stage is a big part of HYT. In the lower tantra, you will not find such a terminology: generation stage. 
In the generation stage, you do have to meditate by being conjoined with bliss and emptiness.  However, if this innate bliss does not exist in your continuum, how are you supposed to meditate on? 
You are supposed to meditate by being conjoined with bliss and emptiness. The emptiness that is required in this context, can be the emptiness explained in the CMWS.  It does not have to be that because it can also be the emptiness explained in the AMWS School or even the MOS School.  Scholars have explained that there are these meditators who have this view of emptiness according to the AMWS or MOS. 
In HYT, you find many instances of the deity taking the form of male and female deities in embrace.  From the state of emptiness, you generate the deities. If you have stable clear appearance and divine pride, then you will be able to stop the arising of manifest appearance of the ordinariness and adherence to the ordinariness. In a short time, you will be able to give arise to this visualization.  
At that time, you should meditate that “My mind has become the nature of bliss”. 
On the basis of you being this deity entering into union with the consort then you has to imagine this bliss.  On the generation stage, there is no actual bliss, as you are simply imagining this bliss. You have to think “My mind has become the nature of bliss or my mind has transformed into the nature of bliss.”  
When you think also that all the supporting and supported mandalas are empty of inherent existence, you have to give rise to this thought in the decisive way. Then this mind that has become the nature of bliss then apprehends emptiness.  
You mind is not really in the nature of bliss but you think, you visualize, you imagine “My mind is in the nature of bliss.” Then you meditate on emptiness with that mind.  So this is the meaning of conjoining with bliss and emptiness during the generation stage. 
At least you have to do such imagination, thinking that “I am conjoined with bliss and emptiness in this way.”  If you are able to meditate like that then it is said that you are able to purify an enormous amount of misdeeds and obscurations.  Also you will accumulate extensive merits. 
If you are able to do at least such a meditation, then there will be a big difference through the effectiveness of stopping the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. 
Such a meditation also has the ability to increase the power of your understanding of emptiness.  In other word, your realization of emptiness, your ascertaining of emptiness, will become more stable. Because your ascertainment of emptiness has become more stable then this means that you are able to have greater and quicker power to overcome the conception of true existence. 
Through the force of such an attainment then you will also gain extraordinary quickness and power in attaining a direct realization of emptiness.
Therefore, to meditate by conjoining with bliss and emptiness on the generation stage has great purpose.  Even though you may not have actual bliss and emptiness, you imagine that you have it, you visualize it.  Through the force of such visualization, you will be able to be quicker in terms of overcoming the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. You will be able to attain the realization of emptiness more quickly. You will be able to have greater power in abandoning the conception of true existence.  In this way, you will be able to attain Buddhahood quickly.
In the next session we will discuss when calm abiding is attained.  Also in the context of tantra, whether calm abiding and special insight are attained at the same time.  I hope that in next class we will be able to complete the generation stage. 