Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L6.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:16.221691
================================================================================

As I have mentioned before, whenever we learn the dharma, listen to the dharma, or engage in any dharma practice, it is important to do it with the correct motivation. If it is done with the correct motivation, then all those activities will become meaningful and you will achieve the goal of those practices. When we use the word “motivation”, it means what we are looking for or what we desire. If we are really looking for something, and if we engage in whatever that will help us to achieve it, we will definitely achieve it because we have the desire. At the end of the activity, it is important to dedicate the roots of virtue that were accumulated from that activity. Dedication makes a huge difference in that the roots of virtue thus acquired will not go to waste. So it is important not to forget to dedicate the merits. Therefore, whenever we engage in virtuous activities or whenever we engage in learning the dharma, it is important to have the right motivation at the beginning and to dedicate the merits at the end. When we say to have “a good motivation” and “to dedicate the merits”, these do not refer to just entertaining the rehearsing thought in our head or merely verbalizing some words with our mouth and thinking that is motivation or dedication. Rather it is something that has to be heartfelt. When we say “motivation”, it is something that comes from our heart and mixed with our mind. Likewise, when we said we “dedicate towards an activity”, it is not just the words that came out from our mouth but rather it is our mind that is mixed with that dedication because we want specific result from that dedication. So it is important to keep this in mind all the time - the motivation at the beginning and the dedication of merit at the end. So whenever we adjust the correct motivation or whenever we dedicate the merits, we have to feel it and it has to blend in with the mind. 
We were discussing about the path. When uncontrived renunciation is generated, when the thought seeking liberation arises day and night, that is the measure of having generated renunciation. Whether it is the thought seeking liberation for oneself or the thought seeking liberation for others, when this thought of seeking liberation arises day and night from the heart effortlessly, that is when the path has arisen in that person’s mind. The person is said to have entered the path. When he enters the path, he enters from the Path of Accumulation. This is so called because this person sees the points and doesn’t find it difficult to accumulate merit. So the real accumulation of merit starts after entering the Path of Accumulation. This means that the real accumulation of merit starts when the uncontrived renunciation with the thought seeking to achieve liberation arises day and night continuously and effortlessly. For such a person, he has no difficulty in accumulating merit. 
As for the path, there are the 5 Hinayana paths and the 5 Mahayana paths. Whether it is the Hinayana path or the Mahayana path, they are:
Path of Accumulation, 
Path of Preparation, 
Path of Seeing, 
Path of Meditation and 
Path of No-more-learning. 
The Path of Accumulation is divided into three:
the small Path of Accumulation
the middling Path of Accumulation
the great Path of Accumulation
In the context of the Mahayana Path of Accumulation, when a bodhisattva reaches the middling Path of Accumulation, his mind generation will never degenerate. 
As in the chart (at point C - point where it is not possible to fall to the Hinayana), once the middling Mahayana Path of Accumulation is attained, it is not possible for the bodhisattva to fall to the Hinayana. Why? Because his mind generation will never degenerates; whereas on the small Mahayana Path of Accumulation, it is still possible for some individuals to lose their mind generation. 
Khen Rinpoche: Look at the chart. I mean there are different ways of learning. It is possible that you don’t need any chart to learn. Some people need chart to learn. That’s why I give the chart. But that’s not necessary as we can listen. You think you know then okay that you don’t need the chart. Those who need, they must look at the chart so that is easy for you.
Question: Can we say that from the moment the great Mahayana Path of Accumulation is attained, one necessarily has realized emptiness.
If you think about it, it seems even from the middling Mahayana Path of Accumulation, one would have realized emptiness already. The reason is being that when one achieves the great Mahayana Path of Accumulation, one would have the calm abiding focusing on emptiness. Then one should have realized emptiness on the great Mahayana Path of Accumulation. If that is the case, would that be the alright to say that one would probably have realized emptiness on the middling Mahayana Path of Accumulation?
Do you see the case for saying that probably emptiness is realized on the middling Path of Accumulation?
The mind generation of the bodhisattva on the great Path of Accumulation is called the mind generation like the waxing moon. The “waxing moon” here refers to the moon in the early phase of waxing, probably on the 2nd or 3rd day of the month in the lunar calendar. As the moon gradually becomes full, likewise, his mind generation is called that.
On the great Path of Accumulation, the bodhisattva is said to have attained very special meditative stabilization, and this concentration is called the concentration of stream of doctrine. It is said that because of having this concentration, the bodhisattva remembers all the words and teachings of the oral transmissions that he has received over a long period of time; even as long as eons prior to achieving that concentration. He will remember all the words and the meanings of the oral transmissions that he had heard.  
In the last module of the 70 topics, in terms of the 37 harmonies of enlightenment, the four legs of miraculous manifestations (also translated as four legs of magical manifestation) are achieved on the great Path of Accumulation. It is said that with this four legs of miraculous meditation, that bodhisattva can see numberless buddhas, see numberless purelands and go to those buddhas fields and purelands to receive teachings. They are also can make offerings to these numberless buddhas. 
Because of all these meditative stabilizations (concentrations) that the bodhisattva has on this level, his accumulation of merit becomes much more exalted, i.e. his ability to accumulate merit is much more enhanced. Because of that, it makes a difference to his mind generation. So his mind generation is enhanced by this merit really increases. As such his mind generation is called the mind generation of the waxing moon.
On this level, with calm abiding focusing on emptiness, the bodhisattva seeks to achieve special meditative stabilization (concentration) which is a union of calm abiding and special insight. Basically he is training to achieve special insight focusing on emptiness. When that special insight focusing on emptiness is first achieved, that marks the attainment of the Path of Preparation. 
As in the chart (point D – union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness) when the special insight focusing on emptiness is achieved, then the bodhisattva enters the Path of Preparation.  Of the four levels of the Path of Preparation, he enters from the heat level of the Path of Preparation.
 When the Path of Preparation is divided, there are these four levels:
Heat, 
Peak, 
Forbearance 
Supreme mundane qualities (SMQ)
On the four levels of the Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva has not directly realized emptiness. The bodhisattva has realized emptiness but does not realize it directly yet. The bodhisattva still realizes emptiness via meaning generality. 
Why are there four levels of Path of Preparation? 
If he has realized emptiness already, what is so different about his realization of emptiness? That has to do with how much dualistic appearance has been subsided while in meditative equipoise. So commensurate with the level of sighting of the dualistic appearance in meditative equipoise, that is how there are four levels of the Path of Preparation. As one progress along the path, the presence and appearance of the dualistic appearance becomes more and more subtle. 

On the heat and peak level of the Path of Preparation, while the bodhisattva in meditative equipoise, there is dualistic appearance and the bodhisattva who is experiencing that is aware of that dualistic appearance.

When the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation is achieved, while there is still dualistic appearance, but the appearance of the dualistic appearance have subsided. In reality, there is dualistic appearance but just that the dualistic appearance has become more subtle. It appears as if the dualistic appearance has completely disappeared but this is not the case and the bodhisattva is not aware of that. 

After the four legs of miraculous manifestations in the 37 harmonies with enlightenment, then there are the five powers and the five strengths (forces). 
The five powers are posited in relation to the 1st and 2nd levels of the Path of Preparation.
The five strengths (forces) are posited in relation to the 3rd and 4th levels of the Path of Preparation. 
We have discussed the difference between them in the last module.
The ability of the bodhisattva to reduce the manifest apprehension of true existence starts only after having achieved union of calm abiding and special insight. As the bodhisattva progresses on the Path of Preparation, his ability to counteract the manifest apprehension of true existence grows. From this, we can see that the process of seeing the ultimate reality i.e. realizing emptiness is not easy. In order to realize emptiness, we have to accumulate vast collections of merit. It is only then we can realize emptiness. Also we need to realize emptiness with a mind of calm abiding. We can have the calm abiding focusing on emptiness but that is not enough, we need to achieve the special insight focusing on emptiness. Even after having achieved the special insight focusing on emptiness, when we enter the Path of Preparation with the union of calm abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness, we are still unable to do any harm to the seeds of the apprehension of true existence. However, the bodhisattva gains the ability to do something with the manifest apprehension of true existence on the Path of Preparation. From this we can see it is a multi-level process.
Even to reduce, hurt or damage the manifest apprehension of true existence, we need the union of calm abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness. Only then, we can start to hurt the manifest apprehension of true existence through the subsidence of the dualistic appearance as one moves along the path. In order to directly hurt or destroy ignorance, one needs the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. 
In the last lesson, there was a question about whether the bodhisattva becomes equal after realizing emptiness directly, and the answer is No. The superiors are classified into dull faculties, middling faculties and sharp faculties. Even after having realized emptiness directly, the bodhisattvas do not become equals. There are certain signs of irreversibility i.e. signs that the bodhisattva gets to indicates that his enlightenment is confirmed, and he is definitely going to achieve enlightenment and there is no turning back. We call them the signs of irreversibility. 
There are bodhisattvas of sharp faculties, middling faculties and dull faculties. As such, they receive these signs of irreversibility at different points of their careers:
-  The sharp facultied bodhisattvas obtain the signs of irreversibility on the heat level of the Path of Preparation
- The middling facultied receive the signs of irreversibility on the Path of Seeing 
- The dull facultied receive the signs of irreversibility on the 8th ground. 
Just because their enlightenment is irreversible, it doesn’t mean that they are somebody who has achieved the signs of irreversibility. From the middling Path of Accumulation, everybody is irreversible from enlightenment. Since they will never ever fall, their bodhicitta will never ever degenerate. It is only a matter of time they will achieve enlightenment. In that sense, it is irreversible. 
Khen Rinpoche: You understand?  I think I didn’t talk about this before. First time I’m talking about this thing.  
As for the signs of irreversibility, you could say that there are external signs and internal signs. Or translate as the signs that shows from conduct and the signs that we can take when we see what’s happening in our mind. 
Let’s look at the internal sign. When do the bodhisattvas have achieved the internal sign? It is when the bodhisattva will never ever develop the thought thinking to achieve liberation for his own purpose alone. When there is no opportunity for that thought to manifest, then it is said that he has achieved the internal sign. 
That is completely impossible for that bodhisattva to have that thought manifest thinking “I will achieve liberation for myself alone”. That will never ever happen, and it is impossible. That possibility does no longer exist as he has conquered or destroyed that opportunity for that manifest thought thinking  “Maybe I just achieve liberation for myself”. It is impossible for it to arise as he has abandoned.
We should use the word “abandon”, otherwise we could also say that it is impossible for the bodhisattva on the middling Path of Accumulation to entertain thoughts of achieving liberation for himself alone. 
When we are talking about the internal signs of irreversibility, we say that the bodhisattva has abandoned any opportunity for the manifest thought thinking to achieve liberation for oneself. In this context, I guess “abandon” means he has achieved that confidence.
Although from the middling Path of Accumulation onwards, the bodhisattva would never ever have the thought to achieve liberation for himself alone, and it would never arise, but it doesn’t mean that prior to achieving the signs of irreversibility, he feels confident about it.
If you remember on the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva gains the confidence and has the certainty that he would never ever fall into the lower realms. It is not to say that on the earlier levels of the Path of Preparation he would fall into lower realms. Probably we could say that it is impossible to fall into lower realms when he has achieved the Path of Preparation. But nevertheless, it is only on the Forbearance level of the Path of Preparation that he gains that confidence. 
As in the chart (point F: no more rebirths in Lower realms), the bodhisattvas on the forbearance level would never fall into the lower realms. We have to qualify that he achieves 100% confidence that he would not fall into the lower realms. However, this does not necessarily mean prior to that, he would fall into lower realms. 
Regarding the gaining of confidence about never ever generating manifest thought looking for one’s own liberation alone, when does this confidence is gained?
- For the sharp faculties, this is gained on the heat level of the Path of Preparation,
- For the middling faculties, this is gained on the Path of Seeing
- For those extremely dull faculties, this is gained on the 8th ground. 
What does the external signs of irreversibility or the sign through the conduct mean? It means they need to possess a stable realization of exalted or special wisdom and method. 
As for the external sign, we talk about the sign via the conduct of that bodhisattva. It means having this stable, exalted realization of method and wisdom. 
How do you posit of having achieved this sign? That bodhisattva knows that he will definitely achieve enlightenment, and he knows he possesses this special realization of method and wisdom. Not only he is aware of that, others who have associated with this bodhisattva for over a period of time can see it and come to understand about it.  Hence that bodhisattva knows it and also displays it so others are able to cognize the signs that bodhisattvas has the external signs. 
When are these signs obtained? It is not on the first moment of heat level of the Path of Preparation but in the second moment. During the first moment, he is still in meditative equipoise, and these signs are obtained after meditative equipoise. Also, these bodhisattvas’ way of teaching emptiness is very different from others in that they are able to teach emptiness using numberless reasoning. These bodhisattvas also show signs of their very special powerful compassion. When they think of the sufferings of others, as external signs, they cry or their hair stands on their hands and so forth. 
The sharp facultied bodhisattvas achieve the signs on the heat level of the Path of Preparation. The bodhisattva gains the confidence that he has destroyed all opportunities for the manifest thought seeking liberation for oneself. He also possesses very stable exalted realization of method and wisdom. These are what we call the signs. 
The middling facultied bodhisattvas achieve the signs on the superior path, on the Path of Seeing. 
The extremely dull facultied bodhisattvas gain the sign on the 8th ground.
Question: Are the paths of the dull facultied, middling facultied and sharp facultied bodhisattvas different?
Khen Rinpoche: Or same? 
Question: There is a difference in the cause, therefore there has to be a difference in the result. 
As such, are there dull, middling and sharp facultied buddhas?
This is how it sounds when we debate. We throw the consequence: It follows that there are buddhas of sharp, middling and dull faculties because at the time of the path, the causes are different. 
Isn’t it the case that there will be a difference in terms of the result if at the time of the cause they are different? 
Khen Rinpoche: The cause is different, result has to be different. No? 
Isn’t the difference in the results due to a difference in the causes? No? Then what makes it different? 
If it is not the cause then what is it that makes the result different?
The enlightenment that is achieved by the dull facultied bodhisattva is different because of who he is. He has to be different from the middling capacity. Then what about the sharp facultied ones?
Student 1: The reasons for causing bodhisattva to have dull faculties or sharp faculties are the factors that obscure buddha nature
Khen Rinpoche: My question is: Doesn’t there need to be a difference in the result since there is a difference in the cause?
Student 2: The difference in the cause is the difference in terms of the obscurations that obscure the buddha nature. So the cause for us to…
Khen Rinpoche: You just answer that part. You got my question. Result is different because cause is different. Logical or not? 
Student 2: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, there are three different types of buddha because cause have three different types. 
Student 1: Yeah, the cause of buddhahood is not due to the level of the faculties of bodhisattvas, it is due to buddha nature.
Khen Rinpoche: You are not following logic. Result is different because of cause. Cause different, result has to be different. Yeah? 
Student 1: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, I’m saying buddhas also have to be three different levels because cause have three different levels. 
Student 1: Okay.
Khen Rinpoche: So what are you going to say? 
Student 1: Don’t know. Need help.
Khen Rinpoche: Cecilia asked after Path of Seeing all equal or not, the answer is not equal. So now go further, after buddha become equal or not? Maybe not. .
Student 2: The cause for attaining Buddhahood is the same in the sense that it is based on whether or not one has abandoned the obstructions to omniscience. So there is no difference. Even in terms of the path, the Path of Accumulation, Path of Preparation, Path of Seeing, Path of Meditation and Path of No More Learning, although the bodhisattvas traverse on the same path, they have different attainments but that is not considered as different causes for Buddhahood. 
Khen Rinpoche: Because abandonment is same, so therefore no difference?
Student 2: I mean the benchmark is that whether or not the bodhisattva has abandoned the obstructions to liberation and obstructions to omniscience. I mean the cause.
Khen Rinpoche: So your answer is abandonments is same, therefore, no difference. Are you saying that is your final answer, is it?
Student 2: Yeah, because at the time of the cause of the Buddhahood is that.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that? Abandonment is same, therefore, no difference. Are you saying that or not?
Student 2: Yeah. At the time of the cause, if the abandonment is the same…
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore the same, you saying that?
Student 2: I feel like I’m being forced to say yes. I have yet to convince myself.
Khen Rinpoche: You can be yourself. 
Student 2: At the time of the cause, whatever abandonments they have is the same. Therefore, the result of attaining Buddhahood will remain the same. I don’t see any different causes, whether or not one is a sharp facultied bodhisattva or dull facultied bodhisattva. 
Khen Rinpoche: Just answer what I’m asking, answer: Buddhas have three faculties or not? 
Student 3: No. There are no buddhas of three different faculties. The buddhas when become buddhas are equal. That is, you can’t say “Manjushri is inferior to Chenrezig” .
Khen Rinpoche: Of course, Manjushri has more wisdom. 
Student 3: But they are all Buddhas. 
Khen Rinpoche: Manjushri has more wisdom than Tara, no? 
Student 3: I disagree with that. I think the buddhas are all equal in their qualities and their power. So if that is the case, if I work backwards, the final result is the same. Even though the causes are different, the final result is the same. Why is that so? This is an exception to the rule where you say that different causes will yield different results. In the case of Buddhahood, even though the faculties of the bodhisattvas are different, the final result when they attain Buddhahood on the Path of No More Learning, the power of that Buddha is equal. 
Khen Rinpoche: Because?
Student 3: It is an exception to the rule. Just like when we learn karma, when we say karma is definite and you will definitely experience the result of the karma that you have created. But then later on when you learn about the possibility of purification, that means that if you practice purification well, then you will not experience the result of the negative karma that you have created. So there is an exception to the rule. So I’m just thinking that in this particular discussion, it is the same thing. Although there are different causes, but the ultimate results will be the same, whether you start off as a dull facultied, a middling facultied or a sharp facultied bodhisattva. Because Buddhahood is the dharmakaya, you can’t say “There is medium quality, low quality and high quality dharmakaya”. Dharmakaya is dharmakaya.
Khen Rinpoche: Because cause is different. I’m just arguing. Because cause is different, there should be different result.
Student 3: Yes, generally speaking that is so. But in this discussion, my position is that this is an exception to the rule.
Khen Rinpoche: Why exception?
Student 3: Because I said so. I’m just relating it to other..
Khen Rinpoche: Why exception?
Student 3: To me I believe all the Buddhas are equal in power. 
Khen Rinpoche: All equal in power, then why they say Manjushri, why Tara?
Student 3: Because the disciples have different inclinations and dispositions. Different disciples have different connections to different Buddhas. Like some people have a connection with Chenrezig or Tara and that is why we have different yidams as well. Even as a Buddha, there are different buddhas that manifest in those different forms to help us sentient beings. Some of us look at Chenrezig and feel an immediate connection but when we look at Manjushri nothing happens. So if we posit that they always manifest in a way that will benefit a specific disciple, therefore, you have buddhas manifesting in different aspects. That’s what I think. I have a question. What is a middling facultied bodhisattva? Because it’s like we hear of dull and sharp…
Khen Rinpoche: Before only hear two, now I give you middling, three. 
Student 3: So now I gather the middling facultied bodhisattva is the one who is half-half.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, you can say that. Middling is easy to understand.
It is clear in the text that even the extremely dull facultied bodhisattvas will achieve the signs of irreversibility on the 8th ground. Henceforth, are they all the same already or not? 
Khen Rinpoche: 8th ground, 9th ground, 10th ground, they become equal? Why equal?
Student’s response inaudible. 
Khen Rinpoche: You still have to catch up on enlightenment or haven’t caught up on enlightenment? His goal is to catch up enlightenment, he haven’t catch up still have to go, how can be equal after 8th ground? I don’t know. I’m not sure.
Seems like we have to posit there is a difference in faculties, as to how that is a different thing, we can say when we become enlightened, then all the same. Before that, they are not the same. 
Before enlightenment on the 8th, 9th, 10th ground, I think we have to posit the different facultied bodhisattvas –dull faculties, sharp faculties, middling faculties. But once enlightened then they are the same. 
We have to say that when we are enlightened, they are all the same and equal because we cannot say that there is a difference among buddhas. But yet, at the time of the path, if you say there is a difference in the cause, you have to then also say that there is a difference in the result.
So on the Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva realizes emptiness via meaning generality. Come the time when the bodhisattva directly perceives emptiness, he attains the Path of Seeing. The Path of Seeing is so called because the bodhisattva is directly seeing the truth for the first time. 
On the Path of Preparation then one enters the Path of Seeing when the bodhisattva directly sees the truth. It is only from then that the bodhisattva acquires the capacity to really start to hurt or damage ignorance - the apprehension of true existence. The process of hurting ignorance only starts from then. So as for the apprehension of true existence, there are two:
The artificial conception of the apprehension of true existence and 
The innate conception of true existence. 
Of the two, the uninterrupted path of the Path of Seeing acts as the direct antidote to the artificial or acquired conception of true existence. When the artificial conception of true existence is abandoned, that is when the bodhisattva achieves the path of release of the Path of Seeing. 
When the bodhisattva enters the Path of Seeing, he enters the Path of Seeing in meditative equipoise. In that state of equipoise, that minds that directly realizing emptiness is called the uninterrupted path of the Path of Seeing. That uninterrupted Path of Seeing is the direct antidote to the artificial afflictive obscurations. 
In this case, we just look at the artificial conception of true existence. When the artificial conception of true existence together with its seeds is abandoned, that phase of the meditative equipoise is called the path of release of the Path of Seeing. 
When the bodhisattva arises from the meditative equipoise, he achieves the subsequent attainment of the Path of Seeing. During the phase of subsequent attainment, the bodhisattva primarily concentrates on accumulating the collection of merit. Of the six perfections, the bodhisattva on the 1st ground during subsequent attainment focuses on the Perfection of Generosity. 
In subsequent attainment, he accumulates the collection of merits and then enters into meditative equipoise directly focusing on emptiness. Come the time when the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise is powerful enough to act as an antidote to the innate conception of true existence. That is when he achieves the uninterrupted path at the end of the 1st ground.  That uninterrupted path at the end of the 1st ground is the direct antidote to the innate conception of true existence. The artificial one has already been abandoned. 
The innate afflictions are divided into 9 levels:
 3 big, 
 3 middling and
 3 small
 Within each of those 3 big, 3 middling and 3 small, again they are further divided into big, middling and small. So there are:
the big big, middling big and small big 
That is how you have the 9 levels of the innate afflictions that are to be abandoned. 
I guess we can finish looking at this in the next lesson, and then I think we can start on the tantric paths and grounds. 
Extracted from Basic Program study manual - Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations Chapter 4
The Mahayana Path of Preparation (also translated as partial concordance with definite discrimination) has four levels:
1. heat
2. peak
3. tolerance
4. supreme mundane qualities
Within each level, there are two periods: 
(a) meditative equipoise, when the bodhisattva is meditating on emptiness, and
(b) subsequent attainment, which occurs subsequent to meditative equipoise. 
Subsequent attainment consists of periods when the bodhisattva is not meditating on emptiness, such as times when meditating on other objects such as impermanence, or times when practicing the perfections such as generosity. 
This topic, the Mahayana Path of Preparation explicitly indicated in this case, focuses on the subsequent attainment period of the Mahayana partial concordance with definite discrimination, describing the realizations and practices of this bodhisattva when he is not meditating on emptiness.
The observed object of bodhisattvas on all levels of the Mahayana path of preparation during subsequent attainment is all sentient beings. In other words, when not meditating on emptiness, this bodhisattva’s mind is oriented toward all sentient beings. The aspects describe the particular attitudes and actions regarding sentient beings that a bodhisattva has over the four levels of the path of preparation. There are 19 aspects presented in this context.
Since the observed object of all four levels of the path of preparation is the same, i.e., all sentient beings, only the aspects are described below.
1. Heat level 
The aspects of the heat level are the 10 types of mind toward sentient beings. These are the 10 types of mind that a bodhisattva generates on the heat level of the path of preparation.
Small Heat
1. Evenmindedness/equanimity - The bodhisattva regards all sentient beings equanimously, ceasing attachment and aversion to them.
2. A mind of love - The bodhisattva regards all sentient beings with a mind of love as well as with a mind of compassion. These two attitudes accompany each other, one being manifest when the other not. Love wishes all sentient beings to have happiness and its causes, while compassion wishes them to be free from suffering and its causes.
Middling Heat
3. A mind of benefit - A bodhisattva thinks how to benefit, help, and serve sentient beings. He tries to think of all the possible ways and means to benefit sentient beings and not harm them. There are many ways to harm sentient beings; one should avoid harming them physically, verbally, and mentally.
4. A mind of non-anger - This bodhisattva does not become angry with other sentient beings. It is good if we also strive not to become angry. When anger arises in us, it creates unhappiness for both ourselves and other sentient beings.
5. A mind of non-harmfulness - The bodhisattva is not mean, directly or indirectly. We should practice likewise. It is very easy for us to be harmful. Sometimes people do not harm others directly, but indirectly they inflict great harm.
Great Heat
6. The mind of a mother and father - The bodhisattva regards and treats sentient beings who are of similar age to his parents as his father and mother. Weshould also practice in this way.
7. The mind of a brother and sister - The bodhisattva regards and treats sentient beings who are a bit older or younger in age to himself as his brother or sister.
8. The mind of a son and daughter - The bodhisattva regards and treats sentient beings who are the age of his own children as his own son or daughter.
9. The mind of a friend and companion - The bodhisattva regards and treats sentient beings who are equal in age to himself as his friends and companions. Companions are those with whom one shares one’s life, one’s girlfriend or boyfriend, and so forth.
10. The mind of a paternal relative and maternal relative - The bodhisattva regards and treats sentient beings as paternal and maternal relatives, grandfather, grandmother, and so forth.
2. Peak level
Bodhisattvas who abide on the peak level of the path of preparation also have all sentient beings as their observed object. There are three aspects or perfect thoughts on the peak level:
1. The mind of placing others in positive activities:
Small peak -The mind of turning away from the ten non-virtues and placing others likewise.
Middling peak - The mind of abiding in generosity and so forth and similarly placing others in these activities.
Great peak -  Meditating on the emptiness of the internal and exhorting others to meditate on it.
2. Verbally expressing praise for those who engage in these without being exhorted to do so.
3. The mind of rejoicing in those who act in accordance with the previous two aspects.
3. Forbearance Level (also translated as Tolerance level)
The tolerance level also observes all sentient beings by way of three aspects:
1. The mind of placing others in positive activities:
Small forbearance - Abiding in the knowledge of the four noble truths andplacing others in this knowledge and so forth.
Middling forbearance- Abiding in the knowledge that although one understands the results of stream enterer and so forth, one does not actualize them. One also places others in this knowledge.
Great forbearance -Abiding in the cause of the path of seeing of a bodhisattvaand placing others in this cause.
2. Verbally expressing praise for those who engage in these without being exhorted to do so.
3. The mind of rejoicing in those who act in accordance with the previous two aspects.
4. Supreme mundane qualities level
Likewise, the bodhisattva on the supreme mundane qualities level observes all sentient beings by way of three aspects. It observes sentient beings by way of ripening them, liberating them, and so forth.
1. The mind of placing others in positive activities:
Small supreme mundane qualities - Abiding in the activity of ripening sentient beings and placing others in this activity.
Middling supreme mundane qualities - Abiding in the generation of clairvoyances and placing others in this activity.
Great supreme mundane qualities - Abiding in the activity of generating a knower of all aspects and abandoning the afflictions that are induced by latencies and so forth, and placing others in these activities.
2. Verbally expressing praise for those who engage in these without being exhorted to do so.
3. The mind of rejoicing in those who act in accordance with the previous two aspects.
Conclusion
In short, during the subsequent attainment period of the Mahayana partial concordance with definite discrimination, the second of the five Mahayana paths, the bodhisattva mainly focuses on the practice of method. The observed object of the bodhisattvas during this period is all sentient beings. The bodhisattva observes these sentient beings by means of 19 aspects, or perfect thoughts and actions: 
10 aspects on the heat level, 
3 aspects on the peak level, 
3 aspects on the tolerance level, and
 3 aspects on the supreme mundane qualities level. 
On the heat level, the bodhisattva generates 10 types of virtuous minds toward sentient beings. n each of the peak, tolerance, and supreme mundane qualities levels, the bodhisattva generates three types of mind: 
(1) the mind of placing others in positive activities, 
(2) the mind of expressing praise for those who engage similarly without exhortation, and 
(3) the mind of rejoicing in those who act accordingly.
Likewise, we should all try to practice in these ways.
Signs of Irreversibility
On the Mahayana partial concordance with definite discrimination (Mahayana path of preparation), a special group of bodhisattvas is found. These are the irreversible bodhisattva sangha who possess the signs of irreversibility. They are irreversible from highest complete enlightenment and are definite to attain the enlightenment of the buddhas because they will never give up their bodhichitta motivation and regress to a lower vehicle. These bodhisattvas display special signs, known as the signs of irreversibility, whereby others can infer their attainment of irreversibility.
However, one who will definitely attain highest complete enlightenment is not necessarily a bodhisattva who possesses the signs of irreversibility. From the great level of the Mahayana path of accumulation onward, a bodhisattva who is of indefinite lineage will not fall to a lesser vehicle path. It is not possible for him to degenerate from the Mahayana mind of enlightenment, and he will definitely attain highest complete enlightenment. But he is not posited as a bodhisattva who possesses the signs of irreversibility. Likewise, there exists a person who has awakened his Mahayana lineage prior to cultivating the applications, but he too is not posited as among those who possess the signs of irreversibility.
Irreversibility can be understood from two perspectives:
1. From the point of view of thought, one has eliminated the opportunity for the arising of the manifest thought of striving for liberation, which is for one’s welfare alone.
2. From the point of view of training [or conduct], one possesses a stable realization of special method and wisdom.
The attainment of irreversibility can be inferred through observing certain signs, such as the following:
a) The attainment of special wisdom can be inferred by the special verbal sign of presenting complete categories of Mahayana paths, such as emptiness.
b) The special Mahayana method can be inferred by the physical signs of the body hair standing on end and tears coming to the eyes, showing that one is unable to bear the suffering of sentient beings.
Furthermore, it can be inferred that someone is irreversible from highest complete enlightenment from the reason that he possesses the powerful causes for enlightenment. How? By the signs of possessing the special method and wisdom and by the fact that he has eliminated the occasion of manifesting the thought of striving for his own welfare alone.
The definition of a sign of irreversibility is a perfect proof that serves to convince that the person who possesses it is irreversible from highest, complete enlightenment.
A bodhisattva who has attained any of the 44 signs of irreversibility is known as a bodhisattva who has attained the signs of irreversibility. 
There are three divisions of bodhisattva sangha who have attained the signs of irreversibility:
1. Bodhisattvas of sharp faculties who manifest the signs of irreversibility on the Mahayana path of preparation.
2. Bodhisattvas of middling faculties who manifest the signs of irreversibility on the Mahayana path of seeing.
3. Bodhisattvas of dull faculties who manifest the signs of irreversibility on the Mahayana path of meditation.
These 44 signs of irreversibility are described in three groups:
1. Signs of irreversibility of one on the path of preparation 
2. Signs of irreversibility of one on the path of seeing
3. Signs of irreversibility of one on the path of meditation