Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L60.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.397260
================================================================================

Whether we are listening to the Dharma or teaching the Dharma, what we do in the beginning is we recite 3 times the prayer of refuge and bodhicitta.  
By going for refuge, we distinguish our practice from the wrong practice. 
By generating bodhicitta we distinguish our practice from the Hinayana practice. 
It is by conjoining ourselves with refuge and bodhicitta then we set up the motivation for engaging in the Dharma. 
When we listen to the Dharma, we have to ensure that we set up a good motivation. It is important for you to have the motivation of bodhicitta. If you are able to give rise to this motivation, and adjust your body and mind accordingly, it is said that you will be able to accumulate infinite merits.
Now you are here to listen to the Dharma. It is important for you to focus your mind.  So you need to be able to concentrate. In that way, you will be able to hear the teachings.
Whether or not you will be able to understand the teachings, it depends on how interested you are in the teachings and how much you are seeking these teachings.  If you are able to listen carefully then it will make a difference to your understanding of the teachings.
As I mentioned before, it is important for you to not forget what has been taught in the previous few classes.  You attend the later classes by adding the information that you obtained from previous classes.  If you forget of what has been taught in the previous class, and you try to attend the later classes, then it is difficult for you to understand that.  It is on the basis of remembering what has been taught previously that you add more information by attending future classes. In that way, you will come to a fine understanding of the topic
You need to develop this very strong mind wanting to understand the teachings. What is the generation stage?  You need to have this kind of strong interest thinking “I have no choice but to understand what the generation stage is”.  This keen interest is necessary. It will help you to concentrate on the teachings. If there are things that you don’t understand, you will ask question so that you can understand the topic.  If you lack this strong interest, then it will be difficult for you to understand the topic. You have to listen and if there is anything that you don’t understand, immediately you should ask questions.   
We are talking about the generation stage. 
What is a generation stage?  It is the stage of generating the deity. 
Who is generated as a deity?  You are generated as a deity.  
Khen Rinpoche: That’s it. Simple as that. If you know that you will know the generation stage.
There are four levels of practitioner.  The first is the beginner. You have to be very familiar with all these terminologies.  It is difficult for me to say everything that I have said previously.  How many of you are able to explain what this beginner is?  Raise your hand.
Khen Rinpoche: Just raise. Just want to know.  One, two, three, four, five, six, ok.  Only six.
It seems like majority of you are not able to explain what a beginner is.  Those of you who cannot explain it, what is it that you cannot understand?  What is it that you are unable to know? You should ask questions.  
I want to know “Why you didn’t know about that? I have been explaining these for three or four classes.  I am just wondering why you are not getting it.  That is my question.  Maybe some people know but you didn’t put up your hand. Maybe like that, possible.  But only few people, I don’t know.  Why? You have any idea?  Because of what?  Somebody say something then is good. Those who don’t understand, why?  Then I can explain in different way.  Otherwise, I have to repeat like kindergarten every time, over and over.  I am not sure whether you need that. You have any idea, why?  Good to share you share your view of why you don’t get it.  Either I am going too fast. There must be some reason of why you didn’t get it. Whether you don’t have enough time, or you are not reading, or you are not thinking. 
Student 1: On the 2nd level, those attaining some pristine wisdom, what does pristine wisdom refer to?
Khen Rinpoche: It doesn’t seem like there is precise explanation for this exalted wisdom or pristine wisdom.  But when you reach the 3rd or 4th level, you have completed the coarse subtle generation stage, and you are able to practice the union of calm abiding and special insight.
During the 1st level, the level of the beginner, you begin to meditate on the generation stage.  The main practice on the generation stage is bringing death, intermediate state and rebirth into the path as the three Buddha’s bodies. You generate yourself as the deity and you meditate on it.
During this beginning level, what you do is you visualize yourself as a deity and meditate. How this is done is that you read the sadhana and then you try to reflect according to description of the words. In that way you try to complete this meditation on bringing the death, intermediate state and rebirth into the path as the three bodies. As you recite, you do the reflection, and slowly you perform all the visualizations. This is what happens in the beginning.  
An actual meditator on the generation stage will practice slowly, and trying to develop stability and clear appearance.  Accordingly to what is described in the sadhana, the person tries to meditate in a stable way making the appearance clear and without forgetting what has been visualized in the training on the 1st stage. Then one moves on to the 2nd stage, and train in the similar ways trying to obtain stability, clear appearance and then without forgetting that stage as well. One moves on to the 3rd stage and then train in having the stability and clear appearance.
Let’s suppose it takes about 3 hours for you to complete the sadhana. As you read you also reflect on the description. As you move on you add on more and more to your visualization. Finally, when the 3 hours are over, you have finished with the sadhana. At that point you should be able to have everything appear clearly to your mind.  This is the level of a beginner.     
Through such practice again and again, eventually when you practice the sadhana, you are able to cause the visualization to appear clearly without much difficulty.  Simply by turning your mind to the visualization, it clearly appears through the force of familiarization.  You are able to cause the entire supported and supporting mandala to appear clearly. This is called the uncontrived experience.  
Through such repeated practice you will1 be able to cause the entire supported and supporting mandala to appear clearly to your mind in a stable way.  Through such an attainment you are able to stop the appearances of ordinariness.  Base on that you have to cultivate divine pride.  Through such practice, eventually you will be able to arrive at a good level of clear appearance and divine pride. This means that you will be able to stop the appearance of ordinariness and adherence to ordinariness.  
Appearance of ordinariness appears to us all the time.  They appear to our sense consciousness. They appear also to our mental consciousness. You assent to those appearances and adhere to ordinariness.  The purpose of the generation stage is to stop the appearance of ordinariness and adherence to ordinariness.  How do you do that? You purify everything into emptiness and meditate on emptiness.  That is the way to stop ordinary appearance and adherence.  
When we meditate on bringing death to the path as the truth body (dharmakaya), we meditate on emptiness. We begin by visualizing the death process, the dissolution of the four elements and so forth. Then we visualize the syllabus Hum is absorbed. Finally, even the nada, the squiggle at the top is also absorbed into emptiness. Then you visualizing the clear light and meditate on that.  This is when you meditate on emptiness. Everything becomes more and more subtle, and eventually there is just emptiness - everything has been purified into emptiness and emptiness appears to the mind; nothing else. In that state of voidness we place our mind on the meditation on emptiness.   
From the state of emptiness, one goes on to practise the second stage which is bringing the intermediate state to the path as the complete enjoyment body (sambhogakaya). 
From the state of emptiness, one visualizes a blue shaft of light the height of a one cubit. Then that light transforms into the deity; one face and two arms. 
That is the brief way of meditating on bringing the intermediate state to the path as the sambhogakaya.
The shaft of blue light that appear from the state of emptiness correspond to the state of bringing intermediate state to the path as the sambhogakaya.  Then that shaft of light transforms into the deity; one face two arms and so on.  That is bringing rebirth to the path as nirmanakaya (emanation body).  In brief from the state of emptiness, you generate into a deity and eventually you try to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride with respect to that.
By training in this way, eventually you will be able to generate clear appearance of the deity. On that basis you should think “I am the deity of the resultant time.  I am the actual, for example, the dharmakaya, sambhogakaya, nirmanakaya.  I am the actual deity, the body of the time of the result.  I am not ordinary”.  This is how you should train initially. By training in this way then you will be able to obtain stable and clear appearance and divine pride through the force of familiarization.    When this occurs, there is no appearance of ordinariness to your mind, and there is also no adherence to ordinariness.
Through cultivating clear appearance and divine pride, you are able to meditate on the body of the deity. When you are meditating you should always think “Even though the deity appears, the deity does not exist inherently. There is no inherent existence”. You should think about the meaning of the emptiness at that time too.  
If you are able to meditate with a combination of these three qualities:
clear appearance, 
divine pride and 
the absence of inherent existence 
then your meditation will become very powerful.  
This is because:
by having clear appearance, you stop the appearance of ordinariness,
by having divine pride, you stop the adherence to ordinariness, 
by meditating on the absence of inherent existence you are able to stop the conception of self (grasping to self).  
On the level of beginner, in the beginning you have to slowly meditate on the sadhana and visualizing all the various objects. Eventually you will be able to meditate on the entire supporting and supported mandala.  Going through all the various stages you will be able to generate the entire mandala. This occurs on the level of the beginner.  So this is what you need to understand about the beginner.  
Khen Rinpoche: Are you beginner?  Not yet?  You understand what is beginner now. What mean beginner?   
Student 2: Are the ordinary I and the self-generated deity separated? The ordinary I is made of blood whereas the self-generated deity has nothing inside.  
Khen Rinpoche: The main point you have to think about is this.  You generate yourself as the deity. What is the base for you to generate yourself as the deity? It can be said that the 5 aggregates is what meditated as the deity. The 5 aggregates that are the basis of designation of the I. So you generate the 5 aggregates as the deity.  In fact there is this explanation that when you purify the 5 aggregates then you obtain the Buddha of the 5 families.  This is not easy.  It is said that when the form aggregate becomes completely purified, it becomes Vairochana.
Another way to think about this is to recall the fact that the ordinary coarse appropriated aggregates cannot be transformed into the deity. So these ordinary coarse contaminated (appropriated) aggregates cannot turn into a deity. This is why you have to purify everything into emptiness and then generate the deity from the state of emptiness.    
We say that from the state of the emptiness, the shaft of the blue light with the height of a cubit appears. Then this blue light transforms into the deity.  This blue light then becomes what is the basis for you to meditate on the deity’s body.  
This phrase “from the state of emptiness” is crucial because the generation of the deity occurs from the state of emptiness. It does not just arise but rather it arises from the state of emptiness. This means that whatever you generate from the state of emptiness is a mere imputation. It exists in mere name.
It is not the case that your contaminated aggregates with flesh and blood, bone and so on become the deity. You actually have to purify that into emptiness. Then from the state of the emptiness, you generate the deity.  
When we meditate we purify everything into emptiness. We have a very subtle mind ascertaining emptiness. This very subtle mind ascertaining emptiness then becomes the basis for us to think ‘I am the actual dharmakaya. I am the dharmakaya at the time of the result’. This is what we do when we bring death to the path as the dharmakaya (truth body). The base for us to establish this dharmakaya is our very subtle mind ascertaining emptiness. It is on this very basis that we are able to generate this thought ‘I am the actual dharmakaya’ and later on ‘I am the actual sambhogakaya’ and  ‘I am the actual nirmanakaya’. 
In the final analysis when you want to identify what this Buddha nature (buddha lineage) is, we say that what is suitable to transform into the Buddha bodies. What is this Buddha lineage? It is actually our very subtle wind and mind. Very subtle wind and mind is what transforms into the Buddha’s bodies. 
For example, in terms of this very subtle mind it is simply this factor of clear and knowing. That is what becomes the Buddha’s dharmakaya. 
Similarly, the very subtle wind becomes the Buddha’s  rupakaya (form body).
What transforms into the Buddha’s bodies? What is the basis that actually becomes the Buddha’s truth body and form body. It is our very subtle wind and mind. The very subtle mind realizes emptiness. That realization of emptiness appears or arises as the deity’s body. So by meditating in this way you practice the yoga of non-dual of profundity and clarity.
We talked about the apprehended aspect of the realization of emptiness appearing as the deity. If you take the expression apprehended aspect to refer to the object, then this means emptiness. Therefore, from the state of emptiness, the deity appears.
Sometimes in certain texts you see this explanation that you meditate on the 5 aggregates as the deity. Some scholars have said that there is no fault in saying that. You can say that the 5 aggregates meditated on as the deity. 
In most of Lama Tsongkhapa’s explanation, he talks about the apprehended aspect of the mind realizing emptiness appearing as the body of the deity. What this means is that the exalted wisdom realizing emptiness appears as the deity’s body. This is actually a unique feature of tantra. In this meditation you have the union of method and wisdom within a single mind. They are simply one entity different isolates. 
Then you have this yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity and you are able to accumulate both collections: the collections of merit and the collections of wisdom at the same time.
If you are able to combine method and wisdom into a single mind then this mind becomes very powerful. This is a unique feature of tantra. This means that there is no differentiation between meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment. Even in subsequent attainment you are able to accumulate easily the two accumulations of merit and wisdom.
As I have mentioned in the previous class, the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity can be found also in the lower tantras. What is special in HYT is that there is this feature also of bliss and emptiness. Even though you may not actually generate bliss, at least you visualize that you are experiencing bliss. You absorb all the coarse mind and you cause the very subtle mind to manifest. In such a state then all appearances have vanished. This mind is generated in the nature of great bliss, and using this mind that is in the nature of bliss, you meditate on emptiness. This blissful mind ascertains emptiness. 
This practice is uncommon feature of HYT. By causing the very subtle minds to manifest then you are able to stop all the appearances and this mind becomes very blissful. It has a special ability to realize emptiness. So using this blissful mind you ascertain emptiness. This is the unique feature of HYT. 
We talked about taking desire to the path. What this means is that through the deity and the consort entering into union by the joining of the two organs, you cause all appearances to vanish. Using this blissful mind you then meditate on emptiness. 
Back to the original question “What is the basis of generating the deity on the 1st level”. It will be difficult for you to generate the deity based on your ordinary self, ordinary I. Without the purification into emptiness and so on, how do you then do this practice of embracing consort, generating a blissful mind meditating on emptiness? It is not done on the basis of the ordinary I. One has to follow the instructions purifying into emptiness, generated as a deity. You have to meditate stopping the appearances of ordinariness and adherence to ordinariness. You also need to meditate on emptiness. 
With that kind of basis, you have clear appearance, divine pride then you are able to visualize entering into union with a consort generating this blissful mind and so on. Without those steps, if you just think this ordinary I generating as deity, then all these steps will be very difficult. Then this entering into union with a consort will be just some kind of a very mundane thing and it will be of no benefit and in fact it will generate negative karma.
In the generation stage we are making use of this exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness. This blissful mind is used to ascertain emptiness. It is this exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness that arises as the deity’s body. If you have emptiness as the foundation then this practice becomes easy. 
The techniques in tantra involve these steps. For example the 4 joys of the forward process and 4 joys of the downward process, the bliss becomes greater and greater. As this happens you are able to stop the coarse mind. All appearances will become stopped. Such a state then becomes very powerful for the realization of emptiness. For example, it is said that if a male practitioner is not able to retain the white bodhicitta and then this white bodhicitta is emitted from the body, this is actually an infraction in tantra. 
We have to understand tantra in an accurate way. If we see tantra as some kind of ordinary kind of activity, then without understanding properly there is a danger we generate wrong views. So we have to be careful. It is not easy at all. If you do not understand tantra properly there are many drawbacks. That is a good reason of why tantra is said to be secret. 
On the level of beginner, one meditates on the mandala slowly, one is able to generate clear appearance, and one also trains in divine pride. Through practicing in this way again and again, the practitioner will eventually be able to cause the entire supporting and supported mandala to appear clearly and instantly. In the short instant the entire mandala appear clearly through the force of great familiarization. Simply by thinking about it the entire mandala appears in a correct order with all the numbers of objects correct, one has clear appearance, and one also has stable divine pride. Once one reaches that level one belongs to the level of those who has attained some pristine wisdom. On this level called those attaining some pristine wisdom, one is able to cause the entire mandala to appear clearly in a very short period of time. In a period of a finger snap, everything appears clearly.
Khen Rinpoche: OK. Don’t forget these two things. Next class I ask, don’t say don’t know again. Otherwise it will take forever. 
Student 3:  When we say the apprehended aspect of the realization of emptiness can refer to both the object and the object possessor (the mind), is it because the object and the mind realizing emptiness are indistinguishable and are in one entity.
Khen Rinpoche: You say same. I say not same. 
Student 3: Not same?
Khen Rinpoche: There are two different ways of explanation. It is not the same thing. 
There are two ways of understanding what this apprehended aspect is:
One way is to understand it as the exalted wisdom realizing emptiness. 
The other way is to understand it as the object emptiness. 
According to Lama Tsongkhapa, it is the former. In other word, for Lama Tsongkhapa, apprehended aspect refers to the exalted wisdom realizing emptiness. 
There are two ways of understanding that expression:
One way is the mind
The other way is the object
These two are not the same. 
Student 3: Why these two - the mind and the object which is emptiness - can use the same term of the apprehended aspect? This expression “apprehended aspect” can be understood as the object and also it can be understood as the mind, then what is the reason for there being two different ways of understanding the same expression? I think the reason is because the mind realizing emptiness and the object emptiness are one entity. 
Khen Rinpoche: The reason why this expression “apprehended aspect” can refer to either the object or the object possessor is because the word “aspect” can be understood in two ways:
It can refer to the object aspect or it can refer to the subject aspect. 
Because of the word aspect, this is why it can refer to emptiness or the mind realizing emptiness.
Student 3: Which of these two practitioners is more powerful in terms of purifying negativities and accumulating merit?
The 1st practitioner is a person who is on the generation stage on HYT and is practicing the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity conjoined with indivisible bliss and emptiness but the bliss is imagined and this person has not yet attains calm abiding.
 The 2nd practitioner is a person who is practicing one of the three lower classes. This person is also practicing the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity and is on the Path of Accumulation and has achieved calm abiding. 
The HYT has extraordinary power. It is said that you are able to attain full enlightenment in a single lifetime in the same body during the degenerate times. In HYT, there is an explanation of the elements absorbing, the clear light mind manifesting, and then using that mind to realize emptiness. Such a technique does not exist in the lower tantras. This presentation of various levels of subtlety of mind is not found in the lower tantras. So using this very subtle mind to meditate on emptiness is very powerful. This extraordinary power is found only in HYT. 
The technique or the procedure for attaining calm abiding in sutra, in the Perfection Vehicle, is the same as that which is taught in the lower tantras. Guntang Rinpoche said that because the procedure for attaining calm abiding is the same in the lower tantras, one is not able to stop the subtle conceptions. 
In HYT there is a unique way of achieving calm abiding. It is said that you achieve calm abiding in HYT during the 3rd of the four levels. You do not achieve calm abiding before that. 
For example, on the 2nd of the 4 levels, you would not have achieved calm abiding. This means that when you do achieve it during the 3rd level you attain a very powerful calm abiding that is different from the calm abiding presented in the sutra system. Such a very powerful calm abiding is able to stop even the subtle conceptions. 
On the 2nd level you are able to instantly cause the entire supporting and supported mandala to appear clearly. You have clear appearance and divine pride. However, you are not able to cause that clear appearance of the deities of the basis, the sense basis, to appear instantly. If you want them to appear clearly you may have to meditate for 1 or 2 hours. On the 2nd level you are able to meditate on the coarse deities instantly but not these subtle deities instantly. 
You need to train also in being able to see the deities of the sense basis clearly in a very short period of time. By training then eventually you will be able to see, for example, Kṣitigarbha at the eyes very clearly instantly. When you are able to do that then you move on to the 3rd level, which is the level of those who have attained some control over pristine wisdom. 
Once you reach the 3rd level, the level of those who have attained some control over pristine wisdom, not only are you able to instantly generate the coarse deities clearly in a stable way, you are also able to do that for the subtle deities of the sense basis the eye and so forth. At this level you have clear appearance and divine pride with respect to both the coarse and subtle deities. 
Once you reach this level then you don’t need a long time to do your sadhana. You don’t need 1 hour and so on. You close your eyes and then you are able to visualize the entire supporting and supported mandala. 
Khen Rinpoche: If you are tried to commit long sadhana then make sure you achieve that. One like that everything there. You don’t need 2 hours, 3 hours. You go then finish. Even if you have 100 deities initiation no problem. 
Student 4: I would like to clarify on the meditation on great bliss and wisdom. The way I meditate on bliss is like when I eat a delicious piece of cake and I get the bliss in my mind. Then I think “This bliss is empty of inherent existent. It is merely labelled by the mind. All phenomena, including me, are all empty of inherent existent. Then I think the Guru, who is Buddha, is also experiencing bliss and the Guru realizes that the bliss that he is experiencing is also labelled by the mind and is empty of inherent existent. Even though I think that the bliss from eating the cake is truly existence, I make effort to think that it is empty of inherent existent. In that way, I try to conjoin that with the realization of emptiness. I want to check whether the great bliss wisdom imagination is something like that? Or is it another thing? 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know. Cake must be delicious 
In general there are two ways to experience bliss:
Bliss can occur in the retinue of a sense primary consciousness or
Bliss can occur in the retinue of a mental primary consciousness
When we experience bliss, that bliss appears to us as inherently existent and we also adhere to that bliss as inherent existent. When that occurs, our attachment to that bliss will not decrease, but in fact it will increase. Therefore, it is important on such occasion to remember that the bliss is empty of true existence. It might be an illusion.
When we meet an object and we feel blissful. It is important for us to remember that bliss is empty of true existence, like an illusion. If we do not remember that, then we will generate attachment to that bliss. That will become the cause for us to circle in samsara. 
We should remember that all phenomena are empty of true existence; they are like illusions. Not just the bliss. Like all phenomena in samsara and nirvana are empty of true existence; they are like illusions. It is important for you to meditate on that. 
What does it means to take desire into the path or to take sensual objects into the path? It doesn’t just like what you had described. What is involved here is that you use a condition of joining the two organs to cause the winds to enter the central channel. If you are able to penetrate the essential points then you are able to cause the winds to enter the central channel. Then as a result of that the coarse minds are stopped, all appearances are stopped and so on. 
This also occurs, for example, during the fainting process. This occurs on various occasions such as when joining of the two organs, when one is falling asleep, when one is fainting, one is dying and so on. Naturally, the coarse mind will be stopped and the subtle mind will manifest. When the subtle mind manifest and you are able to use it to ascertain emptiness, then this becomes a very powerful practice. This process involves all these coarse conception, conceptualization stopping, in an automatic way. This is what is involved when you take desire to the path.
Student 5: When we do our sadhana, when everything dissolves into emptiness. At the end, for ourselves, a clear appearance appear one-face two arms. After that, this mental meditation, for everyday or only when we are in meditation?  Let’s say I do my meditation, for example, Yamantaka. Now I am not Yamantaka because my face is still ordinary me. We suppose to see everybody as Yamantaka, but I still see everybody with the same face because my mental is still not pure. 
Khen Rinpoche: There is mentioned in the stanza from Lama Chopa in LC110 which says, 
I seek your blessing to cleanse of all stains of ordinary appearance and grasping through the first stage yoga of transforming birth, death and the bardo into the three bodies of the Buddha. So that whatever appears may arise as the deity. 
This stanza contains all the essential points of all the generation stage. This generation stage involves transforming birth, death, bardo into the three bodies of the Buddha. Then the stanza end by saying:
I seek your blessing so that whatever appears may arise as the deity. 
This is not an easy practice, but that is the goal.
For a beginner this is hard to do. It is hard for everything that appears to arise as the deity. In fact, there are instructions on how you should practice during the session and between the sessions. This means that even when you are out of the session, there are many instructions for practice. This is something that you have to practice not just during the session. It is not like after you get out of the session, then you just leave everything behind. No. Even after the session, you have to practice. All these instructions are to be practice and occur not just in tantra. You also see that in sutra. For example, there is this instruction or advice in the sutra that you should train in seeing all sentient beings as the teacher, the Buddha. Also in the context of practicing devotion to the spiritual master, relying on the Guru, there are many instructions on how you should train in developing faith in your teacher.
There are many instructions on how you should train to understand that things do not exist in the way they appear. They appear in a certain way is not necessary real. Their appearances are not necessary real. Starting from the beginning there are many instructions that you have to train in. Through a gradual process, eventually, when you train in tantra, then you will be able to train in seeing everything that appears as the deity body.
As we have explained, you have to train in stages starting from the level of a beginner, and then going to the next level, the 2nd level and when you reach the 3rd level, those who had attained some control over pristine wisdom, you are able to cause the entire supporting and supported mandala to appear instantly. Simply by thinking about the mandala, the entire mandala appears clearly. So you have the clear appearance and you also have divine pride. You are also able to remember that they are empty of inherent existent. So by training then simply by thinking you are able to do that.
In the presentation here, it is said that you attain calm abiding only during the 3rd level. So this very stable mind is attained only during the 3rd level. This means on the 1st and 2nd of the four levels, you do not have calm abiding. That imply that it is possible for you to come under the influence of laxity, excitation, your mind can become distracted and so on. If laxity and excitation and so on occurs, it will become difficult for you to have this clear appearance of the deity body and so on. It is said that in order for whatever appears to arise as the deity, this is the training you have to do. It occurs on the generation stage.
On the 3rd level, you have this stability to cause the coarse and subtle bases to appear clearly instantly. When you attain the 3rd level, the level of those who have attained some control over pristine wisdom, you have attained both the stability in the coarse generation stage and you have also completed the coarse generation stage.
In fact, there is this explanation on what you should do on the first two levels. 
Further, those on the first two levels mainly engage in meditation on the subtle drop for the purpose of countering mental laxity and excitation *in realization meditation.
Translator translated as:  When meditating on the sadhana 
On the first two levels, you still have laxity and excitation. In order to counter them, you are instructed to meditate on the subtle drops.
You must be able to know what these terms means. So whenever you hear these terms, beginner, you have to immediately be able to tell this is what it means. Whenever you hear the expression, those who have attained some pristine wisdom, immediately there is some meaning generality or idea in your mind as to what it means. If you do not have these kinds of understanding, then it will be difficult for you to understand the text.
Khen Rinpoche: You get two things, now? Or like this or that? Like eating cake, you must get the bliss like “Oh these two..”. Not only cakes, bliss in studying also.
On the first two levels, the level of beginners, and those who have attained some pristine wisdom, you try to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride with respect to the supporting and supported mandala. On these two levels, you still have the mental laxity and excitation. How do you overcome them? The method is meditation on the subtle drop.
If laxity is predominant, meaning excitation is not as predominant then what do you do? You have to meditate on the subtle drop; subtle object at the upper opening. 
You can meditate on subtle drop or, they say like the subtle, minute hand implement or symbol.
Where is this upper opening? It is actually at this point between your eye brows. It is said that the central channel goes upwards and it curves and then ends at the point between your eyebrows.
At this end here, there is this opening inside. Then you meditate on a tiny five-spoke vajra. By meditating on this minute five-spoke vajra at that point, you will be able to reduce laxity.
By meditating on this minute vajra, the size of a mustard seed, at the opening, you will be able to cause laxity to subside. This is not the main meditation. You still have to return to the visualization of the supporting and supported mandala in cultivate divine pride and clear appearance. That meditation on the tiny vajra at the upper opening is simply for the sake of overcoming laxity. Once laxity has been taken care of, then you don’t have to meditate on them again. You should return to meditating on the supporting and supported mandala.
While you are on the first two levels, the level of beginner and those who have attained some pristine wisdom, you may be affected by laxity or excitation. When laxity arises then you should focus on this subtle vajra (minute vajra) at the upper opening and then cause your laxity to be overcome. As soon as laxity has been eliminated then you should return to meditate on the mandala again. By meditating this way, you want to cause the mandala to appear clearly instantly.
What happen if excitation is predominant? Instead of laxity, now excitation is predominant. In that case you should meditate on this subtle drop at the lower opening. The lower opening is situated at your secret place. It is actually where the lower end of the central channel is. The lower end of the central channel is located in the secret place. Inside of this lower end of the central channel, you should meditate on this subtle object which is given the name of the substance drop. You have to meditate on this object which is as small as a mustard seed and then cause your excitation to be overcome. As soon as the excitation is overcome, then you return to meditating on the mandala cultivating clear appearance and divine pride.
Meditations involving the subtle drop and their purpose
Beginners and those attaining some pristine wisdom hold the mind on a subtle hand symbol or drop at the upper and lower opening. Those who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom and above meditate on the complete supporting maṇḍala and supported deities inside a hand symbol or subtle drop.
Further, those on the first two levels mainly engage in meditation on the subtle drop for the purpose of countering mental laxity and excitation in realization meditation. 
It is said that establishing the stabilization of mind contracted to a subtle drop is achieved from the third level.
I have already given the commentary and the words are quite clear. If you read these passages you should understand what they are saying. You have to read the text again on your own. Reading again and again then you can understand what the text is saying. You have to ask yourself again what this passage is saying.
The passages after that talk about when calm abiding is attained, when is special insight attained, when do you have the union of calm abiding and special insight and do you achieve the two together? 
Some scholar says that you can achieve calm abiding and special insight simultaneously. 
There are some other scholars who says that calm abiding and special insight are attained serially as in the case of the sutra system. 
There is this scholar who says that calm abiding is attained when you completed the subtle generation stage. 
But the reply then says that this does not explained when it is newly attained and so on.
Special announcement by Khen Rinpoche on the commitments of Lama Chopa to be given by Kyabje Lama Zopa Rinpoche:
You know Rinpoche is coming here and giving the Lama Chopa and Yamantaka initiation, and also giving the Lama Chopa commentary. It will be about one month in September. Many people worry about the commitment of Lama Chopa. I did check. Of course, Rinpoche highly encourage people to do Lama Chopa every day. That is his main wish. That is the part of the Guru Devotion practice. So he thinks it is extremely important to do Lama Chopa every day. He wants people to do as many as possible. Then Rinpoche says if people have difficulty to do Lama Chopa every day then do the Lama Tsongkhapa Guru Yoga every day. That depends. So Rinpoche says don’t need to worry. So that is quite clear. So don’t worry so much about the commitments. Of course, the best is you should commit to do Lama Chopa every day; especially to learn the tantra well as possible. When Rinpoche comes and explain then you can understand better. Lama Chopa is all about tantra. Now is the preparation. When I explain on generation stage and completion stage, listen well. When Rinpoche comes and explains then you will be more clear. About the commitment, some people worried so much. So I checked and the advice is something like that. Okay then you can take.