Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L61.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.756564
================================================================================

(Khen Rinpoche gave some questions for the students to write down the answers and to be submitted by the next Saturday.)
Khen Rinpoche: Those who are really interested and want to study then you write down the questions. After that you must answer the questions within a week. Next week you give me back. This is only for those who really seriously want to study. If you are not so serious and just want to listen, then it is up to you. Don’t need to write. Relax, listen, and leave positive imprint for the next life. Take it easy. What I am saying is nothing big thing. We have already covered these topics. The point is by giving questions then maybe you focus little bit, you write down litter bit and then you learn little bit. So that is the point. 
Question 1: On the generation stage, one meditates on bringing death, intermediate state and rebirth to the path as the three Buddha bodies for the sake of purifying ordinary death, intermediate state and rebirth. How does the meditation purify ordinary death, intermediate state and rebirth?
Khen Rinpoche: That is the long way of saying but can share in one very short sentence.
Basically, when you meditate on bringing death, intermediate state and rebirth to the path as the three bodies, how are they purified? 
More extensively:
When you meditate on bringing death to the path as the dharmakaya (dharma body), you purify ordinary death. 
When you meditate on bringing the intermediate state to the path as the sambhogakaya (complete enjoyment body), you purify the ordinary intermediate state. 
When you meditate on bringing rebirth to the path as the nirmanakaya (emanation body), you purify the ordinary rebirth. 
You meditate on bringing to the path the three Buddha’s bodies. You have to give an explanation on how you do that. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay? So you can write 10 pages, 20 pages. It is up to you. How many pages you want to write is up to you. 
The explanations have been given. From your side, you have to be interested and then you have to make yourself understand. You have to read up and so on. The whole point is that you have to make yourself understand. 
Question 2: We have discussed the beginner and those who have attained some pristine wisdom. What are these levels? What is the difference between these two levels: the levels of the beginners and those who have attained some pristine wisdom?
Question 3: How do we eliminate the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness on the generation stage? 
These three questions are related to the generation stage. Please think about the answers and then write them down. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay? Next Saturday you can bring back. One week should be enough. 
The first two levels, the levels of the beginners and those who have attained some pristine wisdom, correspond to the coarse generation stage. 
During the 3rd level, the level of those who have attained some control over pristine wisdom, one cultivates the subtle generation stage. 
As mentioned in the previous classes, the first two levels involve meditation on a subtle hand implement at the upper opening or the lower opening. We said that the purpose for engaging in these meditations on the first two levels is to counter mental laxity and excitation. 
Beginners and those attaining some pristine wisdom hold the mind on a subtle hand symbol or drop at the upper and lower opening. Those who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom and above meditate on the complete supporting maṇḍala and supported deities inside a hand symbol or subtle drop. 
When you are meditating on the supporting and supported mandala, mental laxity and excitation can arise. In order to eliminate them, you meditate on minute hand implement or the substance drop at the upper and lower openings.
If laxity is predominant, you can meditate on a tiny vajra at the upper opening. 
If excitation is predominant, you meditate on a substance drop at the lower opening. 
On the first two levels you do not meditate on this subtle hand implement or drop for a long time. As soon as you have eliminated mental laxity and excitation you return to deity yoga. Therefore, on the first two levels, the main meditation is that of deity yoga, not the subtle drops. This has been said in Ngawang Palden’s text and we have already gone through that section. 
When you are meditating on the sadhana you meditate on yourself as the triple tiered being:
You have the form of Vajrabhairava
At your heart you meditate on youthful Manjushri
At the heart of youthful Manjushri there is the syllable HUM
You meditate on this tiny vajra from the position of the syllable HUM rising to the top of the upper end of the central channel. That refers to this point between your eyebrows. You meditate on this tiny vajra there. 
The upper end of the central channel is located at this point between your eyebrows. Inside this end, you have to meditate on a very tiny vajra. This vajra separates from the letter HUM at the heart of Manjushri and it goes to the upper end of the central channel. Inside the upper end of the central channel located between your eyebrows you have to meditate on this minute vajra. This is not an ordinary vajra. You have to think that this vajra is actually the entity of your yidam (tutelary deity) which takes the aspect of a vajra. So single-pointedly you need to hold your mind there. 
Similarly, you meditate on a substance drop that emerges from the letter HUM at your heart. This substance drop then goes to the lower end of the central channel which is located at your secret place. Inside this central channel at that end you have to meditate on this very tiny drop, blue in color, and it is the nature of Akshobhya and has the size of a mustard seed. 
This little drop has three attributes:
It is blue, 
It is the nature of Akshobhya 
It has the size of a mustard seed. 
You have to focus your mind on this tiny drop. Similarly, the vajra that we described earlier is also the size of a mustard seed. So by focusing your mind on these tiny objects, you need to eliminate laxity and excitation. Once you have eliminated then you should resume your cultivation of clear appearance and divine pride of being the deity. 
On the coarse generation stage you meditate in this way:
If laxity and excitation arise, you focus on this tiny hand implement or you focus on this subtle drop. In that way you pacify laxity and excitement. 
Then try to improve your meditation. 
Then using the sadhana you move onto reflect on the purities. 
You recite the mantra. 
At the end you will offer the tormas. 
Finally you end the session. 
During the cultivation of the coarse generation stage, you recite the mantra and you also cultivate clear appearance and divine pride. When you do so in a proper way, accumulating say 100,000 mantras and so on, you will basically achieve the effectiveness of the mantra and the substance. These mantra and substance become powerful. Then you will be able to perform the four kinds of activities:
Pacification
Increase
Control
Wrath. 
If you want to practice in a way that causes you to gain this kind of proper experience, that is the way you should do it. Sometimes when we do the retreat, we try to accumulate the mantras quickly, we don’t recite properly and don’t meditate properly and so on. But of course there is still the accumulation of merit. What I am trying to say is that if you really meditating properly, that is the way you should do it. If you want to attain Buddhahood quickly, then that is the way in which you should meditate. 
During the 3rd level, you want to achieve calm abiding. During this level, you will focus on meditating on this subtle drop/subtle implement the size of a mustard seed. You have already completed the deity yoga by the time you reach the 3rd level. Therefore, on the 3rd level you are focusing on this meditation on the subtle drop. 
The range of the coarse and subtle generation stage
It is said that the coarse generation stage is completed when you reach the third level, and meditation on the subtle generation stage occurs after attaining mental stability through contracting the maṇḍala in drop yoga. It is said that calm abiding is obtained when you attain stability on the subtle drop at the upper opening.
Then you attain the peerless concentration uniting calm abiding and insight through the wisdom of individual investigation repeatedly emitting and reabsorbing its object, and the generation stage is completed when such yoga stabilizes. Mantric Stages states that this presentation conforms with both systems of Guhyasamāja.
“It is said that calm abiding is obtained when you attain stability on the subtle drop at the upper opening” - this means that you meditate on tiny implement at the upper opening. When you are able to meditate on that in a very stable way, you do not come under the influence of laxity or excitation. Your mind does not become distracted. 
When you are able to attain stability on the subtle drop at the upper opening, is this an attainment of calm abiding? You should think about it. 
This point is actually not clear in the commentaries. I read many commentaries and there is no explicit statement saying if you are able to meditate on the subtle drop in this way for 4 or 5 hours then you have attained calm abiding or you have attained special insight and so on. This is not clear in the texts. 
“Then you attain the peerless concentration uniting calm abiding and special insight through the wisdom of individual investigation repeatedly emitting and reabsorbing its object” - this means you emit a vajra to the front. After that you reabsorb it to the root vajra at your heart. You can do this again but you emit two vajras to the front and then you reabsorb to the root vajra. It is said that through doing such a practice of emitting and reabsorbing, you can attain special insight. 
Through such a practice of emitting and reabsorbing, from 1 vajra you emit another vajra, from 1 you emit 2 vajras, from 1 you emit 3 vajras and so on, these vajras in the beginning emitting at the front of your face, then later pervading to in front of your body and so on until the whole space is pervaded by these vajras. It is said that eventually you will attain special insight. 
The root vajra is located at your upper opening. Previously by focusing on this vajra at the upper opening, you achieve calm abiding. Now through this practice of emitting and reabsorbing, from the vajra at the upper opening you want to achieve special insight. While you do this emitting of the vajras and reabsorbing them, you have to focus on the vajra at your upper opening without becoming distracted. 
First of all, you emanate just 1 and later you reabsorb it. 
At the next stage, you emit 1 then you emit a 2nd one.
After that you reabsorb them sequentially.
At the 2nd level, you emit 1 vajra then you emit a 2nd vajra. 
When you reabsorb, you reabsorb the 2nd one first and then you reabsorb the 1st one.
The 1st one also becomes reabsorbed to the root vajra at your upper opening. 
At the 3rd level, you are emanating 3 vajras, 
First from the root vajra at the upper opening, you emanate 1 vajra. 
From the 1st vajra that you have emanated, you emanate a 2nd vajra. 
From the 2nd vajra you have emanated, you emanate a 3rd vajra. 
When you reabsorb, the 3rd vajra absorbs into the 2nd vajra.
The 2nd vajra absorbs into the 1st vajra.
The 1st vajra absorbs into the root vajra at the upper opening. 
This is not easy because you need to have a very clear stable mind that is free from distraction. Just imagine you have to do this emitting and reabsorbing that pervades the entire space. You have to keep track of all the vajras that you have emitted. You have to emit them in this order and when you reabsorb you have to do it in the correct sequence. Basically, there are just countless vajras. How are you going to do this? It is not easy. 
Khen Rinpoche: Making lego. 
 “Then you attain the peerless concentration uniting calm abiding and special insight through the wisdom of individual investigation repeatedly emitting and reabsorbing its object” - through this practice, you will attain special insight. 
First calm abiding is attained then special insight is attained. This is the explanation according to Ngawang Palden. There is a way of explanation that says that in tantra calm abiding and special insight are attained sequentially. 
This explanation occurs in Lama Tsongkhapa’s Mantric Stages and also in Khedrup Je’s Ocean of Attainments. Explicitly these texts said that calm abiding and special insight are attained sequentially.
There are other scholars who explained that calm abiding and special insight can be attained simultaneously in tantra. For example, Gundang Jampel Yang and Kyabje Lobsang Trinley say that in tantra, one can attain calm abiding and special insight simultaneously; unlike in sutra. 
In the sutra system, there is no possibility of attaining calm abiding and special insight simultaneously. They have to be attained sequentially. However, it is explained that in tantra, it is possible to attain them simultaneously. It is not definite that one first attains calm abiding followed by special insight. 
The question comes up: How do you attain calm abiding and special insight simultaneously if that is a possibility in tantra? Perhaps when you are cultivating calm abiding by focusing on this tiny implement at the upper end, during the 7th and 8th stages, you train also in this emitting and reabsorbing of the vajras. Through the force of engaging in this practice on the 7th and 8th mental abiding, and when you complete the 9th mental abiding, you also complete the special insight. So you attain calm abiding and special insight together. 
In the sutra system, when you train in calm abiding, you do only placement meditation. This is because when you engage in analytical meditation, then the factor of stability will deteriorate.  So you simply do placement meditation. 
In the actual practice of calm abiding, according to the sutra system, you only do placement meditation. This is because if you try to engage in analytical meditation, then the mind will have difficulty staying on the object. Therefore, it is said that you begin to cultivate special insight only after you have attained calm abiding. 
This is different in the tantra system because of the unusual object and the unusual location where you meditate the object:
This object is subtle drop or a tiny implement of the size of a mustard seed. This is something unusual. 
On top of that, this object is meditated at the upper opening. This place where you meditate this object is also unusual. 
In tantra, this technique is unusual because it has unusual power in withdrawing your mind inwards. It is said that even though you do both the placement meditation and the analytical meditation, the analytical meditation does not serve as a hindrance to your meditation. Because you are able to alternate between placement meditation and analytical meditation without this analytical meditation becoming a hindrance, therefore, you can attain calm abiding and special insight together.  However, it is not clear in the text when exactly one attains calm abiding and when exactly one attains special insight. 
Therefore, regarding the attainment of calm abiding and special insight, there are two explanations.
According to the first way of explanation, first you attain calm abiding by meditating on this subtle drop or tiny implement. After you have attained calm abiding then you do this meditation of emitting and reabsorbing. Then you can attain special insight. 
According to the second explanation, it is possible for you to attain calm abiding and special insight together. Perhaps the way to do that is that when you are on the 7th and 8th mental abiding and before you attain calm abiding, you do this practice of emitting and reabsorbing. When you attain the 9th mental abiding, you attain both calm abiding and special insight. 
There is this presentation of meditating on this subtle substance drop with yourself visualized as the deity father and mother in union. Then you produce this drop, the substance of bodhicitta. Then this bodhicitta drop abides at the secret place. Within this drop you meditate the entire supporting and supported mandala. 
With yourself visualized as this father mother deity in union, at your secret place is this subtle drop. Within it is the entire supporting and supported mandala. 
Since this is the complete supporting and supported mandala, within it you have also the father and mother deities. At the father and mother deities you have also the drops. This drop then descends to the secret place. Within that drop there is an entire supporting and supported mandala. So you can see that the meditation gets more and more subtle. 
Similarly, you have the 3rd level of meditation because within this subtle drop there is an entire supporting and supported mandala. This means that the father and mother deities are inside there. Again, you visualize they enter into union and then the drops descend to their secret place. At the secret place, there is this drop again containing the entire supporting and supported mandala. 
If you recall that we had said that you complete the coarse generation stage when you are able to cause the entire supported and supporting mandala to appear instantly for a certain period of time.
If you are able to do this for 4 hours, you attain stability. 
If you are able to do this for an unlimited amount of time then you complete the generation stage.
In Lama Tsongkhapa’s Medium Length Lamrim, in the context of discussing special insight, it is mentioned that in Highest Yoga Tantra, there is the simultaneous attainment of calm-abiding and special insight. 
In the Medium Length Lamrim, there is this statement saying that in the sutra system, it is mentioned that first you attain calm-abiding then you attain special insight. Then the question comes: Is this presentation the same in Hinayana, in Mahayana, in Sutra and also in Tantra? 
The question is asked: Is this presentation of sequential attainment of calm-abiding and special insight -first calm-abiding then special insight - of the Hinayana, Mahayana, Sutra and also Tantra? 
The answer said it is similar in the following systems:
in the vehicle of the Hearers,
in the vehicle of Solitary Realizer
in the vehicle of the Bodhisattvas,
in the 4 tenets system as well as 
the 3 tantra sets
From this answer, you can see that there is the omission of the Highest Yoga Tantra. It talks about the Hinayana, Mahayana in the Paramitayana and so on. It talks about the three lower classes of tantra. It does not mention Highest Yoga Tantra. Perhaps from this answer, we can infer that the attainment of the calm-abiding and special insight in Highest Yoga Tantra does not have to be sequential. 
Even though, there is no explicit statement saying that in Highest Yoga Tantra there is simultaneous attainment of calm-abiding and special insight but when the answer states which systems have the serial presentation of calm-abiding and special insight, Highest Yoga Tantra was not mentioned. Perhaps from there, we can say that there is simultaneous attainment in Highest Yoga Tantra. 
Why is Highest Yoga Tantra omitted from the answer? What is the reason? There should be a reason.
According to Yangchen Gawai Lodrö when you complete the subtle generation stage, you attain calm-abiding. That is what he said in his Principles of Grounds and Paths. 
Points of debate
When is calm abiding attained?
One scholar says: Calm abiding is attained when you complete the subtle generation stage.
Reply: But this statement does not teach when it is newly obtained. Understand the method of obtaining stability and the point of completion of the coarse and subtle generation stages through such training by consulting the Principles of Grounds and Paths of my guru, Yangchen Gawai Lodrö. 
Who is this “one scholar” mentioned here? It is actually the author Ngawang Palden’s own teacher Yangchen Gawai Lodrö who says that calm-abiding is attained when you complete the subtle generation stage. Ngawang Palden himself is saying this statement does not teach the demarcation of the new attainment of calm-abiding. It is simply saying that when you complete this subtle generation stage, you have attained calm-abiding. It is not talking about newly attaining calm-abiding. 
According to Ngawang Palden, as we have seen from the previous explanation, one attains calm-abiding before one completes subtle generation stage. It is not the case that one attains calm-abiding when one attains the subtle generation stage. When you attain the subtle generation stage, you are able to instantly see the entire supported and supporting mandala within a subtle drop in a very clear and stable way as though you are seeing the entire supported and supporting mandala in the subtle drop with your own eyes, with your eye consciousness, as though your eyes are opened and are looking at the mandala. It is so clear that it seems like if you are to stretch out your hands, you can actually touch it. 
When you have such a clear stable meditative stabilization that is able to see this entire supporting and supported mandala and the subtle drop instantly and you can maintain this for 4 hours then you have attained stability. 
If you can do this for an indefinite period of time, you have completed the subtle generation stage. 
This is the meditative stabilization of the union of calm-abiding and special insight and it has amazing clarity.
During this 3rd level, you cultivate calm-abiding and special insight and you are able to meditate on this entire supported and supporting mandala in subtle drop very clearly and in a very stable way. This occurs through the power of meditative stabilization. You do not rely on the power of mantra and substance at this stage. 
It is said that on the first two levels, you rely on the power of mantra and substance. But during the 3rd level, you rely on the power of meditative stabilization instead. It is a mistake to think “I can just meditate through visualization. I don’t have to care about substance, mantra and so on”. 
Before you reach the 3rd level, you do need to rely on substance and mantra. You shouldn’t think “I can just visualize everything”. 
You need mantra and substance. 
You need to have clear appearance. 
You need to have divine pride. 
You need to have the awareness of emptiness that these phenomena are like illusion and so on. 
It is only when you reach the 3rd level that you do not have this dependence on substance and mantra. So, it is incorrect for you to think that you do not need mantra, substance and so on before you have actually attained the level.
During the 3rd level, you will attain the union of calm-abiding and special insight. It is said that after you have completed the subtle generation stage and when you go out to a field and meditate on the entire supported and supporting mandala and visualizing yourself in this celestial mansion, it is said that if it rains you will not become wet. The rain will not come into the mandala.
Khen Rinpoche: It is how powerful the mind. The power of the mind.
It is an amazing achievement and this occurs through the power of meditative stabilization. By meditative stabilization, you attain this actual ability. For example, it is said that when you use meditative stabilization to meditate on a bridge, you can actually walk on this bridge without falling into the river. Also it is said that using meditative stabilization to visualize on staircase going up into space, you can actually walk on this staircase and ascend upwards.
Khen Rinpoche: But don’t try now. You may fall down 
Such power can be attained on the generation stage through the power of your mind. Through the attainment of union of calm-abiding and special insight, you will be able to manifest this move as you think. So, such as the power.
However, those are not our goals. Our goal is not to be able to walk on water and so on. But it is said that the power of the generation stage is such that you will gain these abilities. As explained previously, you cultivate clear appearance and divine pride in order to overcome the appearances of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. You have to have very stable clear appearance and divine pride in order to overcome those hindrances. Therefore, you need to attain calm-abiding. With the calm-abiding, you will have very stable clear appearance and divine pride and thus you are able to eliminate the appearances of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. 
Therefore, you meditate on bringing death, intermediate state and rebirth to the path as the three Buddha’s bodies. 
After that you offer inner offerings. 
Then you offer the other offerings. 
Then you offer praises. 
At that point you meditate on the coarse and subtle generation stage.
After that your recollect the purities.
During the recollection of the purities, you try to generate enthusiasm. The translation is minding the symbolism which says that:
your 9 faces like this are for the 9 scriptural categories
your 2 horns are for the two levels of truths
your 34 arms plus your body, speech and mind are for the 37 limbs of enlightenment
your 16 legs are for the 16 types of emptiness and so on. 
So by recollecting the symbolism, the purities of the deity’s body then you generate enthusiasm.(see page 32-33 of the sadhana Victory Over Evil – The Extensive Practice of the Solitary Hero Yamantaka) 
Minding the Symbolism
Your nine faces like this are for the nine scriptural categories. Your two horns are for the two levels of truth. Your thirty-four arms plus your body, speech and mind, these thirty-seven are for the thirty-seven limbs of enlightenment and your sixteen legs are for the sixteen types of emptiness. Your phallus standing erect is for ever-expanding great bliss. The person and so forth are for the eight powerful attainments, and the vulture and so on are for the eight powers. Your nakedness is for not being obscured by obstacles and your hair bristling upward shows your achievement of the elevated state of Nirvana.
After minding the symbolism, then you do the mantra recitation. Before you recite the mantra, you have to bless the mala (rosary). You generate yourself as the deity. Then you consecrate the rosary and bless the mala. After that you recite the peaceful and wrathful mantras of Vajrabhairava. 
You do four sessions everyday. You meditate according to the sadhana. When you become tired, you do the mantra recitation. After that you make offerings and offer the tormas. Finally do the absorption and then end with the prayers and dedication.
The section on offering torma is important. You bless the torma in the same way that you bless the inner offerings. After blessing it you offer it. It is taught that there is a great purpose and reason for offering the torma. If you are able to do that it will help to pacify obstacles. You will also be able to quickly achieve the various attainments (siddhis). 
You bless the torma and then you offer to Vajrabhairava. You also offer to Karma Yama, the protector. 
You have to bless the torma. Then you have to invite the guests and offer the torma to them. 
When you want to make this offering, first you have these substances in the vessels or bowls or whatever. You have to purify them to emptiness and then you bless them. Then you offer them to, for example, the deity (yidam). Then you have to visualize this HUM at the tongue of the deity becomes one spoke vajra to which the essence of the torma is drawn out. 
When you make this offering, you have to imagine that you emanate infinite goddesses from your heart and then they make the offerings. Then Vajrabhairava’s tongue becomes this white single spoke vajra like a hollow tube. Through that the deity draws out the essence of the torma through a straw light. Through partaking of the offerings you have to imagine great bliss is generated in their continuum and they become satiated by these offerings.  This is on page 39 of your sadhana (Visualization of the Guests for the Torma).
You have many tormas to offer. There are different recipients of the tormas. After that you have to perform the absorption. Before that you have to request for forbearance or request for their patience. 
At that point you should recite the 100 syllables mantra to purify the mistakes, for example, reciting the mantra incorrectly, from having unclear concentration, from addition, omission and so on. After that you have to do the dissolution of the absorption. This is at page 47 of the sadhana.
Dissolution
The charnel grounds along with the protection wheels dissolve into the celestial mansion. The celestial mansion dissolves into myself. As the commitment being, I myself dissolve into the wisdom-being. The wisdom being dissolves into the concentration being, the letter HUM.
The U of the HUM dissolves into the HA, the HA dissolves into its head, this into the crescent moon; that into the drop and that dissolves into the nada. This too turns into inconceivable emptiness. From within the state of emptiness, I arise in the aspect of glorious Vajrabhairava with one face and two arms, marked at the crown of my head with an OM, at my throat with an AH and at my heart with a HUM.
You imagine that from your heart, light ray radiates and then strikes the charnel grounds and the protection wheel. Then they absorb into the celestial mansion. 
There are explanations of whether or not you should absorb this protection wheel. It is said that if you are facing great obstacles then you should not absorb the protection wheel. So, you leave the protection wheel there as it is. Then you absorb the charnel grounds. 
Everything is being absorbed and eventually there is just clear light emptiness. You should place yourself in equipoise on that clear light emptiness. After that you arise as the deity and then with that 
During the dissolution, you absorb the charnel grounds and so on. Then eventually, you arrive at clear light emptiness. Then you have to place yourself in meditative equipoise in that clear light emptiness for a while. After that you arise as the deity. From that point onwards then you enter the session breaks or the period between sessions. 
After the dissolution from the state of clear light emptiness you arise as a deity. If you are able to arise as a complete form, the full Vajrabhairava, that is ideal. If that is not possible then you arise as one face two arms Vajrabhairava. From there you enter the period between sessions.
You may wonder what is the point of dissolving myself into clear light emptiness and arising again as the deity. What is the purpose? 
Arising from clear light into the deity again correspondence to the intermediate state at the time of the basis. By doing you train in this meditation. This means that by such training, at the time of the path, you will be able to arise more quickly into the pure and impure illusory body. This also ripened the result so that you can arise quickly into the complete enjoyment body.
When you enter this period between the sessions, you should realize that this period is as important as the actual session from the point of view of your practice. Even though the between session, you should not be parted from the divine pride. As you are going about your daily activity, whether you are sleeping, eating, waking up, washing yourself and so on, you should maintain the divine pride of being the deity.
During this session breaks, you should practice the conduct such that whatever you see or you think is the actual mandala of the deity and cultivate the divine pride of the actual supported and supporting mandala. Whatever sound you hear, you think that these are the sounds of the yidam (deity). Whatever comes to your mind, whatever thoughts you have, you should think that this is the actual mind of the deity. On top of that, we have to eat, we have to drink, and if you can, you should bless your food and drinks in the same way that you bless the inner offering. Thinking that the 5 meats and 5 nectars and they are blessed to become an ocean of nectar through the processes of purification and then transforming them into nectar and causing them to increase and multiply. These foods and drinks become the nature of great bliss but they have the aspect of being an ocean of nectar.
Whatever you eat, you should try to spend 1 or 2 minutes to reflect on that. This is an important practice. Since you are generated as Vajrabhairava or Yamantaka, you are marked by the 3 syllables at your 3 places. This means that there is a syllable HUM at your heart. This syllable HUM should be regarded as encompassing all the Buddhas. As you enjoy the food, think that you are offering this food to the letter Hum at your heart. Then you are offering to all the Buddhas. You visualize as the result of offering, there is the generation of the special exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness. Doing such a practice achieves many purposes. If you are able to eat your food or drink water as described above, you will not accumulate any negativity in that process. Instead you will accumulate indefinite merits. By doing so, you will become free from sickness and will have a healthy body.
You should try to do that to the best of your ability whenever you eat food, whenever you drink and so on. By spending a little bit of time to do that reflection, you will achieve great benefit. In terms of the conduct you can also practice sleep yoga. 
To practice sleep yoga,
Imagine that from your heart, infinite light rays emanated. 
These light rays strike the environment and the inhabitants within the environment. 
Then they are absorbed back into you. 
Then you also absorb into emptiness in stages. 
Finally, you arrive at the stage of clear light emptiness.  
Everything absorbs, it absorbs into the Hum and the Hum also absorb into stages
Finally there is just the clear light, emptiness. 
You should fall asleep in that stage of clear light emptiness. If you have difficulty falling asleep, this is one practice you can do. You visualize that light rays radiate and then the environment and its inhabitants absorb into you. Then you absorb into the HUM.  
The U of the HUM dissolves. The Shabkyu absorb into the HA and the HA absorb into the moon and so on. Finally the Nada, the little squiggle absorb and finally is the clear light emptiness. If you make effort in that, it will be helpful for you to fall asleep. By falling asleep in this clear light emptiness then you are practicing sleep yoga. This is one of the yoga of conduct.
You sleep but eventually you have to wake up. Then you practice the yoga of waking up. 
When you wake up, think the gods and goddesses are singing song urging you to arise from this clear light. They are urging you to wake up. At the urging, you wake up. 
When you wake up you should think “I am arising as the form body in order to enact the welfare of sentient beings”. 
With that intention, you should visualize that you arise in the form of one face two arms Vajrabhairava. 
Then you cultivate clear appearance and divine pride. 
So that is the yoga of rising or the yoga of waking up.
After you have gotten out of bed then you wash yourself. When you wash yourself, you can think that this water is actually the water of exalted wisdom. This water of exalted wisdom is obtained from the melting of Akshobhya father and mother. The visualization here is same as that in the vase water initiation. You visualize that Akshobhya father and mother melt and become the nature of water and that water is used to wash yourself.  Then when you are washing yourself, you can think that in the space before you are the Buddhas of the 5 lineages (families), the fathers and mothers, deities. From their hearts, infinite goddesses are emanated. These goddesses hold vases that are filled with nectar and then offer that to you. 
As you are washing, think “All my misdeeds and all my obscurations are washed away and become purified”. After this water flows away, you think that there is one drop remaining at your crown. This drop of water transforms into Akshobhya; becomes this crown ornament. Then you think that the initiation deities absorb into you and bless your continuum.
There was this question regarding clear appearance and divine pride came out previously. It is important for you to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride both during the session as well as between the sessions. If you think “I just need to cultivate them during the session” and you are careless after the session, then this will make it difficult for you to generate clear appearance and divine pride when you return to the session. So, it is very important for you to make effort at clear appearance and divine pride also during the session break. If you are attentive during the session break then that attentiveness with continue into the actual session. 
The essence of this discussion is that you try your best to practice. If you cannot do everything then you do the essential one. For example, every day you need to eat food so you try to bless the food in the same way you bless the inner offerings. You spend a little bit of time doing that. Like every day you have to go to sleep, so try your best to sleep within the state of clear light. Then when you wake up, try to generate the pure motivation and try to cultivate divine pride. Generate this good heart thinking “I will not harm anyone. I will only benefit them”. In this way, you should adjust your conduct. It is difficult for us to practice every single thing. If we are the generation stage practitioner then that is the way you should practice.
We are about to complete the generation stage. There just like one page in the Tibetan text left. I guessed. After that we will begin the completion stage.
Khen Rinpoche: You all already complete the generation stage