Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L62.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:20.331078
================================================================================

Let us begin by reflecting on the stanza from The Foundation of All Good Qualities. The stanza says:
Having become a pure vessel by training in the general path*, 
Please bless me to enter 
The holy gateway of the fortunate one, 
The supreme vajra vehicle.
(*Translator: the common path) 
This stanza talks about become a pure vessel by training in the common path. “Common path” here means the three principles of the path - renunciation, bodhicitta and correct view.  By studying about this and reflecting on them, then we can become suitable receptacle for entering this supreme vajra vehicle.  Among the vehicles, the highest among of the vehicles is the vajra vehicle, the Vajrayana. Among the four classes of tantra, the highest is the Highest Yoga Tantra. 
In order to be able to practice this, you have to enter the vajra vehicle. 
In order to enter that, you have to receive an initiation (empowerment). 
In order to receive this initiation, you have to enter the mandala and request the vajra master to confer the initiation.  
If you want to practice Vajrayana, you need to have some understanding of the three principles of the path i.e. you need to reflect on renunciation, bodhicitta and the correct view so that your mind is moved by these three principles.
It is stated in this stanza that the vajra vehicle, Vajrayana, is the supreme among all vehicles.  Why is it the highest or the best among all vehicles? In what way is it supreme?  
You should be able to explain why the Vajrayana is the supreme vehicle. You have to cause yourself to understand the reasons.  I have provided this explanation previously.   
Khen Rinpoche: My point is that if somebody were to ask: Why is it the supreme among all the paths?  What are you going to say?  You have to explain.  
You have to make yourself to understand the reason why Vajrayana is the supreme path?  What is distinctive about the tantra vehicle? What is that distinguishes from the Perfection Vehicle or the Sutra Vehicle?  Among the four classes of tantra, why is Highest Yoga Tantra so distinctive?   Through your study you should be able to explain why with confidence. You must know the reasons for the explanations of the Vajrayana being supreme and so on. 
The next stanza in The Foundation of All Good Qualities states:
At that time, the basis of accomplishing the two attainments 
Is keeping pure vows and samaya. 
As I have become firmly convinced of this, 
Please bless me to protect these vows and pledges like my life. 
After having received an initiation, you have to keep all your vows and pledges properly.  The reason for receiving an initiation is that you understand that if you want to attain Buddhahood (omniscience), you have to practise tantra.  When you make that kind of decision, it is because you see the reasons and the purposes of taking initiation and practicing tantra. You know that without doing this, there is no way you can obtain omniscience.  So seeing the relevant of the practice of tantra, taking initiation, then you engage in the practice.
The two attainments that are mentioned in the stanza are:
common attainment 
uncommon attainment; which mean the supreme attainment, the attainment of Buddhahood 
Here it is stated that “the basis of encompassing the two attainments” is the eight common attainments and the supreme attainment, the uncommon attainment in Buddhahood, is keeping our vows and pledges properly.  This means that the foundation or the root of achieving these two attainments is keeping the vows and pledges properly. These are the vows and pledges that you have committed yourself to during the initiation. 
You have to understand the importance of keeping your vows and pledges properly if you want to attain Buddhahood.  You have to reflect on this point until you come to this ascertainment “There is no way I can attain Buddhahood and there is no way I can have these two attainments if I do not keep my vows and pledges properly”  You have to generate an uncontrived awareness of this point. Once you have done that then you will keep your vows and pledges at the cost of your life.
In terms of the vows that were conferred by the Buddha, there are many types. For example, in the Vinaya, the Buddha talked about these 7 types of pratimoksha vows (individual liberation vows) that enable one to attain high status of human and gods and also liberation from samsara. 
If one is aspiring to not just attaining one’s liberation but also to be able to benefit all sentient beings, then there are the bodhisattva vows. 
If one wants to attain enlightenment quickly then there are the vows of tantra.
The Buddha taught that if you want to have good rebirth in the realms of human and god in the next life, then you have to keep certain types of vows.  Similarly, if you aim to attain liberation from samsara, there are certain vows that you must keep.  Buddha also taught if you want to attain whatever goals, there are certain vows that you have to keep.  This is something that you do because you strive to attain a certain goal.
If you are concerned not just of your own welfare but also the welfare of all sentient beings – all living beings pervading space - then you have to observe the bodhisattva vows. 
If you are the person who has certain kind of courage and wanting to enact the welfare of all sentient beings, then you have to guard the corresponding kind of ethics.  There are things you should do and there are things you shouldn’t do.
If you have the kind of mentality that cannot bear the fact that sentient beings suffer for a long time while you take three countless eons to attain Buddhahood, and you want to attain Buddhahood more swiftly so that you will be able to eliminate the suffering of sentient beings more quickly. For such trainees there are the vows of tantra.
If you are someone who is genuinely interested in attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime in the same body, then you would protect your vows and pledges properly.   This is because you have seen the reasons and the purposes for keeping the vows and pledges.  When you try to follow the rules, you don’t feel any hardship at all because you understand that “If I do this, if I stick to the rules, then I will be able to attain Buddhahood quickly”.  As a result of that, there is no hardship at all. Instead you will experience joy.
It is important for us to see the reasons and purposes for committing ourselves to these vows and pledges; making promises to keep them.  If you are able to do that, there will be joy and delight when you take these vows and keep these vows.  Otherwise, you will feel quite miserable for having committed yourself to these vows and pledges. You will feel like, “I am so pathetic. Poor me, I have all these vows.” Indeed the Buddha said in the sutra: For some vows are suffering, for some vows are happiness”. 
Khen Rinpoche: Which one?  Suffering?
It is very important for you to really realize the reasons and purposes for taking vows, for keeping vows and to keep your ethics well because if you are really interested in attaining Buddhahood then you realize the remembrance. 
In the stanza from The Foundation of All Good Qualities, “please bless me to protect these vows and pledges like my life”, you should be able to see these vows and pledges as very precious and very valuable such that if you have to choose between giving up your life or giving up your vows and pledges, you should be prepared to give up your life. As to whether or not you are able to regard your vows and pledges as more precious than your life is something that comes from you own mind.
The next stanza in the Foundation of All Good Qualities:
Then, having realized the importance of the two stages,
The essence of the Vajrayana,
By practicing with great energy, never giving up the four sessions, 
Please bless me to realize the teachings of the holy Guru.
It is not sufficient for you to simply keep your vows and pledges properly. If you do not meditate then you are not going to get the result.  So it is important for you to train in the path of tantra. When these paths are subsumed, we have the two stages: the generation stage and the completion stage.
The two stages of the tantra are:
The generation stage 
The completion stage
You should also understand the reasons and the purposes for meditating on the two stages.  For example, you should also understand:
Why it is necessary for you to meditate on the generation stage?
Why is it not sufficient for you to just meditate on the generation stage without meditating on the completion stage?
What are the reasons and purposes for meditating on the completion stage?  
With the understanding of these reasons and purposes then you will have joyous effort when you cultivate these two stages. So you should have to these understanding of their relevance.  You should understand that:
It is not alright if I do not meditate on the generation stage.  
It is not alright if I do not meditate on the completion stage.  
I have to meditate on the generation stage.
I have to meditate on the completion stage.  
In such a way, you should generate enthusiasm and joy when you cultivate the two stages.
As stated in these stanzas by Tsongkhapa, you should realize the importance of these two stages and you should practice with great enthusiasm. He also said that you should practice without giving up the 4 sessions.  In other words, we have to make effort to practice the yoga in the 4 sessions.
You need to practise the two stages. This mean you need to understand the essential points of the generation stage:
What is the generation stage?
How do I practice the generation stage?
If I practise the generation stage, what benefits are there?
How do you practice the generation stage?  
After having received the initiation, you have to practise the sadhana. You have to recite the sadhana and do all the reflection and visualization as describe in the sadhana. You shouldn’t be just reciting blah blah blah. In your mind you have to reflect on the meaning. In that way you try to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride. This is why when an initiation is conferred there is this commitment of doing the sadhana.
Similarly, having received the initiation, you make this commitment to recite the Six Session Guru Yoga on the daily basis. This is because you commit yourselves to many vows and pledges during the initiation.  By doing the Six Session Guru Yoga everyday you remind yourself of these vows and pledges.
As you recite the sadhana, you should meditate clearly on the supported and supporting mandala. As I have explained before, the main practice of the generation stage is the practice of bringing death, intermediate state and rebirth to the path as the 3 Buddha bodies. It is important all the essential points related to bringing the death, intermediate state and rebirth to the 3 Buddha bodies are complete.  If the points in this practice are not complete then this means that you are not doing this practice in a complete way.  
During the generation stage practice, you recite the sadhana slowly and try to reflect as describe in the sadhana and try to make all the points clear in your own mind.  During the generation stage you have to make effort in making this happen.  
If you do the 4 sessions on a daily basis, then over time, due to the power of familiarization, you will be able to cause the entire supported and supporting mandala to appear clearly without using a lot of time.  Instantly you will be able to cause this to appear clearly.  
When you are able to cause the supported and supporting mandala to appear instantly in a clear way to your mind, this is still not sufficient. At that point, you have already attained certain degree of clear appearance and divine pride. You also have pacified a substantial degree of laxity and excitement. However, you still need to train in causing the subtle deities - the deities at the sense basis your eyes and so forth - to appear clearly instantly. So you still need to make effort in achieving that.
Slowly you have to train in causing these subtle deities - the deities at the sense basis your eyes and so forth - to appear clearly. You meditate again and again and through the force of familiarization you will arrive at this point where not only the supported and supporting mandala appear clearly but also the subtle deities at your sense basis (sense sphere) appear clearly.  This ability to cause the supported and supporting mandala and the subtle deities at the sense sources to appear clearly occur through the power of familiarization. This means that you will not need a long time to meditate on the sadhana once you achieve this ability to cause the mandala and all the subtle deities to appear instantly. Because of your familiarization, in the very short period of time, everything appears clearly.  There is no need to dwell on the sadhana for a long time.  
According to the text, even if you have reached this point, you have still not yet achieve calm abiding (samantha). This is because laxity and excitation can still arise sometimes.  In order to pacify laxity and excitation, you need to meditate on the subtle implement at the upper opening or the substance drop at the lower opening.  Through such meditation, you pacify laxity and excitement and then you return to your meditation on the mandala.  
Once you have completed the coarse generation stage you move on to meditate on the subtle drop. Here you are trying to achieve calm abiding.  For the purpose of achieving calm abiding, you want to cause your mind to be able to dwell on this very subtle minute drop in the stable way. Specifically, you focus on this subtle drop in a single-pointed way to achieve stability.
According to the text that we are using by Ngawang Palden, he describes how you should attain calm abiding. 
First through focusing on this subtle drop. 
After you have attained calm abiding then you should train in a special insight (vipassana). You do this by emitting and reabsorbing the subtle implements. 
This text by Ngawang Palden talks about the achievement of calm abiding and special insight in a serial way - first you attain calm abiding then you attain special insight.  
In the context of the Sutra vehicle, for example, in the explanation of the Lamrim - the Stages of the Path, you do not attain calm abiding and special insight simultaneously. The sequence is definite - first you achieve calm abiding then you achieve special insight.
Some scholars have said that in tantra, the sequence described for calm abiding and special insight in the sutra is not definite because in tantra, it is possible to attain calm abiding and special insight simultaneously. Because of the special essential points present in tantra, it is possible to attain calm abiding and special insight at the same time.
According to many scholars it is possible to attain calm abiding and special insight simultaneously by the uncommon features of tantra. This is because the object is unusual as you are meditating on a subtle drop. In addition, you are meditating on the subtle drop at a very special location. You are meditating on the subtle drop inside the tip of this upper end of the central channel. Because of these extraordinary features, the winds then are able to gather. This then gives you extraordinary power in attaining calm abiding and special insight. 
Because you are meditating on the subtle drop at a very special location, then this special location within the body has the ability to cause the winds to gather. It has this extraordinary ability or power in causing the winds to gather. This means that when you are cultivating calm abiding even though you do this meditation on emitting and reabsorbing the implement, it does not serve as a hindrance to your calm abiding. 
You have to understand this essential point that it is possible for you to attain calm abiding and special insight simultaneously in tantra. If it is possible to attain calm abiding and special insight simultaneously, what is the method for achieving it? It is not clear in the text but maybe it is like that. As I mentioned in the previous class, when you arrive at the point on the 7th or 8th mental abiding during the cultivation of calm abiding, you meditate on this subtle implement inside the tip of the upper end of your central channel. You hold your mind there and you emit and reabsorb the subtle implement. At that point on the 7th or 8th mental abiding, you have not yet attained calm abiding. You do that practice on the 7th or 8th calm abiding and when you attain the completion of the 9th mental abiding then perhaps you will attain the union of calm abiding and special insight. 
We can also recall this question and answer in the Medium Length Lamrim which says:
“Using which systems do you attain calm abiding and special insight serially?” 
There Highest Yoga Tantra was omitted from the answer. From there perhaps you can infer that in Highest Yoga Tantra there is the simultaneous attainment of calm abiding and special insight. 
We need a source for saying that it is possible to attain calm abiding and special insight simultaneously. From that answer given by Lama Tsongkhapa in the Medium Length Lamrim, can we conclude that Highest Yoga Tantra offers this possibility of simultaneous attainment of calm abiding and special insight? This is something for us to think about. 
In the Sutra system it is clear when you are actually training to attain calm abiding, you should only do placement meditation. You do not do any analytical meditation. Because if you do any analytical meditation during that stage, it will serve as a hindrance preventing you from achieving calm abiding. After you have attained calm abiding and you want to achieve special insight, then you do analytical meditation. This is the Sutra system. However in Highest Yoga Tantra it is said that even before you attain calm abiding there is a way of doing analytical meditation such that it does not hinder your achievement of calm abiding. So this is an essential point that you should understand. 
I have already providing the commentary to the text. When you read this section of the text again, you have to see whether you are able to derive some additional understanding. 
Calm abiding is not established on the level of beginners. However, when they forcefully hold the mind on subtle letters, subtle drops, and so on at the upper or lower openings, the navel, or heart, this acts as a condition for the winds to gradually gather internally due to sustained meditation on the focal basis.
A unique method for developing concentration
Though the focal objects of analytical meditation are numerous or conflated, this system of establishing concentration is different from that explained in the Perfection Vehicle and the lower classes of tantra. In this system you can quickly stop mental excitation when meditating on the supreme-conqueror maṇḍala and so on due to progressively taming the winds.
Though you attain actual calm abiding in the Perfection Vehicle and the lower tantras, it is said that the component of stability declines if analysis is applied too strongly. However, even before obtaining calm abiding in this system, you can attain stable abidance when analytical meditation cultivates and integrates numerous objects.
The range of the coarse and subtle generation stage
It is said that the coarse generation stage is completed when you reach the third level, and meditation on the subtle generation stage occurs after attaining mental stability through contracting the maṇḍala in drop yoga. It is said that calm abiding is obtained when you attain stability on the subtle drop at the upper opening.
Then you attain the peerless concentration uniting calm abiding and insight through the wisdom of individual investigation repeatedly emitting and reabsorbing its object, and the generation stage is completed when such yoga stabilizes. Mantric Stages states that this presentation conforms with both systems of Guhyasamāja.
From the passage that we have just read you can see Ngawang Palden, the author of this text, explains that you first attain calm abiding. Then during the 3rd level you attain the calm abiding. After that you do this training in the wisdom of individual investigation, you repeatedly emitting and reabsorbing the object and through that you attain calm abiding and special insight. From this passage it is clear that he presents the attainment of calm abiding and special insight serially.
Khen Rinpoche: Any question on this paragraph that I am reading if you don’t understand. I think should be very clear. 
Student 1: I understand that in the 3rd level you have two types of meditations. There are two schools of thought. 
The first one you have to meditate on the lower end of the entire mandala inside the subtle substance drops of bodhicitta and then you attain calm abiding. Subsequently you meditate on the upper end with the tiny vajra emitting and reabsorbing to attain special insight. That is sequential. 
The second school is that you can attain calm abiding and special insight simultaneously by meditating on just the upper end inside the subtle drop with emitting and reabsorbing the hand implement. Is that correct? 
Translator: On your understanding of the 2nd method to attain calm abiding and special insight simultaneously, you just meditate on this tiny vajra inside the upper end and do this emitting and reabsorbing?
Student 1: I am just confused whether:
the simultaneous attainment of calm abiding and special insight can be achieved by either meditating on the upper end with emitting and reabsorbing of the small hand implement vajra or 
you can achieve calm abiding and special insight by meditating on the lower end with the subtle substance drops by meditating the entire mandala and supporting and supported mandala in this drop. 
It is actually not clear in Ngawang Palden’s text exactly when you achieve calm abiding. He talks about how by meditating on this subtle drop then you attain the calm abiding during the 3rd level. But he does not say exactly when. I read many texts but I did not see any explicit explanation on when calm abiding is attained. If you look at this explanation in Ngawang Palden’t text that says: 
Further, those on the first two levels mainly engage in meditation on the subtle drop for the purpose of countering mental laxity and excitation in realization meditation (on the sadhana).
It is said that establishing the stabilization of mind contracted to a subtle drop is achieved from the third level.
My understanding is that during the 3rd level when you have overcome mental laxity and excitation you achieve calm abiding. This is just my opinion. It is not stated by the scholars whether or not it is correct. You have to check. However it is clearly stated that in Ngawang Palden’s text that prior to that you meditate on the mandala and after that you meditate on the subtle drop. It is stated clearly in the text that: “it is said that establishing the stabilization of mind contracted to a subtle drop is achieved from the third level”. 
So what is this ‘stabilization of mind’? Is it not calm abiding? 
There is no necessity for calm abiding to achieve through meditating on this subtle object at the upper opening. It depends on whether laxity or excitation is predominant. It is said that:
If laxity is predominant due to your habituation and in order to counteract that, you meditate on this minute object at the upper opening. 
If excitation is predominant due to your habituation, then you meditate on this subtle object at the lower opening. There is no reason why you will not achieve calm abiding by meditating on this subtle object at your lower opening. 
This is my personal opinion. If you can meditate on this subtle object at the upper opening and attain calm abiding, then why not on the lower opening? There should be no difference. This is what I think. 
Perhaps after you have achieved the calm abiding then you do this visualization on emitting and reabsorbing the tiny vajras as I have explained previously. From this root vajra then you emit one vajra, then the 2nd one, then the 3rd one, the 4th one, the 5th one and so on until the entire space is filled with these vajras. Then you reabsorb them in the corresponding sequence all the way from the 5th up to 4th, 4th up to the 3rd, 3rd up to the 2nd, 2nd up to 1st, the 1st back to the root vajra. In that way you train in attaining special insight. By meditating on this tiny vajra at the upper opening and then doing all the visualizations you can attain the union of calm abiding and special insight. 
That is what I think. There is another meditation in which you meditate on this subtle substance drop at the lower opening at the secret place. Focusing on that, you can achieve calm abiding. 
Within this subtle drop, the size of mustard seed, you visualize the entire supporting and supported mandala. 
Within this supporting and supported mandala there is a principal deity. 
At this secret place of this principal deity, again there is a subtle drop containing the entire supporting and supported mandala. 
Within this supporting and supported mandala there is also a principal deity. 
At the secret place of this principal deity, again there is a subtle drop containing the entire supporting and supported mandala. 
I think by meditating in this way up to the 3rd level of this subtle drop you can attain special insight as well. Whether or not this is actually the case, I don’t know. This is what I think. It may be wrong. I am not able to point to a source and say “look it is said that this is the way or another way”. But it is my thinking that you can attain calm abiding by meditating on the subtle object at the upper opening. 
Whatever I have explained has already been explained before. By explaining again and again hopefully do brings you some benefits.
When you meditate on the generation stage, you try to visualize the supporting and supported mandala. You generate clear appearance and divine pride. By doing so, you want to overcome the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. Similarly, you meditate on bringing death, intermediate state and rebirth to the path as the 3 Buddha bodies, and by doing that, you purify ordinary death, intermediate state and rebirth. So there are purposes and reasons for the practices that you do. 
In Lama Chopa LC 110:
I seek your blessings to cleanse all stains of ordinary appearance and grasping 
Through the first stage yoga of transforming birth,
Death, and the bardo into the three bodies of a Buddha,
So that whatever appears may arise as the deity.’
We train so that the environment appears as the deity’s celestial mansion (inestimable mansion) and the inhabitants within the environment appear as the deities. 
This one stanza LC 110 in Lama Chopa Guru Puja condenses the entire completion [generation] stage path. This means that when you read this one stanza you are able to understand all the various parts that are involved in the generation stage through your understanding of the rough structure of the generation stage. Because of your understanding, so when you read the stanza you get a different feeling from the floor. It is like you are singing a song now if you know the lyrics. If you understand the lyrics, you derive greater enjoyment. If you don’t know the lyrics, you don’t understand what is being sung but still when you hear the song there is an enjoyment. But the enjoyment is greater if you understand the lyrics. The same goes when you recite your prayers, your sadhana and so on. If you understand what you are reciting you will enjoy it. If you know the benefits of doing the sadhana recitation and so on you have greater enjoyment. If you don’t, then it is as though you are pushing yourself.
When we are studying the dharma and take initiations or receive initiations then we receive these commitments to recite the sadhana and so on, we have to know the significance of bringing death, intermediate state, and rebirth into the path as the 3 Buddha bodies.  That understanding is crucial. In your practice it is also important for you to think about emptiness. If you are able to do that, then when you meditate on the three bodies you will be able to purify ordinary death, intermediate state, and rebirth more effectively. 
We don’t want ordinary death, we don’t want ordinary intermediate state and we don’t want ordinary rebirth. It is important for us to see they are in the nature of suffering. This is so and therefore in the beginning we need to develop renunciation. Having recognized that these are in the nature of suffering, we want to eliminate suffering. That is the reason for meditating on bringing them to the path as the 3 Buddha bodies. Of course, when we first meditate we don’t actually have 3 Buddha bodies but we imagine having them as described in the sadhana.
We are not actually able to purify ordinary death, intermediate state and rebirth during the generation stage. What we can purify is ordinary appearance and ordinary conception. During the generation stage we are only trying to have this very stable clear appearance and divine pride. There we cultivate calm abiding and special insight. When we are able to culminate both the coarse and subtle generation stages then we are able to eliminate the appearance of ordinariness and adherence to ordinariness. Whether you are practicing the short sadhana or the long sadhana, you have to ensure that the essential points of bringing death, intermediate state and rebirth to the path as the 3 Buddha bodies are complete. You have to try to your best of ability to reflect on those points. It is important for us to deposit imprints on our mind so to place these latencies on our minds. There are various ways to do this. For example, you can do so through meditation, you can do so through contemplation and you can do so through hearing. From hearing explanations, you will place some imprints on your mind. If you are able to contemplate on what you have heard then the imprints will be even stronger. If you are able to meditate on what you have contemplated then really you will place some extraordinary imprints on your mind. These very stable imprints will ripen in life after life. If we believe in future lives then we will understand the relevance of leaving powerful imprints on our mind. This is the time to do it.
When we are doing our recitation we shouldn’t just be reciting. We need to think about what we are reciting. In that way we will able to leave extraordinary imprints on our mind. Try to your very best of your ability to practice the sadhana and to develop familiarization with it so that you are able to understand “At this point, this is what I am supposed to think. At that point, this is what I am supposed to think and so on”. In this way, you will be able to understand how to practice the generation stage. The purpose of teaching the generation stage in teaching tantra is so that we can make effort during the practice. When you are doing your recitation if you are able to reflect on what you are reciting then your practice will have power. If you want to do recitation or if you wish to do recitation, that is the way to do it. You will not feel this difficulty. You don’t feel hardship in doing so. However, if we don’t wish to do the recitation and we push ourselves to do it then we will experience hardship.
Khen Rinpoche: Hardship?
The purpose of doing the sadhana is so that we can purify the appearance of ordinariness and adherence to ordinariness through cultivating clear appearance and divine pride of being the deity. Also we purify ordinary death, intermediate state and rebirth through bringing them into the path as the 3 Buddha bodies.
On the generation stage:
You meditate by cultivating clear appearance because that will counteract the appearance of ordinariness. 
You cultivate divine pride being the deity because that will counteract the adherence to ordinariness. 
If you have the view of the absence of inherent existent then your meditation will counteract the conception of true existence. In that way your meditation becomes very powerful. It becomes the best way to eliminate the conception of true existence. That is how you should meditate on the generation stage with clear appearance, with divine pride and with the view of the absence of inherent of true existent.
During the sessions, you try to cultivate stable clear appearance and divine pride. After the session, during the session break, there will in fact a greater danger of there being the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence of ordinariness. Therefore, between the sessions during the break, you have to use mindfulness and introspection and try to counteract the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. You need to practice in a continuous way also during the session break. If you are very careless after you get out of the session, then your practice will not be very powerful. During the breaks, you should think “Everything that appears, everything that I see is the body of the Buddha”. You should not forget that. “Whatever sound I hear is the speech of the Buddha. Whatever I think is the mind of the Buddha”. You should use mindfulness and introspection to remember that everything is the Buddha - the body, speech and mind of the Buddha. If you are able to dwell in this awareness, then you will create very little misdeeds. There will be this special power in purifying your negativities. 
You practice the different yogas of the deity. For example, when you eat, as I have explained previously, if you can, you should bless the food in the same way you bless the inner offerings. You have to purifying the substance, generating substance and increase the substance and so on.
Saying “Om Ah Hum” and visualizing that the food transforms into uncontaminated nectar will not take more than a minute. If you are very familiar with the procedure of blessing the inner offering, then when you say “Om Ah Hum”, then the significant of the blessing will come to mind.
If you are already visualized as Vajrabhairava then there is a letter ‘Hum’ at your heart. Then you think that this ‘Hum’ encompasses all the gurus, the yidams or the buddhas or the dharma protectors and so on. Then all the objects of refuge embodied by this letter ‘Hum’. You think “I am offering this nectar to them and they accept the nectar and become satiated with the offering”.
In a very brief way, you can just think that this letter ‘Hum’ at your heart is the nature of all the objects of refuge. Then you make the offering to this letter ‘Hum’.
Alternatively, you can think that inside this drop, which is a little circle at the top of the letter ‘Hum’, is the merit field. All the gurus, all the yidams, all the Buddhas, all the dharma protectors, daka, dakinis, heros, all of them are inside this little circle and visualizing that they are all complete in that drop and make offering to that. This practice of offering will not take more than a minute. Even if you don’t have more than a minute you can do this practice. This is an easy way for you to accumulate merit and purify infinite negativities. When you enjoy this food you won’t create any misdeeds. There are many reasons and purposes for doing this practice. If you are a tantric practitioner then you should try your best to do this practice even though you may not have more than a minute. 
You can also practice the yoga of sleep. When you lay down to go to sleep, if you are able to reflect well, then your sleep becomes the nature of virtue. Sleep is one of the four changeable mental factors. Depending on the circumstance, it can be virtuous, non-virtuous or neutral. If you are able to reflect properly and cause the sleep to become virtuous you will derive a lot of benefits. 
How to do this yoga of sleep? 
As you are falling asleep, you should think that with yourself visualize as Vajrabhairava Yamantaka, at your heart is the letter, Hum. 
Light radiate from this letter Hum. So countless of light rays radiate. 
When these light rays strike the environment, the environment transforms into the inestimable mansion of the deity. 
When these lights strike the inhabitants and the environment, they transformed into deities. 
As you lie there, you should think that all these are absorbed back into you yourself visualize as Vajrabhairava.
You yourself also start to absorb towards the center. 
You absorbed towards the Hum. 
The syllable Hum also absorbed upwards from the bottom, absorbing upwards towards the top and absorbing into the crescent moon, from the HA to the moon, the moon into the drop, into the circle and the circle into the nada which is the little squiggle. 
Eventually, even the nada also disappear and vanishes into unobservable emptiness.
If you are able to fall asleep within this state of clear light there will be great benefit.
If you are a practitioner then there are all these very profound detailed instructions for you. What you should do during the sessions, what you should do after the sessions, how you should eat, how you should sleep and so on. If you are able to put these instructions into practice in a consistent manner then you will be able to accumulate infinite merit and purify infinite misdeed and obscuration. In that way, you will easily achieve your goal. 
From this state of the Buddha dharma body, you have to arise in the state of Buddha form body (rupakaya). When you wake up from the sleep of this clear light of sleep, you have to generate this thought, ‘I will enact the welfare of sentient beings. For that purpose, I will arise as the form body.’ In that way, you visualize yourself arising in the form of the deity body and then you go about doing all the activities for the day.
As long as you wake up you must generate a pure motivation. You should think that ‘I will not cause any harm to sentient beings. I will only help them.’ That is actually the essence of the bodhisattva vows. “I will not harm sentient beings with my body, speech and mind. I will only benefit them with my body, speech and mind”. You need to generate this kind of pure motivation.
That is what I want to tell you. You have to try your best to practice. When you do your recitation, you have to reflect on the meaning. You have to meditate. Whatever you have understood please put into practice. Try your best to do all these yogas of eating, sleeping, waking up and so on. 
We have cited some stanzas from The Foundation of All Good Qualities earlier on. The next stanza says:
Like that, may the gurus show the noble path
And the spiritual friends who practice it have long lives.
Please bless me to pacify completely 
All outer and inner hindrances
These stanzas talks about the guru who shows the noble path - the good path. This indicates the importance on relying on the spiritual guide. Prior to this stanza, the explanation on practicing the small scope, the medium scope and the great scope of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment have been explained. But still that is not sufficient, one has to enter tantra, one has to practice the generation stage and the completion stage. Without those, there is no enlightenment. One has to practice all of those. One has to practice taking death, intermediate state and rebirth to the path as the 3 Buddha bodies and so on. Through these practices, we are able to free ourselves from suffering. We understand that these have been shown to us by the spiritual guides. We then gain this appreciation of the value of our teachers. When we are ready able to appreciate the value of the spiritual guide then we will see that it is so important for them to have long lives. From the bottom of your heart, you have this wish that they may live long. 
This is what I am trying to convey to you. You have to try your best. If you are able to connect these points to the short sadhana, that will be very good. I am saying the short sadhana rather than the long sadhana because the long sadhana is quite long.
Khen Rinpoche: We all like the short one. Nobody likes the long one except the long holiday. I think stop here. I have given the homework to do. We don’t have much time. Only ten minutes. Whoever has done, wonderful!  I don’t think I have the time to collect and read. There is not much time. So you read yourself. Today I repeated everything again, are you getting the same kind of understanding or different understanding? I am not sure. If possible, one or two people can volunteer to read what they wrote. We have five to ten minutes. Just good to share what you wrote, so I can hear one or two. 
(Two students read their assignments from 135 mins onwards of the audio files)