Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L63.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:21.431996
================================================================================

As we have previously mentioned, there are many levels to the meditation on the generation stage. When you recite the sadhana, as you recite, you should reflect on what is stated in the sadhana. This is very important. We can also read through the sadhana quite quickly and before we reach the point of the mantra recitation, we can try to see if we can cause the entire supported and supporting mandala to appear clearly to the mind. In terms of the visualization, you can visualize yourself as the three-tiered being (the being with triple tiers).  
Basically, there is a letter Hum, the concentration being, at your heart.
You yourself visualized as Vajrabhairava.
Then there is the charnel ground and the mountain of fire. 
Everything and the mandala are there. 
You can also check this visualization by withdrawing inwards.  So from the mountain of fire to the charnel grounds and so on until you come to this letter Hum at your heart. If you can train in that way, it will be beneficial.  
As I had explained previously, when you try to cultivate clear appearance of the mandalas and the deities, you should cultivate this appearance through your mental consciousness; not your sense consciousness. Even though your eyes maybe wide open when you are cultivating clear appearance, the mandalas and the deities should appear clearly through your mental consciousness. When you meditate on the generation stage, you have to meditate on this clear appearance appearing through your mental consciousness. 
When you train in the generation stage, in the beginning it is very important for you to train in clear appearance of being the deity. When you are able to cause this clear appearance to appear through your mental consciousness, this appearance is even clearer than the appearance that can appear through the eye consciousness. When you have this clear appearance, then you are able to effectively put a stop to the appearances of ordinariness. However, the cultivation of clear appearance is not the main practice here. The main practice is actually the cultivation of divine pride. 
The cultivation of clear appearance is actually a branch of the cultivation of divine pride because in order for this main practice of divine pride to be effective, you need to first cultivate clear appearance. When you cultivate divine pride, there is a basis for cultivating that divine pride. It is very important for you to be able to identify what this I is; which is the basis of cultivating divine pride. Different scholars have different assertions when it comes to identifying this I that is the basis for cultivating divine pride. But you need to have your own understanding regarding what this is and then on that basis, reflect on the different assertions of the various scholars. 
There is this sense of an ordinary I that appears through our mind. If something good happens, we have the sense of I. When something bad happens, we can also have this sense of I. So there is an I that is imputed in dependence on the ordinary aggregates that are the basis of imputation. 
Is this I that is imputed in dependence on the ordinary aggregates, that are the basis of imputation, the basis for generating the deity? 
Is this I what is being generated as the deity? 
Well, the answer is no. 
You have to think about why this is the case. We have the ordinary five aggregates - the ordinary form aggregate and so on. Before we generate ourselves as a deity, we purify everything into emptiness. At that time, all conventional appearances vanished. All ordinary appearances vanished. Regardless of what deity you are generating yourself as in the beginning, it is important for you to purify everything into emptiness - this sense of I. You purify also the aggregates into emptiness. All the appearances to your mental consciousness vanish. 
This isn’t sufficient. On top of that, you have to reflect on the meaning generality of emptiness. You have to think about the emptiness of inherent existence. So it is necessary for you to reflect on that and have some understanding of the emptiness of inherent existence. In this state where all appearances have been withdrawn, you have to reflect on the emptiness of inherent existence and understand the emptiness. On top of that, you have to be aware that this very mind understanding emptiness is the basis for you to cause the body of the deity to appear.  
First of all, you have to purify everything into emptiness. So everything - the aggregates, you yourself - are all empty. Then you have to know that this isn’t non-existence. Rather, it is the absence of inherent existence. It is not the absence of existence but the absence of inherent existence. This mind is the basis for generating the body of the deity. You have to think the body of the deity appears clearly. 
There is this deity that appears clearly through your mental consciousness. It is on the basis of this appearance that you impute I. 
First, you have this clear appearance of the deity and then you impute I upon this clear appearance of the body of the deity. It is on the basis of clear appearance of the body of the deity that you have this I that is the basis for you to cultivate divine pride thinking “I am the deity”. 
First, you need to have this clear appearance of being the deity. Then your mind realizing emptiness is the basis for accomplishing this divine pride because it is on the basis of this clear appearance you generates this thought I, you impute this I. At that point you would think “I am the actual deity of the resultant time”. It is in this sense that the clear appearance is said to be an assistant to the cultivation of divine pride. 
During the session, you want to cultivate this clear appearance of the entire mandala. On that basis, you cultivate divine pride. You have to put effort into cultivation of clear appearance and divine pride in this way during the actual session. Therefore, you need to cultivate a very stable mental consciousness that is able to hold this mandala - the supported and supporting mandala. You have to familiarize with this appearance again and again until you achieve clear appearance. In dependence on the clear appearance, you cultivate divine pride. 
You have to cultivate without coming under the influence of laxity and excitation. It is important for you to have mindfulness and introspection all the time so that you do not have the danger of coming under the influence of laxity and excitement. Without letting your mindfulness and introspection deteriorate, you try to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride during the actual session. 
The body of this deity should appear clearly to your mental consciousness. When that occurs, you think I in relation to this appearance and you can generate divine pride. Eventually, clear appearance and divine pride will occur naturally without much effort during the generation stage. 
So by familiarizing with clear appearance and divine pride over a long period of time, you will be able to overcome the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness during the generation stage. When your mind is very stable with these cultivations, naturally you will be able to overcome the appearance of ordinariness. This is the purpose of meditating on the generation stage. By cultivating clear appearance and divine pride, you are able to overcome the appearances of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. 
At this stage, it does not mean that you actually transform into the deity. There is no actual change. On the generation stage, all these occur on the level of imagination or visualization. On the generation stage, you meditate by way of using imagination. Basically, what you meditate occurs through your mind thinking about it. So the appearances are fabricated by your own mind. 
The achievement of the actual body of the deity occurs on the completion stage. For example, if you attain the illusory body, then you have attained a full fledge deity’s body. That is what you should think about. 
We have said previously that the apprehended aspect of the mind realizing emptiness appears as a deity. What is meant by that? It is that the mind realizing emptiness appears as the deity. That appearance then is a basis for you to impute I and cultivate divine pride. 
There are also scholars who talked about how one meditates on I on the basis of the five aggregates. 
You should have some thoughts about what we have been discussing:
  - What does it mean to say the apprehended aspect of the mind realizing emptiness appears as a deity? 
  - What does it mean to say that I am generated as a deity? 
  - When you cultivate divine pride, what is the basis for cultivating that divine pride?
In the beginning, you must have a basis for you to understand these points. You must have some understanding regarding what these points are all about. If you don’t have anything at all, then when questions are asked then you become confused. 
Student 1: This apprehended aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as a deity occurs during generation stage and at imaginary level is not happening yet we hear of there are high level yogis on the generation stage when he is out of session, he visualizes the mandala above his head and rain does not come down on him and he does not get wet due to him visualizing the mandala. Is there an actual mandala happening for him not to get wet? Or like staircase to heaven or the bridge across the water?
Khen Rinpoche: In those examples, there is actually no full-fledged deity’s body or mandala being generated. Those like bridge or a staircase and so on appear through the power of meditative stabilization.  
Student 2:  What is the relationship between apprehended aspect of mind and the deity that appear to it? It seems to me as if like the substantial cause of the appearance of the deity is the mind realizing emptiness. Then that will kind of fall back to the same problem as we critic the sutric vehicle consciousness cannot be formed.  Can I say that the apprehended aspect of mind appear as deity actually means that the deity is actually the object that is apprehended by this mind?
Khen Rinpoche: Try to make two short sentences.  Ask the essence of the question.
Student:  What is the substantial cause of the appearance of the deity? Is it the wind of the mind or is the mind realizing emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: As explained earlier on, you have to think about this question. How is the deity generated during the generation stage? You have this mind realizing emptiness and that serves as the basis for generating the deity. This occurs on the level of imagination. There is no actual generation. During the generation stage, there is no actual deity body that is produced. 
The question then comes: There is this deity appearing to the mind, what is the substantial cause of this deity that appears to the mind?  This deity that appears to the mental consciousness is not an actual deity. However, there is a deity that appears and there is a meaning generality of the deity that appears. You have to think what is its substantial cause? 
Khen Rinpoche: You have any idea?
This point can be debated about. Here, as I have said before, you have to hold the fact in your mind so then we say that the apprehended aspect of the mind realizing emptiness is generated as a deity or
 it appears as the deity. This is the point you have to hold in your mind when you meditate on the generation stage. 
Student 2: During the generation stage, there is this explanation that the clear appearance of the deity is the basis for us to impute I during the generation stage. What is the relationship between this basis of clear appearance and the imputed I? It cannot be like a basis of designation because the actual deity has not been established. Can we say something like the immediate proceeding conditions, and based on that we impute I?
Khen Rinpoche: Then again you have to have this basis of understanding. The fact that you know when this ordinary I appears to the mind, it is on the basis of the appearance of the ordinary aggregates. Without that, then there is no imputation of the I. You purify everything into emptiness - you purify the five ordinary aggregates and the ordinary I into emptiness through imagination. Then you withdraw all the appearances that occur to the mental consciousness. If the ordinary I that is imputed in dependence on the ordinary aggregates is withdrawn, basically there is no basis for you to hold the pride. When the ordinary aggregates and the ordinary I have been withdrawn, there is no basis for cultivating divine pride.  So in order for you to have a basis for cultivating divine pride, you need base of imputation to appear clearly. What is this base? This basis is actually the mind realizing emptiness gradually appearing as the body of the deity. This is the basis for divine pride. 
When the body of the deity appears clearly to your mental consciousness using imagination, then you can naturally impute I thinking: “I am the actual Vajrabhairava”. In that way, divine pride arises easily. 
On the generation stage, this occurs on the level of imagination. But by familiarizing with this repeatedly, then gradually you will be able to cause this very subtle clear light mind to manifest. This mind is used for realizing emptiness. So when this mind manifest then you use it to realize emptiness. This very subtle mind realizing emptiness then arises as the deity body. This mind serves as the cooperative condition for the illusory body. 
At the same time you have the very subtle wind. This very subtle wind then serves as the substantial cause for the illusory body. This very subtle wind is actually the mount of the very subtle mind.
When you actually achieve the illusory body there is a cooperative condition and substantial cause. You should know what these are. The illusory body being a form has the wind as its substantial cause. 
Student 3: In one of the class Khen Rinpoche mentioned that from the tantric perspective, the adherence to ordinariness and the appearance of ordinariness is afflictive obscuration and knowledge obscuration respectively. On the tantric paths and grounds, when these two obscurations they abandoned? 
Why I ask that is because your question about how to eliminate the appearance of ordinariness and adherence to ordinariness on generation stage. It doesn’t look like it is going to be eliminated in the generation stage. Furthermore, generation stage is coarse mind. It would not be an eternal mind, right? It would have ended. I actually wonder why we would even talk about elimination of adherence to ordinariness and appearance of ordinariness at the generation stage. 
Khen Rinpoche: We did talked about:
the adherence to ordinariness being afflictive obscuration and 
the appearance of ordinariness being knowledge obscuration. 
The tantric afflictive obscuration that is the adherence to ordinariness is abandoned when one reaches the 4th stage called the meaning clear light or the actual clear light. This 4th stage actual meaning clear light serves as the direct antidote to the tantric afflictive obscuration. When you attain the pure illusory body you have eliminated the tantric afflictive obscuration. 
The appearance of ordinariness being a knowledge obscuration is abandoned only when you attain the Buddha ground. 
We do not say that on the generation stage you can abandon the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. What we do say is that because you have stable clear appearance and divine pride, therefore, the adherence to ordinariness and the appearance of ordinariness cannot manifest. In that way, you put a stop to them but you don’t say they are abandoned. 
Student 4: I have a question regarding divine pride. It was said that the cultivation of divine pride is to overcome the adherence to ordinariness. Can Khen Rinpoche explain a bit more on how divine pride overcomes ordinariness especially during post meditative session?  
The second part of my question is that while listening to Student 3’s question and your answer to her, I assume that divine pride is remembering emptiness. Since we have no realization and in our everyday life we are supposed to have the clear appearance and divine pride of a deity. But at times when our conduct is substandard, how do we reconcile that?  In summary, how does the cultivation of divine pride overcome ordinariness especially during post session? 
Translator: You said that divine pride means remembering emptiness? Did you say that?
Student 4: Could it be that?
Khen Rinpoche: It is difficult for people like us. Even during the actual session, it is difficult for us to have divine pride. In order for you to have divine pride during post-meditation, between session or during the session break, you need to have a certain degree of experience of divine pride during the actual session. You need to have a certain degree of experience of putting a stop to the adherence to ordinariness. 
You have to train in four sessions on the daily basis with each session lasting 3 to 4 hours. Even if during the actual session you are able to generate clear appearance and divine pride, it is not necessary that during the break you will be able to put a stop to the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. It is not easy. 
If you ask: How can I have divine pride between the session (during the session breaks)? 
The answer is: You need to have some genuine experience during the actual session. If you have this actual experience during the actual session, then after you are released from the actual session and enter the session break, because the sense consciousnesses are stronger during that time, the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness will also be stronger. 
How do you counteract them? Even if you have a certain degree of divine pride during the actual session, it is not necessary it follows that you have that during the session break. Precisely because of this, there is this advice that you have to be attentive during the post-meditation period. In other word, you have to be very mindful so that you can remember that whatever appears, it appears as the deity’s body and so on. After the actual session:
Whatever external forms that appears to you should be thought of immediately, for example, as the deity’s body. If a sentient being appears to you, then immediately you have to cultivate clear appearance and think that “This is the actual deity”.  
Whatever sound you hear should be immediately thought of as being the deity’s mantra.
Whenever you have a thought, you should think that this is the exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness. 
These are the different pieces of advice that are given to you for you to practice during the session break. Indeed it is more difficult for you to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride during the session break. There is an advice that you have to rely upon mindfulness and introspection. If you do that, then after you enter the actual session, again you have to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride. 
In the text there is this description: Whatever appears is empty, whatever is empty is bliss, whatever is bliss is the sport or the play of the deity.  
It is taught that you have to train in thinking that whatever is empty is the sport or the play of bliss. So you have to think that whatever is empty is the play or sport of the deity. Whatever is empty is bliss. All that appears is a sport or play of that. That is something for you to think about. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, think about. 
Student 5: About clear appearance and divine pride, say supposing this person really has clear appearance of like the whole world as pure land and every being as a deity. For a person on Path of Accumulation would have uncontrived bodhicitta and uncontrived renunciation, how does he apprehend samsara and suffering? 
Khen Rinpoche: Say again. I didn’t concentrate what you talking about. 
Student 5: The tea must be nectar. 
Khen Rinpoche: Delicious. It is very powerful. What I’m saying your mental is already inside, what you talk I don’t hear. When you meditate deity also like that. Whatever you see doesn’t bother and your mind into deity. I told you before yeah. My mother was looking at the TV and her mind is into that. When she is looking like and sometimes one or two hour she was there, some kind of Hindi serial, not Korean, India. Every Sunday there are some shows so she was very focusing. I’m very surprised because she really don’t understand much about the Hindi language but surprising she understand everything. By looking at the action, open the mouth, all the story she know. So every Sunday they have like that. When the time comes, she is there. She was very focus, and whatever people say she just, people walk in front also she don’t notice. Her mind is like, so like that, people shout also she don’t hear. So concentrate her mind there. 
Student 5: The question is that a person has clear appearance of the pure land, mandala as pure, and all beings as deity.  Everything is pure. This person is on Path of Accumulation would have uncontrived bodhicitta and have uncontrived renunciation. How does this person apprehend samsara? How does this person apprehend suffering? Does these two actually even appear to such a person? Would they appear pure or impure? How to generate compassion for the deities?
Khen Rinpoche: Somebody have answer? While I’m thinking maybe someone can answer? Whose mind is very quick? My mind is not so quick. Maybe Sze Gee, you have any answer?
Translator: You know that they are not actual deities. It is just imagination. Even though they appear as deities, it is just my imagination. In reality, they are still suffering sentient beings. So you can still generate compassion for them.
Student 6: In relation to that question, the other time Khen Rinpoche actually replied on the clear appearance, we should see that everybody and the inhabitants of the environment are emanation bodies. Then it also fall to this question: If all are emanation body and emanation body functions to benefit sentient beings, if there is no sentient being, it is like all suppliers but no customers, then how?
Khen Rinpoche: You worry no business? 
Student 6: I worry that compassion will degenerate.
Student 7: My thinking is that it is not possible for you not to see suffering because it is said that the tantric afflictions are supposed to be only purified at the 4th stage meaning clear light. I think suffering would always appear to you. So it is possible to generate compassion still. 
Khen Rinpoche: This is what I think. You need to have some degree of understanding of emptiness. All phenomena are empty of inherent existence. So sentient beings and buddhas are all empty of ultimate existence. From that point of view, they are equal. But, of course, conventionally, they are not equal because buddhas are enlightened and sentient beings are not enlightened. However, whether buddhas or sentient beings, they do not exist ultimately,. 
Conventionally, sentient beings exist. Conventionally, buddhas exist.
Ultimately, sentient beings do not exist. Ultimately, buddhas do not exist. 
Ultimately, there are no mistakes. Ultimately, there is no virtue, there is no non-virtue. 
Conventionally, there is virtuous karma, there is non-virtuous karma. 
Sentient beings do exist. They are tormented by suffering. They are merely imputed, and they exist in mere name. They do exist. We cannot say that they do not exist. However, when you look for them, you cannot find them. 
We experience suffering. They experience suffering, and they also exist. But when you look you cannot find it ultimately. When you look for it, where is it? When you look for this imputed object that is the suffering sentient beings, sentient being who are tormented by suffering, you cannot find it. 
When you look for this imputed object, sentient beings tormented by suffering, you cannot find it. But you cannot then conclude that sentient beings do not exist. 
Even though you cannot find the imputed object when you look for it, you must be able to posit its existence. How do these sentient beings exist? They are merely imputed by your mind. Besides that, there is nothing else; merely imputed by your mind. So you must be able to posit a merely imputed I that accumulate virtuous karma and non-virtuous karma. Through such a reflection, you will be able to arrive at a presentation of this I that is merely imputed by conception. When you look for this imputed object I among your aggregates, you are not able to find it. Then you conclude that this inherent I does not exist. This is slightly easier. 
If you want to go on to understand how this I that is merely imputed by conception is able to accumulate karma and so on, then this is more difficult. 
When we say that sentient being are tormented by suffering does not exist by way of their own entity; they are merely imputed by conception, this does not mean that they are merely imputed by any conception. 
These sentient beings do not exist by way of their own entity. So we say that they are merely imputed by conception. However, this does not mean that they are merely fabricated by conception. It does not mean that sentient beings are just fabricated by your thoughts. If you are able to understand that, then you should know that such sentient beings that are merely imputed by conception are able to perform functions conventionally. With that understanding, you would have an understanding of emptiness and dependent arising. Based on that understanding, you will arrive at this understanding of how sentient beings do not exist by way of their own entity and yet they can accumulate karma, they can experience karma. 
Sentient beings are merely imputed and exist in mere name. Yet they can experience karma and so on. When you arrive at that, then you will generate this extraordinary compassion for sentient beings. These sentient beings tormented by sufferings, even though they do not exist by way of their own entity, yet they suffer and experience suffering. So conventionally, there are sentient beings tormented by suffering. Even though you may imagine that they are all deities and so on, it is not that there is no suffering. It is not that there is no sentient being tormented by suffering. There are times also when we hold ordinary pride, for example, when we engage in the Vajrasattva meditation and mantra recitation, we exercise ordinary pride. 
We have to think about what it means for something to be established through being merely imputed by conception. If you don’t understand this properly, then your understanding can be mistaken. We say that all phenomena are merely imputed and all phenomena exist in mere name. You have to think about what that means. On the reflection you should ask - phenomenon, anything, say sentient being - does it exist the way it appears to my mind? If you analyze with reasoning, you will be able to see that it does not exist the way it appears to your mind. Even though it may appear very vividly, if you analyze with reasoning, you would be able to see clearly that it does not exist that way. If you investigate in this way, in the end, you will know that there is nothing that you can point to as sentient being. Knowing that such a sentient being does not exist through your investigation, you know that sentient being is merely imputed by name, it is merely imputed by conception. From the state of emptiness, you know that this sentient being that appears merely exists in mere name. From the state of emptiness, these sentient beings that are tormented by suffering appears. You must understand that this is the way a sentient being exists - sentient being who is tormented by suffering. It is merely imputed by name. It is merely imputed by conception. There is nothing more you can posit with respect to its existence. It does not exist by way of its own character. How does it exist? It exists by mere name, by being merely imputed by conception.
For this appearance of sentient being to appear to your mind, you know that it exists merely being imputed by name, it exists being merely imputed by conception. With this understanding of emptiness then you have the accumulation of exalted wisdom because when you look for it, you cannot find it. Immediately this sentient being that is merely imputed by conception, merely existed in name arises in your mind. It is fact that it is merely imputed. With that you will be able to accumulate the collection of merit.
Another question that you need to think about is this: 
Before you impute sentient being tormented by suffering, does such a sentient being exists? 
This is a difficult question. Before you impute sentient being, does this sentient being exist imputably? Does it exist in mere name? 
If you understand what I have previously said about sentient beings being imputably existent, existing in mere name then it is not difficult for you to answer this question.
Khen Rinpoche: You get what I am saying or not? I don’t think so. Because I don’t get myself. That is about emptiness. 
When something does not exist by way of its own entity, and since it does exist, it has to exist in mere name. It cannot transcend. Then you have to understand that it is merely imputed in name. If you think: “This means that if I imputed then it exists. If I don’t impute then it doesn’t exist”. Then your understanding is not correct.
What do we mean when we say that something is merely imputed in name? It means that it doesn’t exist by way of its own entity. Whether you impute sentient beings or you don’t impute sentient beings, sentient beings still exist. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay? Are you getting? I mean you need to think more.
This is a difficult point because you think if something is imputed by name then before the imputation, does it exist or not? Does this phenomenon exist or not? This is a difficult question.
If you think: Something is imputed by conception then before the imputation, does it exist or not?
If you think: “Before I impute, it does not exist. If I impute then it comes into existence”.  Then this would mean that before you impute that phenomenon does not exist.
How do you understand this expression: Something is imputed in name? 
If you think: “This means that if I imputed then it exists. If I posited it by name then it exists. If I don’t posit then it doesn’t exist.” 
If that is your understanding then this means that before you impute that phenomenon does not exist.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes or no?
In fact, whether you impute or you don’t impute that phenomenon has already been established.
Khen Rinpoche: No?
If your understanding is that before I posited by name, it does not exist. Then this would mean that before you posited, it would not exist. You have to think about if that understanding is correct.
Khen Rinpoche: Is that correct or not? She (translator) asked me example, I said in emptiness there is no example. Think about that. I thought today to complete the completion stage.
Points of debate
When is calm abiding attained?
One scholar says: Calm abiding is attained when you complete the subtle generation stage.
Reply: But this statement does not teach when it is newly obtained. 
This explanation comes from Yangchen Gawai Lodro in his text on Paths and Grounds of Tantra. He says that when you complete the subtle generation stage, you will attain calm abiding. As we have analyzed in the previous session, when you attained the 3rd level, the level of those who have attained some control over pristine wisdom, you may not have attained it.
There is an explanation by certain scholars that when you complete the subtle generation stage, you attained calm abiding. 
The reply by Ngawang Palden is that this statement does not teach the point at which calm abiding is newly attained. Ngawang Palden’s own position is that you don’t have to complete the subtle generation stage in order to attain calm abiding because in his explanation after you have completed the coarse generation stage then you engaged in meditating on the subtle drop. With that you can go on to attain calm abiding. 
Understand the method of obtaining stability and the point of completion of the coarse and subtle generation stages through such training by consulting the Principles of Grounds and Paths of my guru, Yangchen Gawai Lodrö..
This explanation of obtaining stability and the point of completion are formulated in accordance with Panchen Chogyen’s clear presentation of Khedrup Rinpoche’s thought.
The explanation of:
attaining stability in the coarse generation stage,  
completing the coarse generation stage, 
attaining stability in the subtle generation stage and 
completing the subtle generation stage 
have been done earlier. 
Still, there is a basis for further analysis because Mantric Stages states:
Both systems of Guhyasamaja posit that you complete the generation stage when you attain stability in such yoga.
And Illuminating Lamps states: 
Beginner’s concentration is the yoga of the first stage, and abiding in that is stabilizing that or completing that. 
Also Analysis of the Four Interrelated Commentaries states just that.  However, except for these explanations, it does not appear that the term stability and completion are clearly differentiated. 
Previously, we have seen different criteria posited for attaining stability and for completing. 
To attain stability means to be able to meditate for 4 hours 
To complete means to be able to meditate for as long as you wish, for a month, for a year and so on. 
However, Ngawang Palden is saying that according to Lama Tsongkhapa’s Mantric Stages, it seems like attaining stability and completion are not differentiated. They seem to be the same.
Is meditation on emptiness required during the three concentrations?
Here one says: It follow that the three concentrations, such as the concentration of initial application and so on, do not need to cultivate emptiness because the method of meditating on the appearance of the deity circle is explained as the main practice in the initial stages, apart from a few exceptions such as purification through pristine wisdom, or special resolution subsumed within clear light. 
Reply: That is not logically necessary because in the context of the three concentrations, the clear, profound, nondual yoga* that ascertains the meaning of non-inherent existence by taking the deities as its focal object must be cultivated. 
*Translator used the term “yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity”
Mantric Stages states:
Sridhanyavajra explained that in general the three concentrations function as minds possessing the aspect of the deity circle and also as yogas engaging the reality of selflessness; this was also the opinion of Jnanapada.
Indeed in the first stage you mainly meditate on the appearance of the deity circle, yet you train in everything arising as an illusion through powerfully ascertaining the non-inherent existence of all dharmas.  Thus after meditating on the deity circle, the mind takes the deities as its focal object and ascertains non-inherent existence as its aspect. Such profound, clear, nondual yoga or realization meditation* engages emptiness as its ascertained apprehended object while accessing its apprehended aspect, namely the appearance of the supporting mandala and supported deities.
*Translator used the term “meditating on sadhana”
Khen Rinpoche: OK. You still don’t understand?  I don’t know. 
The essential meaning is as follow: 
The long sadhana is divided into what are called the three concentrations. 
As listed on page 106 of the text, the three concentrations are:
(1) the concentration of initial application [or initial union]. 
(2) the concentration of the supreme-conqueror mandala, 
(3) the concentration of the supreme-conqueror activities.
(At the bottom of page 124) This person thinks that the three concentrations do not need to cultivate emptiness. He is saying “You meditate on emptiness only a few places, for example, in the beginning purifying everything into emptiness, then you meditate on emptiness, and then at one point you absorb everything into clear light.  There you also meditate on emptiness.  Those are the exception.  The three concentrations do not cultivate emptiness because you meditate on the deities.  There is no explanation that you have to meditate on emptiness”.
The description given here is based on the Guhyasamaja sadhana.  This is because before you meditate on the deities there is this purification through pristine wisdom and you meditate on emptiness before you generate the deity.
On top of page 125, “special resolution subsumed within clear light” refers to this point in the Guhyasamaja sadhana where you have already generated the celestial mansion; the inestimable mansion of the deity. Then you generated all the deities. You yourself are already generated as the deity. Different deities are sat at different parts of your body. These deities that are sat on your body are then absorbed into emptiness. After you have generated yourself as the deity Guhyasamaja then 32 deities are visualized at different parts of your body. Then gradually they are absorbed into emptiness. At that point, it is said that you meditate on emptiness. This person says that besides for those exceptions during these three concentrations, you do not need to cultivate emptiness.
In the middle of page 125, the reply said that it is not logically necessarily because in the context of three concentrations, you do meditate on what is called the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity.
The reply basically said that you need to meditate on emptiness throughout all the three concentrations because while you are focused on the deities, you have to ascertain their emptiness. As the source for this position, the author cites Lama Tsongkhapa’s Mantric Stages.
Why is yoga realizing emptiness superior in tantra? 
The profound, clear, nondual yoga in the continuum of a practitioner of the generation stage and the yoga without signs of the lower tantras are more powerful than the path realizing emptiness in the Perfection Vehicle because in tantra method and wisdom are one in nature.
The Ocean of Siddhis of the Generation Stage states:
The mind that focuses on the mandala circle and meditates on its non-inherent existence generates both the accumulation of merit (by means of focusing on the mandala circle) and the accumulation of pristine wisdom (by means of apprehending its non-inherent existence.)
And:
The mind ascertaining non-inherent existence through taking the deity circle as its focal object is one hundred times more powerful as an antidote to grasping at true existence than the mind ascertaining the non-true existence of, say, a sprout.
The etymology of the generation stage, its method of cultivation, the attributes of its different deities, and each mahasiddha’s distinct manner of explaining them should be understood from Mantric Stages alone, since they are not clearly explained in other texts.
I have explained the meaning of these passages previously. The essence is that when the apprehended aspect of the mind realizing emptiness appears as the deity, so in :
the perspective of the appearance, there is the appearance of the deity and
the perspective of ascertainment, there is the ascertainment of emptiness. 
In the perspective of appearance, there is the appearance of the deity’s body. By that you are able to complete the accumulation of merit. 
In the perspective of ascertainment, there is the ascertainment of emptiness. By that you are able to complete the accumulation of pristine wisdom. 
These two are combined in a single mind. By these combinations of these in a single mind, you will be able to complete both collection of merit and exalted wisdom.
At the bottom of page 126, this is why it is said this is more powerful than realizing emptiness in the Perfection Vehicle because in tantra method and wisdom are one in nature. 
The essential meaning is that regardless of what deity you are meditated on, you should always ascertain its emptiness. This is because by doing so you are cultivating the antidote to the conception of true existence. This becomes very powerful for eliminating the conception of true existence.
In the Perfection Vehicle, there is clear distinction between meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment. It is said that during subsequent attainment, after you arise from the meditative equipoise, you meditate on love, you meditate on compassion, you practice the six perfections, and you practice patience and so on. Such an explanation does not appear in the context of tantra.
This essentially related to the question that was asked earlier. It is not taught in this context that during subsequent attainment, you meditate on compassion. It doesn’t say that you accumulate merit by meditating on compassion specifically. 
The explanation of the accumulation of merit occurs in context of meditating on the circle of mandala deities. Whether or not suffering sentient beings appear or not does not seem to be so significant here. So the need for this compassion is in fact ever present.  
In fact, when you begin, you said “For the sake of all sentient beings, I will quickly quickly attain full enlightenment and so on”.  There is no specific explanation that during subsequent attainment you have to meditate on compassion. Usually it is stated that you meditate on compassion, mind of enlightenment so on in order to complete your accumulation of merits. In the context of tantra, there is no specific explanation that during subsequent attainment you should meditate on compassion in order to accumulate merits.  Rather the accumulation of merits is easily completed through the practice of deity yoga. 
You need to think about the following questions in relation to practicing deity yoga in the context of tantra:
How does that practice enhance your love and compassion and cause your accumulation of merits to be completed?
In the context of cultivating the divine pride as explained previously, the basis for cultivating the divine pride is a pure object; an object having pure attributes. You meditate on the deity’s body and then based on that you cultivate the thought “I am the actual deity of the resultant time”. We use what is called an object having pure attributes. This means that from the state of emptiness, you generate this appearance of the deity, and you cultivate clear appearance of the deity. On that basis, you cultivate divine pride.
You should think about how this works. Different scholars have different opinions. Their explanation is that the 5 aggregates are generating as the deity. You have to think about whether or not this is correct. What if you generate the divine pride on the basis of your ordinary I? 
On the basis of ordinary I, ordinary aggregates, you generate the deity, is this acceptable? Is this correct? 
Some scholars say that yes, it is fine to meditate in that way. 
Some scholars say no, that is not alright. 
This is something that you have to think about. There are a lot of discussions on this point. But we don’t have to go into it. 
In essence, you generate this deity from the mind realizing emptiness; the apprehended aspect of the mind realizing emptiness appears as the body of the deity. Try to your best of your ability to meditate on emptiness before that and from the state of emptiness, the deity’s body is generated. I think it is good if you can meditate like that. 
From the state of emptiness, this mind realizing emptiness arises as the deity’s body. You have to try to maintain this appearance clearly and don’t just have this clear appearance. You need to understand that this appearance does not exist inherently. Together with that appearance, you need to have this understanding of emptiness. That is about it for the generation stage. In the next session, we will begin the completion stage.