Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L64.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:17.182416
================================================================================

In the Sutra System there is a presentation of the basis, path and result according to the Perfection of the Wisdom Sutra.  
We have settled upon the bases which are the two truths.  
Based on that, there is a presentation of the path which is the method and wisdom. 
By practicing the path, one will attain the results which are the two Buddha’s bodies.
When we talk about clear light, there are actually two types of clear light:
The object clear light
The subject clear light
Subject clear light is referring to the clear light that is the object processor.  
In the Sutra System, in the context of the Perfection of the Wisdom Sutra, the object clear light which emptiness is emphasized.  
In the middle wheel of dharma (2nd turning wheel of dharma), the object clear light which is emptiness is presented extensively. 
In the last wheel of dharma (3rd turning wheel of dharma), the subject clear light or the clear light that is the object processor is mainly presented.
In order to settle upon the subject clear light, there is a presentation of Highest Yoga Tantra. 
In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, there is a very detail presentation of the very subtle mind. Together with this very subtle mind is the very subtle wind.  
this very subtle mind is imputed the name ultimate truth, 
whereas the very subtle wind is imputed the name conventional truth.
In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, we say that coarse mind such as the sense consciousnesses are adventitious. For example, the mind such as white appearance, red increase and black near attainment are said to be adventitious.  That means they arise adventitiously and cease adventitiously.  They are not stable and they do not dwell in the nature of the mind.  
What is the mind the goes to Buddhahood? It is difficult to posit our adventitious mind as a continuity of a similar type that goes to Buddha ground. What goes to the Buddha ground is this very subtle mind that dwells in the nature of our mind that remains in an unchanged manner.  Such a mind that is able to go to Buddhahood has just this nature of clear and knowing.
We have a very subtle mind that is mounted on the very subtle wind.  These two dwell as one entity. Even though one is a form and the other is a consciousness, they are able to stay together. The form, this wind that we are talking about here, is not referring to coarse form.  This very subtle mind and very subtle wind are dwelled as one entity.
If you are able to understand this point, then you will be able to derive a profound understanding of the statement that all sentient beings are pervaded by the buddha lineage.  All sentient beings have this buddha nature (buddha lineage) that is suitable to transform into a Buddha’s body.  With this understanding, you understand that this very powerful potential exists in all living beings. As soon as sentient beings come into existence, they have such a nature.
Simple having the very subtle mind and the very subtle wind is not sufficient because we need to cause them to become manifest.  So the very subtle mind is used to ascertain the object clear light – emptiness. Such a mind then has the ability to dispel obscuration that is more subtle than those that are presented in the Sutra System.  So such a mind will be able to abandon the subtle afflictive obscurations and subtle knowledge obscurations.
By cultivating this meaning clear light (actual clear light), you will be able to eliminate the two obscurations.  It is said that the continuity of a similar type of this meaning clear light (actual clear light) becomes the dharmakaya (dharma body) of a Buddha.
Now the mount of this meaning clear light is the very subtle wind. Through meditating on the illusory body, this very subtle wind will actually arise as the full fledge deity i.e. becomes the actual deity. This illusory body that is a continuity of the similar type will become the actual form body of a Buddha (rupakaya).  In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra:
the conventional truth is said to the illusory body,
the ultimate truth is the clear light.
Therefore, in Highest Yoga Tantra, there is a presentation of meditating on the two truths to attain the Buddha’s body:
Meditating on the conventional illusory body, 
Meditating on the ultimate clear light.
Now, we have already finished explaining the generation stage.  On the generation stage, one uses one’s imagination to meditate on the supported and supporting mandala.  Similarly, the processes of death, intermediate stage and rebirth are meditated upon using imagination.  
On the generation stage, you are not actually able to produce a full-fledged body of the deity. However, on the completion stage, you can produce such a full-fledged body, an actual body of a deity.
If you want to attain the state of union, the state of the union of no-more learner, which is basically the union of a Buddha’s body and a Buddha’s mind then there is no choice and you have to enter tantra.
If you want to attain such a union of no-more-learning then you have to study tantra and develop and understanding of the method to do that. So it is crucial that you deposit the imprint or latency of how to do this.
We do this explanation here but the actual attainment is difficult. Nevertheless, here we try to understand what is necessary in order to attain such a state of the union of no-more learning, what are the procedures and so on.  In doing so, we will be able to deposit latencies and leave imprints in our mind. This is important.  All of you should focus your attention and listen to the explanation of the path of tantra. Please do so earnestly because if you are able to develop an understanding of how to practice the tantric path, then you will leave imprints on your mind and these imprints will go along with you life after life so that you can continue to practice tantra. So this is important.
We have completed the first of two main sections which is the section on the generation stage. Now we are going to look into the second section which is the completion stage.
We start with some outlines on how to meditate on the completion stage.
The Completion Stage
How to meditate on the completion stage
This has two parts:
1. Explaining some classifications of the completion stage of the Ārya system
2. Teaching in brief the completion stage of other highest yoga tantras
Explaining some classifications of the completion stage of the Ārya system
The first has two sections:
1. Analyzing the definition
2. The meaning of each classification
Explaining some classifications of the completion stage of the Ārya system - what is being explained in this section is the practice of the stages of Guhyasamāja. This is because here there are various explanations on how to practice the Guhyasamāja system.  The Ārya system here refers to the system of Ārya Nāgārjuna. So here we will find a brief explanation of the Guhyasamāja completion stage according to Nāgārjuna system.  
The second of this teaching in brief is the completion stage of other highest yoga tantra. Tantra such as Vajrabhairava or Yamantaka tantra, Heruka or Chakrasamvara are called different names but basically these systems have the same procedure in term of the practice.  However, Kalachakra tantra has a different way of practice. In the second section, Kalachakra tantra will be explained briefly.
The first of these has two sections, and the first of the two subsections is “Analyzing the definition.” 
Analyzing the definition
Paṇchen Chögyen states that the definition of the completion stage is “the yoga in the mental continuum of a learner derived from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation.”  But I think this definition refers to the general completion stage of highest yoga tantra.  
It is not logically necessary that completion stage yogas are derived from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel, because in the Kālacakra system both individual withdrawal and absorption precede the winds entering the central channel.
Let us look at this definition. 
It is stated that the completion stage is derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation.  So this is requirement of the completion stage. 
The definition also states that this is a yoga in the mental continuum of a learner. 
Now there is debate regarding whether the completion stage has to belong to the mental continuum of a learner.  In any case it is stated as such here. So from this statement here, we would say that there is no completion state on the buddha ground.
Here in this definition, it is stated that completion stage has to be derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation.  The point here is that it is not necessary that the completion stage yoga is derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. The example is given of the individual withdrawal and absorption in the Kalachakra system.  This take place before the winds enter the central channel, which mean that it is not necessary that completion stage yoga is derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel.  
This is why right after the definition, we see the statement that says “But I think this definition refers to the general completion state of highest yoga tantra.” In general, we are referring to Guhyasamāja tantra, Yamantaka tantra, Heruka tantra because they have the same procedure. This means that Kalachakra tantra is excluded. So if you want to posit this as a definition that applies to all type of Highest Yoga Tantra then the definition actually contain a flaw.  But if you say that this definition is just for the general completion stage of Highest Yoga Tantra, meaning you exclude Kalachakra, and then it is acceptable.  
I have already said many times before, in order to study well, you have to read this text many times before you come to class. You have to think about the meaning and then you come to class and then you hear the explanation. You read it, you think about it and if you do that you will develop a very good understanding.  However, if this is the first time you ever see this definition then it is difficult for you to immediately form an understanding.  
Khen Rinpoche: Understand?  Must be seeing it first time or many times? Some say many times. Some say first time.  I don’t know.  I saw the news that the British prince going to marry today. The BBC news showing all these things. People are waiting there from last night sleeping on the road. I think hundred people sleeping on the road with the sleeping bag and the temperature going down to 10 or 7 degree like that. They sleep whole night there.  Then the news reporter come and asks question “How you feel last night?  Cold  or not?”  Then he says “Very cold!” What are you waiting for here for the whole night? The people answer was “I want to see what the prince wife Megan dress.” Many people answer that.  If I get time, I take selfie with her. That is our goal for spending whole night under the cold weather”.  See, when people have interest, whole night cold also no problem.  They walk so fast even 1 second or 2 second you will not have time for that. You just have a glimpse of that but they wait whole night.  I think you get what I am trying to say.  If you get my point then ok.  Very interesting how much hardship they put in. For just less than 2 second they just to see what she wears.   I see some people come from France, Spain. From far away they spend so much money just to see that.   
What I am trying to say is that you need to have focused when you are studying.  If you have mental determination, then studying will not be hard. But if you lack that then studying will be hardship for you.
Khen Rinpoche: You must have that kind of interest.  What I am going to see… that kind of alert you must have “Today what are you going to talk something new”.  Otherwise, noting goes inside you. If you have that kind of alert, when you heard some words “Wah.” Otherwise, you are just… so I don’t know.
To study well, you need to have interest.  That means you have to read beforehand.  Then you come to class, you read it again, you listen to explanation then you will be able to leave good imprints. The material will be able to stay in your mind.  In that way then you will be able to study properly.  
Some debate on the definition of the completion stage
One says: It follows that it is not logically necessary that yoga in the mental continuum of a learner derived from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation constitutes completion stage practice. 
This is because a generation-stage practice with such qualities exists. For yogas with such qualities exist in the mental continua of practitioners of the generation stage because the four joys derived from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel exist in their mental continua.
Reply: That is not logically necessary.
This person is saying that the definition is not logically necessary in the sense that according to the definition the yoga in mental continuum of a learner derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation is a completion stage. 
So this person is saying “This is not necessary”. 
He gave the reason: This is because the generation stage practice with such qualities exists. Even though it satisfies that definition, it is not completion stage.
According to the definition, if you have this yoga, the mental continuum of a learner derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation then this is a completion stage practice.  This person says “It is not necessary”.  
If you look at the bottom of page 135, it says that in the generation stage you have this causing of the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation.  What reason does this person gives for claiming that?  
The reason is “because the four joys derived from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel exist in their mental continua” which means that the mental continuum of these people on the generation stage.  
Our own system reply: “That is not logically necessary.” What this mean is that there is no pervasion in the reason that this person has given.  
The opponent then explains why the reason is established.
The reason is established because Illuminating Lamp states:
One who has completed the subtle generation stage might possibly cause the winds to enter the central channel (avadhūtī). And, through knowledge of the technique of converting union with an external consort into vitality exertion, he may generate the four joys through dissolving the winds in the central channel in dependence on that. However, if these two do occur during the generation stage, they must nonetheless be posited as paths of the completion stage. As the Oral Transmission explains, such innate states that arise during the empowerment before meditating on the path are included in the completion stage.
What this text Illuminating Lamp by Lama Tsongkhapa is saying? He is talking about this point that we actually have discussed previously. 
A person practices the coarse generation stage. 
After that he practices the subtle generation stage. 
Then he completes the subtle generation stage. 
It is possible for him to have the winds enter the central channel. 
Illuminating Lamp also says that some sharp faculty generation stage practitioners are able to use this technique of converting union with an external consort into vitality exertion. By practicing this vitality exertion he can cause the winds to dissolve into the central channel and as a result of that generates the four joys. 
Then this text Illuminating Lamp continues to say: “However, if these two do occur during the generation stage, they must nonetheless be posited as paths of the completion stage.’
These two refer to these two that we have seen earlier on: 
the first being that someone has completed the subtle generation stage and possibly that the winds can enter the central channel. 
the second refers to using the technique of entering union with an external consort and so on. 
So he is saying that if these two occur on the generation stage, they must be posited as path of the completion stage. 
This last sentence from Lama Tsongkhapa’s Illuminating Lamp says that ‘such innate* states that arise during the empowerment before meditating on the path are included in the completion stage” means that before you meditate on the generation stage and completion stage, you have to receive an empowerment or initiation. The empowerments are of various types:
1st the vase empowerment,
2nd the secret empowerment, 
3rd the knowledge wisdom empowerment
4th the word empowerment
During the 3rd one, the knowledge wisdom empowerment, it is possible that the person receiving the initiation generates the innate bliss. 
* innate refers to innate bliss
This person has not meditated on the generation stage or the completion stage path. If this person generates innate bliss, could this be said to be included in the completion stage? This is something we need to think about. This occurs before meditating on the path. This means this person has not entered even the generation stage. 
Our systems reply: 
Your assertion is unacceptable because, though the path derived from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel exists in the mental continuum of one on the generation stage, it arises due to completing the generation stage and through union with an external consort. However, he does not transfer to the completion stage, since this path does not arise due to meditating on the special method of penetrating vital points in the body.
I have actually explained this point previously. Here we are saying it is possible for the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel by completing the generation stage or by practicing vitality exertion using an external consort. However, this process of winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel does not occur through the power of meditation. Therefore, it is not considered a completion stage path. 
One says: Take such a path; it follows it belongs to the completion stage because the previously quoted text states that it is a completion-stage path.
This previously quoted text refers to Lama Tsongkhapa’s Illuminating Lamp.
So it is clearly stated that such a path belongs to the completion stage. So this person says that. 
Reply: Though it is a realization typical of the completion stage, it is said to be either
(1) a path that belongs to neither the generation nor the completion stage or 
(2) a completion-stage path existing in the mental continuum of one on the generation stage. 
This should be analyzed.
The person is saying that someone on the generation stage can generate the four joys by causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel. 
The question is: Is this completion stage? 
This person is saying: Well it is because Lama Tsongkhapa said so. 
But the reply is: What is being said here by Lama Tsongkhapa is that this path is a realization typical of the completion stage. 
To summarize: If you were to say someone on the generation stage, can this person generate the four joys by causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. The answer is yes. 
The question now is: Is this a completion stage? 
When you look at Lama Tsongkhapa’s text Illuminating Lamp, Lama Tsongkhapa says yes, it is completion stage.
But you must think about the fact that it is not reasonable to posit the existence of a completion stage in the continuum of someone who is on the generation stage. That being the case we then have to say: It is not a completion stage but it is a realization typical of the generation stage or more literally we say: “It belongs to the class of the completion stage”. Many scholars give such an answer.  
This path of the four joys derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. The text says: “the path that belongs to neither the generation nor the completion stage’. Is this something acceptable?
The doubt is basically the fact that in the continuum of someone on the generation stage, it is possible to have the four joys by causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. Would you posit this as a generation stage or would you posit as completion stage? This is something to think about.
Khen Rinpoche: Does anyone have any question at this point? You are all lost? No question? If you have a question, ask quickly.
Student 1: In the middle of page 136, the expression ‘paths of the completion stage’ and then later on, on page 138 there is another expression ‘completion-stage path’. Can we take both of these expressions as the same thing or not? 
Translator: Is there any difference between ‘paths of the completion stage’ and ‘completion-stage path’? In terms of Tibetan it is the same. I think the translator just rendered it slightly differently. In Tibetan it is exactly the same. 
Student 2: It says here that the practice of subtle generation stage and union with consort is not a completion stage practice ‘since this path does not arise due to meditating on the special method of penetrating vital points in the body.’ My question: Isn’t subtle generation stage meditating on the drops in the mandala? Isn’t that meditation?  Especially when they position on certain parts of the chakras?
Khen Rinpoche: Previously we have said that on the first two of the four levels - on the levels of the beginners and those who have attained some pristine wisdom - there is no attainment of calm abiding. If you have this laxity or excitation then you meditate on the subtle drops. Once you have pacified laxity or excitation you should return to the meditation on deity yoga. 
Then the purpose of meditating on the subtle drops on the first two levels - the level of the beginners and those who have attained some pristine wisdom - is to pacify excitation and laxity. However, when you reach the 3rd level - level of those who have attained some control over exalted wisdom - then you meditate on the subtle drops for the purpose of making the mind single-pointed. Then you don’t meditate on the yoga but you focus on the subtle drops so you can attain calm abiding (samantha). After that for the sake of attaining special insight (vipassana), then you do the meditation of emitting and reabsorbing. This explanation is given in the context of meditating on the generation stage to explain how you can attain calm abiding and special insight. 
When you are on this generation stage you do not meditate on the subtle drops for the purpose of causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. This is something that you do on the completion stage. 
When you complete the subtle generation stage it is possible for the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. However, you did not meditate on this subtle drop the size of a mustard seed in order to achieve that. On the generation stage you meditate on the subtle drop, for example, to pacify laxity, excitation, to cultivate calm abiding and so on. This means that even though the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel, the meditation was not done specifically to achieve that. So you can see that Lama Tsongkhapa’s explanation comes in two sections. 
You have to first practice the generation stage, 
You complete the coarse generation stage, and
You complete the subtle generation stage,
Then you practice the completion stage. 
In this text by Lantor (??) Lama Rinpoche and the textbook used by Gyurme Tantric College, they say that “You just have to complete the coarse generation stage. Without going into the subtle generation stage, you can just practice the completion stage.” 
In this text by Lantor (??) Lama Rinpoche entitled the “Enumerations of the Paths and Grounds of Tantra”, he says that humans of the degeneration age have such short lives and there is no time. So after completing the coarse generation stage you can go on to practice the completion stage. 
However, Lama Tsongkhapa in his text such as the Clear Lamp on the Five Stages states very clearly the stages or sequences on embarking on the paths:
First, you complete the coarse generation stage
Then you complete the subtle generation stage
Then you go on to the completion stage.
He describes these stages as the steps as if you are ascending a staircase. 
Khen Rinpoche: Before I read, better go through the chart on five stages. Otherwise, you don’t know what I am talking about. This gives some idea. After I read, it makes sense. Everybody have? 
The tantric path can be divided into two: the generation stage and the completion stage. 
If you look at the two stages of the Highest Yoga Tantra, there are two stages:
the generation stage
the completion stage
Under the completion stage we have the five completion stages of Guhyasamaja according to Nagarjuna. The first stage is called vajra repetition. There are different ways of calling this. Some call it as the isolation of speech. 
In terms of these five stages, according to Arya Nagarjuna: 
1st stage is verbal isolation (isolation of speech)
2nd stage is mental isolation (isolation of the mind)
3rd stage is illusory body
4th stage is meaning clear light (actual clear light)
5th stage is union
 These are the five profound paths according to Arya Nagarjuna. They are called 1st stage, 2nd stage, 3rd stage, 4th stage, and 5th stage. You should remember that 
If you enumerate these stages in terms of six stages, then you have:
When Nagarjuna listed verbal isolation as the 1st stage he actually included physical isolation within it. He says 1st stage vajra repetition but it is a case of the physical isolation (isolation of body) being included in the isolation of speech. 
There is also enumeration of these stages as 4 stages:
1st stage mental isolation
2nd stage is illusory body
3rd stage is meaning clear light or the actual clear light
4th stage is union
This would be a case of including physical isolation and verbal isolation in mental isolation
There are various ways to classify the stages of the completion stage. You can have a fourfold classification, you can have a fivefold classification or a sixfold classification but they are not contradictory. 
If we try to correlate these five stages with the paths that are described in the Perfection Vehicle or the Sutra Vehicle, then isolation of body could correspond to the heat level of the Path of Preparation.
The generation stage would occur on the Path of Accumulation. So you correlate the generation stage with the Path of Accumulation. 
The completion stage will correlate with the other paths. 
So then the isolation of body (physical isolation) will correspond to the heat level of the Path of Preparation.
The isolation of speech (verbal isolation) will correspond to the peak level of the Path of Preparation.
Then the isolation of mind (mental isolation) corresponds to the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation.
The mental isolation is divided into two levels:
The mere mental isolation 
The final mental isolation. 
The 3rd stage called the illusory body then corresponds to the supreme mundane level of the Path of Preparation.
Then moving on to the 4th stage of clear light and this correspond to the uninterrupted path of the 1st ground of the Path of Seeing. One is able to generate this direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations that are to be abandoned by the Path of Seeing with this 4th stage of clear light. On this stage, of course one is not able to abandon the innate afflictions.
In the Sutra System when you generate the uninterrupted Path of Seeing, then that serves as a direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations that are to be abandoned by the Path of Seeing. So when you attained the liberated path, after that then you have abandoned the afflictive obscurations to be abandoned by the Path of Seeing. After that you will go on to abandon the afflictions that are to abandon by the Path of Meditation. As soon as you attain the 8th ground, you have abandoned the innate afflictive obscurations.
In tantra, with a single uninterrupted path, you can abandon both the acquired and innate afflictive obscurations. So this one uninterrupted path acts as the direct antidote to both the acquired and innate obscurations.
When you hear this expression “the 4th stage clear light”, you have to know that this is the uninterrupted path that is the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations.
In general, the 5th stage union can be divided into two types:
The learner’s union 
The non-learner’s union.
Within learner’s union itself there are also two types:
The learner’s union of realization
The learner’s union of abandonment.
Between these two types of learner’s unions,
first you attain the learner’s union of abandonment
then you attain the learner’s union of realization.
Going back to the 3rd stage illusory body, you can see that this is actually the impure illusory body. But the general term, illusory body is of two types:
The impure illusory body 
The pure illusory body.
However, if we say the 3rd stage illusory body, you must understand that this refers to the impure illusory body.
In the context of stating, 1st stage vajra repetition, 2nd stage mental isolation, 3rd stage the illusory body, 4th stage clear light, 5th stage union. So in that context the 3rd stage illusory body can only refer to the impure illusory body.
In terms of this learner’s union of realization and abandonment, we are talking about that. 
The illusory body is such that there are two types:
Pure 
Impure.
When you generate this 4th stage of clear light, you have the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations. As soon as you have abandoned all the afflictive obscuration you achieve this pure illusory body. So that pure illusory body together with the mind of clear light is the union. So then these two - pure illusory body and the meaning clear light - are combined into the single entity.
Khen Rinpoche: I make mistake.
When you say learner’s union of abandonment is on the 4th stage clear light you have the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations. As soon as the afflictive obscurations have been abandoned you have the pure illusory body. 
So union then refers to the union of the abandonment and the pure illusory body.
Instead of saying union is the union of clear light and the pure illusory body, we should say it is the union of the abandonment of the afflictive obscurations and the pure illusory body.
So the union of abandonment refers to this union of the abandonment of the afflictive obscurations and the pure illusory body. 
Why do we say that this illusory body is pure here? Such a person has already abandoned afflictive obscurations. So the “pure” in the expression pure illusory body refers to being free from the afflictive obscurations.
The illusory body is pure or impure based on whether or not the afflictive obscurations have been abandoned. 
In the case of an impure illusory body that person has not yet abandoned the afflictive obscurations. 
In the case of the pure illusory body that person has abandoned afflictive obscurations.
One has already abandoned the afflictive obscurations but it is still necessary to meditate on meaning clear light. One needs to manifest the meaning clear light. This is for the purpose of abandoning the knowledge obscurations. As soon as one manifests this meaning clear light, then one attains the union of realization.
This learner’s realization corresponds to the Sutra System of the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum.
The final meaning clear light of a learner correspond to the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum according to the Sutra System.
When you attain this learner’s union, the learner final meaning clear light, then you attain the union of meaning clear light and the pure illusory body.
When you attain such union, you attained the learner’s union of realization.
The realization that we talk about the learner’s union of realization refers to this final meaning clear light of a learner. Then one attains this union that is the union of this clear light and the pure illusory body.
Then this clear light and the illusory body are of one entity. Immediately after having actualized this final meaning clear light, then one has abandoned all the knowledge obscurations.
That is the union in which the body and mind are of a single entity.
In order to attain this union of no-more-learning in which the body and mind have become an indivisible entity, you need to first attain the learner’s union of realization. And before that you have to attain the learner’s union of abandonment.
This learner’s union of abandonment has to be preceded by the 4th stage meaning clear light. 
In terms of someone who enters from the onset into the tantric path, before you can attain this 4th stage meaning clear light, you have to attain the impure illusory body. 
In order to attain such an illusory body you need to first attain what is called the final isolation of mind which is this metaphoric or example clear light. Without attaining that then there is no way to attain the illusory body.
So this final isolation of mind that is the metaphoric or example clear light occurs on the Path of Preparation. At that point one is still not able to directly realize the emptiness; one realizes emptiness with subtle dualistic appearance. 
The wind that is the mount of this final isolation of mind that is the metaphoric clear light then serves as the substantial cause of the impure illusory body. 
The final isolation of mind that is the example clear light serves as the cooperative condition for the impure illusory body.
In order to generate this final isolation of mind that is the example clear light, you need to gather all your winds into the central channel. Not only that, you have to gather them into the indestructible drop. If you are able to do that, then you are able to cause the very subtle mind to manifest.
In order to manifest this final isolation of mind, you have to cause all the winds to enter into the central channel at the heart and absorb into the indestructible drop. If you are not able to do that then you will not be able to cause the final isolation mind that is the meaning example clear light to manifest.
When all the winds have absorbed into this indestructible drop then the various minds - white appearance, red increase, black attainment - will manifest and then finally you have the clear light manifesting. At that point, emptiness appears in the manner of meaning generality.
In order for all these winds to absorb into this indestructible drop at your heart, you have to engage in this verbal isolation (isolation of speech). You engage this practice in order to loosen the knots at the heart. In order to do that, you basically have to cause the winds to absorb into the central channel at your heart.
By causing the wind to absorb into the central channel at your heart, then you engage in vajra repetition. By causing the wind to enter the central channel at the heart, then you are able to loosen the knots there. So then the winds are able to flow at the central channel at your heart.
In order to make it easier to loosen the knots at the heart, through causing the winds to absorb into the indestructible drop, you have to practice first the physical isolation (isolation of body) by loosening the knots at the naval and the secret place.                                      
During this stage of body isolation belonging to the completion stage, you meditate on the subtle drop so then you can cause the winds to enter the central channels and loosen the knots at the naval and the secret place. In order to cause the winds to enter the central channel there is the presentation of generating the four joys.
When you are practicing the body isolation, you can cause the winds to enter the central channel but they are not able to enter the central channel at your heart.
So by practicing verbal isolation then you cause these winds to be able to enter the central channel at your heart.
By this wind absorbing into central channel at the heart, the four joys are generated and these are superior to the previous joys.
So during the verbal isolation (isolation of speech), the winds are able to enter the central channel at the heart but they are not able to enter in the indestructible drop at the heart.
During the stage of isolation of mind in which there are two levels:
The mere isolation of mind 
The final isolation of mind
You are able to cause all the winds to enter into the indestructible drop at the heart and manifest the all empty clear light. Once you are able to manifest this final isolation of mind that is the metaphoric clear light, then you are pervaded by being able to generate the impure illusory body - the 3rd stage impure illusory body.
Once you attain this 3rd stage illusory body you will never die. On that basis you will be able to attain Buddhahood.
Khen Rinpoche: You will never die. That is what we need. If you don’t want to die then you need to achieve illusory body. There is no choice.
This completion stage is a practice on the bases of daily yoga. During generation stage, you practice calm abiding, special insight, you train in clear appearance and divine pride of being the deity. Then you have to be able to clearly visualize the channels and then you can practice the completion stage.
The practice of the generation stage is very important. Because in order to practice the completion stage:
you need to have this clear appearance of being the deity, 
you need to visualize this body that is made of light and 
you have to visualize of the various deities. 
Therefore, the generation stage is indispensable because you need to have very stable clear appearance and divine pride to practice the completion stage.
Those are the five stages according to the Nagarjuna. It is important for you to know all these stages without any confusion. For example, as soon as you hear the expression ‘the 4th stage’ you should know that this refers to meaning clear light. As soon as you hear ‘the 3rd stage’ you should know that this refers to the impure illusory body. The details on what these various stages are will come later in the text. So slowly we will go to those sections.