Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L65.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:19.321233
================================================================================

Student 1: It was said that during the lunar or the solar eclipse, the central channels in our body are more conducive or more relax and we can expand much better. During this period of time, we are advised to do our practice and do our meditation. How does one detect the flow of winds in the channels during these eclipses?
Khen Rinpoche: I’m not very clear about what you have asked. If you observe, you can see that from the 1st of the lunar month until the 15th of the lunar month, the moon waxes and it then becomes bigger and bigger. On the 15th day of the lunar month you get the full moon - the round complete moon. During these stages, there are changes in our environment. One example is the waves of the ocean. On the 15th, you can see that the waves are bigger. You noticed that or not? You must go beach every night. Watch for one week from 1st until 15th. You measure big, big, big like that. 
On the 15th, you can observe that the waves are bigger than usual. With the changes in the time of the calendar, we can perceive changes in the environment of the world. Based on that, we can say that there are changes within our body as well. 
Khen Rinpoche: In that case maybe you have to sleep whole night in the moonlight on the 15th. Then you may notice the difference. Most of the time we are inside the house and are covered by everything. There is no moonlight shine to your body. Maybe you go to the mountain where there is moonlight. Maybe may feel the difference. Your channel or wind movement…. I’m not sure. I have no idea. It just comes out from the mind. It has effect on the ocean. Why not on our body?  I think there should be some effect from the lunar system. Definitely! I’m not sure how much is the effect on our body system. I’m not really sure but there should be some. 
Based on these observations, we can perhaps speculate that the power of the winds become stronger as we move to the 15th of the lunar month. 
His Holiness the Dalai Lama has commented that it is observable that there is a difference in the flow of winds in the left and right nostrils on these special days. Usually the winds in our left and right nostrils are not balanced; one is stronger than the other. However, during the lunar eclipse, the solar eclipse, or on the auspicious days of the calendar, the winds in these two nostrils become balance and equal. You can investigate this phenomenon of the winds in the two nostrils becoming balance and equal. 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know much about that detail. Just now she asked what kind of experience? My idea is go to the mountain with the moonlight, sit there the whole night and meditate, then you may have some different feeling. I’m not sure. You need some moonlight.
Student 1: Is the Chinese flow of the Qi in the system similar to the winds in the Tibetan system?
Khen Rinpoche: They are same thing. We employ the same thing.
We have arrived at the section in the text that discusses the completion stage. Prior to the completion stage, there is the generation stage. During the generation stage, you do not have the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel through the force of meditation. However, on the completion stage, you have the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel through the force of meditation. 
In the previous session, we considered the situation where when one has completed the subtle generation stage, one also has this phenomenon of the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel. This occurs, for example, due to entering into union with an external consort. When this occurs, is this considered a completion stage or not? This is something that we investigated in the previous session. It will be difficult for us to say that is a completion stage. Most scholars would say such belongs to the class of the completion stage; rather than saying that it is a completion stage.
The meaning of each classification
This has two parts:
1. The enumeration and definitive order of the five levels*
2. The meaning of each
*Translator: The word definite should actually be applied also to enumeration - The definite enumeration and definite order of the five levels.
As we have mentioned previously, when we look at the generation stage, there are:
-  coarse generation stage and 
-  subtle generation stage
For the completion stage, we have the five levels according to the classification of Nagarjuna. 
Those five levels of the completion stage are:
Isolation of speech, 
Isolation of mind,
Illusory body,
Clear light 
Union
You should bear in mind of this classification.
If we want to count in terms of six stages of the completion stage, all we have to do is to add the isolation of body. In other words, the six stages of the completion stage are:
Isolation of body, 
Isolation of speech, 
Isolation of mind,
Illusory body, 
Clear light,
Union. 
You must make sure that these stages are clear in your mind. Even though we have five stages or six stages, their meanings are the same. If you don’t remember these stages, then it will be difficult for you to follow. So you must remember these stages.
It is also possible to enumerate the stages of completion stage in terms of four stages; in which case you can leave out isolation of speech. In other the words, the four stages of the completion stage are:
Isolation of mind,
Illusory body, 
Clear light 
Union. 
It is also useful for you to be able to correlate these stages of the completion stage of tantra with the paths and grounds.
The generation stage correlates of the Path of Accumulation. 
If you are already have a good understanding of the paths and grounds as presented in the Sutra System, and when you correlate the stages in tantra to the paths of Sutra then the correlation makes sense. If you don’t have any familiarity with the Sutra presentation, then this correlation will not be very helpful. 
Moving up to the Path of Preparation, there are four stages:
Heat, 
Peak, 
Forbearance 
Supreme mundane qualities
We can also correlate these with the stages of tantra. 
Isolation of body corresponds to the heat level of the Path of Preparation. 
Isolation of speech corresponds to the peak level of the Path of Preparation.
Isolation of mind corresponds to the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation  
Illusory body corresponds to supreme mundane qualities of the Path of Preparation 
The 4th level, the actual clear light (meaning clear light) corresponds to the uninterrupted path of the Path of Seeing. So when you initially attain the Path of Seeing, you have the direct antidote to the afflictive obscuration. So the meaning clear light corresponds to the uninterrupted path of the Path of Seeing. 
Then moving on to union, let us first talk about the union of abandonment. Here you have the abandonment of the afflictive obscuration. 
The union of abandonment corresponds to the liberated path or the path of release of the Path of Seeing. This union of abandonment refers to the union of the abandonment of the afflictive obscuration and the illusory body. This stage of union of abandonment belongs to a learner’s union and is an ordinary kind of union. 
After you have abandoned the afflictive obscuration, you still need to meditate on clear light for the sake of abandoning the knowledge obscuration (obscuration to omniscience).   
When you attained the uninterrupted path that is the direct antidote to the knowledge obscuration, then you attain the union of realization. What we mean by the union of realization is the union of actual clear light (meaning clear light) and the illusory body.
After you abandoned the knowledge obscuration, you attain what is called the non-learner’s union (the union of no-more-learning). This union refers to the union of body and mind. 
With the attainment of this non-learner’s union (the union of no-more-learning), you have this union of body and mind. It is said that wherever the mind pervades, the body also pervades. In Sutra, we have this explanation of Buddha pervading everywhere. There is nowhere where there is no Buddha. So with the Sutra’s proclamation, you find the profound explanation by relying on the explanations in tantra.
In order for you to attain this state in non-learner’s union, in which the body and mind are unified, you need to have also such a unified body and mind during the learner’s stages. So it is on the union of realization in the learner’s union where you have the union of the body and mind. 
During learner’s union, you have this union of realization in which the body and the mind, actual clear light, are one entity. 
The ability to have such a union of body and mind during the union of realization can be traced to the fact that in all sentient beings there is this very subtle wind and very subtle mind that are inseparable. 
We say that all sentient beings are pervaded by having buddha nature (buddha lineage). This means that naturally each and every sentient being has the potential to transform into the form body and the dharma body of the Buddha. 
Why is it that naturally all sentient beings have this potential? It is because we have this inseparable very subtle wind and very subtle mind. 
You should remember these points and have these ideas in mind as we go through the text. That will make it easier for you to understand the text. 
Khen Rinpoche: I think quite easy to understand the text now. If you understand what I’m saying now, when I read the text there is nothing to read. We go one more time in case those who don’t understand. 
The enumeration and definitive order of the five levels
First you require common and uncommon paths to establish the final goal, but you do not require other paths not included here.
We require various paths to establish the final goal. What is the final goal here? It refers to the non-learner’s union (the union of no-more-learning). 
The uncommon paths refer to the generation stage and completion stage that we are discussing here. 
What are the common paths? The common paths are the paths that are presented in the Perfection Vehicle – renunciation, bodhicitta and the correct view. 
You need these paths to establish the final goal. You do not need any other path that is not included within these. 
To establish non-learner’s union as explained in the general highest yoga tantras, you must first establish learner’s union combining both the actual clear light and pure illusory body. 
What is meant by the general Highest Yoga Tantras? It is the tantra of Guhyasamaja and included here are the tantras of Yamantaka or Vajrabhairava and the Heruka tantra or Cakrasaṃvara Tantra. These have different names – Guhyasamaja, Yamantaka, Heruka. They have different names, different ways of imputing but the procedures are the same. This is what is meant by general Highest Yoga Tantras. 
What is excluded from here is Kalachakra tantra. In the Kalachakra tantra, the stages of attaining non-learner’s union are slightly different. So that is distinct from the other general tantras. 
As stated here, if you want to attain non-learner’s union, the union in which the enlightened body and mind are unified, then you need to first attain learner’s union combining both the actual clear light and pure illusory body. The learner’s union here specifically refers to the union of realization. So here you want to attain this union of body and mind in which the body and mind are indivisible. 
To establish learner’s union you must first establish the pure illusory body, because if the pure illusory body is not first established it is impossible to obtain such union. 
In other words, to establish the union of realization you must first establish the pure illusory body. 
To obtain mere union you do not need to first establish the pure illusory body because the pure illusory body and ordinary union are necessarily obtained simultaneously.
As explained previously, when you first meditate on this meaning clear light and then you generate this direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations. Immediately after that, you attain the pure illusory body. This is why it is said that the pure illusory body and ordinary union are necessarily obtained simultaneously. 
It is mentioned in the beginning of this passage “mere union”, this mere union refers to ordinary union. Between the two, main union and ordinary union, this is the ordinary union. This union of abandonment is such that you do not need to first establish the pure illusory body. Why? Because the pure illusory body and this ordinary union (mere union) are attained simultaneously. 
As mentioned previously, attaining the pure illusory body, attaining ordinary union and the attaining the union of abandonment are the same. 
After this, you still need to continue to meditate on meaning clear light in order to abandon the knowledge obscurations (obscurations to omniscience). When you realize this clear light once again, then you attain the union of realization. 
What this means is that in order to attain the union of realization you have to first attain the pure illusory body. However, to attain mere union, you do not first need to attain the pure illusory body. Why? Because the pure illusory body and mere union are attained simultaneously. 
If you read the text slowly and carefully, you will understand what is being explained here because the explanation is quite clear. So to obtain mere union, you do not first need to attain the pure illusory body. Why? This is because the pure illusory body and mere union (ordinary union) are attained at the same time. 
So it is very important for you to read the text before you come to class. You have to go through the text and then develop some kind of understanding regarding what is explained in the text. Then you come to class, listen to the explanations and check if your understanding agrees with the explanations. This is something for you to check and to consider. So it is very important for you to read and develop your own understanding. Whether that understanding is correct or incorrect is not so crucial in the sense that you are still a student, you are still studying. So you have to form some kind of understanding, whether it is correct or incorrect. Then you come to class and then you check your understanding against the explanations. In case you find that there is some discrepancies, then you can discuss and find out what is correct. 
So you need to develop this interest in studying the text and reading the text before you come to class. Then when you come to class you are able to listen to the explanations of the teacher. Then you can check whether your understanding is correct. You have a basis for reflection. If you can verify that your own understanding agrees with the teacher’s explanation, then you will have a very stable understanding. You will not forget easily what has been explained, what you have understood. In this way, very stable and very firm imprints will be deposited on your mind. If you fail to do that, you don’t do any preparation before you come to class, you listen to the explanation but you are not able to retain them. They don’t make any impression on your mind, and then tomorrow you forget. You can do this but I wonder if you can really deposit these beneficial imprints on your mind. So if you are to just carry on like this life after life after life it is questionable whether there is some stable benefit. 
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? I don't know. Don’t forget. When you finish class you forget everything.
The point is it is very important for you to make effort. If you are able to make effort then that is the way to go. If you can’t, then there’s nothing to do. 
Khen Rinpoche: If you can’t, there is no way to go. If you can, there is the way to go.
To obtain the pure illusory body you must first establish the actual clear light because the pure illusory body is derived from its substantial cause, the extremely subtle fundamental wind that is the mount of actual clear light.
Here it is stated that in order to obtain the pure illusory body you must first establish the actual clear light. So recall the explanation that we went through just now, we said that this actual clear light (meaning clear light) is the uninterrupted path that serves as the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations. After this meaning clear light has been attained, you will attain the pure illusory body. Therefore, in order to obtain the pure illusory body, you must first establish the meaning clear light. 
In the Sutra explanation, we say that first you have the uninterrupted path of the Path of Seeing. Then you attain the path of release or the liberated path of the Path of Seeing. So, first the uninterrupted path then the path of release. Similarly here, first you attain meaning clear light then you attain the pure illusory body. 
What is the substantial cause of this pure illusory body? 
As stated at the top of page 140, it is “the extremely subtle fundamental wind that is the mount of the actual clear light”. 
What is the substantial cause of this pure illusory body? It has to be something that comes before the pure illusory body. So the substantial cause has to precede the pure illusory body. What is this substantial cause? It is the extremely subtle fundamental wind that is the mount of actual clear light. So this has to come before the pure illusory body. 
From this reason, we are able to understand that in order to obtain the pure illusory body we must first obtain the actual clear light. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, you clear or not? Should be clear. I think nothing to confuse. Shouldn’t be confused as it is quite clear. 
To obtain actual clear light you must first establish the accumulation of merit and wisdom for three countless eons or its equivalent, the illusory body of the third level. 
For if either of those two are not first established, then the actual clear light that possesses the capacity to quickly exhaust the extremely subtle obscurations cannot manifest, and such obscurations cannot be abandoned by other paths.  
What is this actual clear light? It is as we have explained before. 
Minds are of various levels. There are:
coarse minds 
subtle minds. 
You have a very subtle mind that newly directly realizes emptiness. Such a mind then acts as the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations. This very mind is the actual clear light (meaning clear light). Such a meaning clear light (actual clear light) is a very powerful mind. It has extraordinary power. So compare to this realization of emptiness in the Sutra system, this meaning clear light is far more powerful. In the Sutra system, you have to abandon the afflictive obscurations over stages, from the 1st ground up to the 8th ground. However, this meaning clear light (actual clear light) in the tantra system alone is able to destroy all the afflictive obscurations. 
 “Such obscurations cannot be abandoned by other paths” means that the paths in the sutra system do not have such a power to abandon the obscurations that can be abandoned by this meaning clear light. 
This meaning clear light (actual clear light) can abandon the very subtle obscurations. As we have explained before, in the context of tantra, the afflictive obscurations are the adherence or the conception of ordinariness. Such a powerful mind, the meaning clear light, can abandon such very subtle obscurations. On top of that, it is able to do so very quickly. So without having to do this over a long time over stages as in the Sutra system, very quickly it can abandon these very subtle obscurations. This indicates the extraordinary power of the meaning clear light. 
In the middle of page 140, it is stated that: 
“To obtain actual clear light you must first establish the accumulation of merit and wisdom for three countless eons or its equivalent, the illusory body of the third level” – so in order to attain such a powerful meaning clear light, it is not going to be easy.  In order to do that, as stated here, you need to first establish the accumulation of merit and wisdom for three countless eons.  Alternatively, you have to establish the impure illusory body which is the illusory body of the third level.  In other words, you need to have this full-fledged deity body.  If you do not have this achievement, then you basically do not have the capacity to abandon the afflictive obscuration. 
Why is it that in this explanation here there is this alternative given? 
Why does it say “the accumulation of merit and wisdom for three countless eons or its equivalent, the illusory body of the third level”?
Why is it necessary to have these two possibilities? 
This has to do with the way Buddha Shakyamuni attained Buddhahood.  He entered the Path of Accumulation, went to the Path of Preparation and then traversed the ten grounds.  On the 10th ground, he realized there is no way to attain Buddhahood except for entering tantra.  He then did not have to go through the coarse and subtle generation stages.  He did not have to go through isolation of body, isolation of speech, isolation of mind.  He did not have to attain the impure illusory body. Rather he entered directly from the 4th stage of meaning clear light.  So to provide for his circumstance, there is this explanation of the accumulation of merit and wisdom for three countless eons or its equivalent, the illusory body of the third level.  
It is clearly stated in Lama Tsongkhapa’s Clear Lamp of the Five Stages that Buddha Shakyamuni, in order to attain Buddhahood, did not have to pass through isolation of body, isolation of speech, isolation of mind as well as the third stage of illusory body.  Rather he entered from the clear light.  
You have to realize the significant of positing the 3rd and 4th stages from within the five stages. 
The 3rd stage illusory body refers to the impure illusory body.  
The 4th stage has to be this direct antidote, the uninterrupted path that is the direct antidote to the afflictive obscuration.  The 4th stage is the meaning clear light (actual clear light).
This explanation on page 140 is saying that if you do not have either of these two:
The accumulation of merit and wisdom for three countless eons, 
Or its equivalent, the illusory body of the third level, the impure illusory body,
Then there is no way for you to attain the actual clear light.  
To obtain the illusory body of the third level you must first establish actual mental isolation or equivalent completion-stage practice.
Translator: This next phrase “due to such meditation on the completion stage” should be shifted down to later. So that sentence should read:
For if you do not first dissolve all karmic winds in the indestructible drop at the heart according to the stages of death, 
(Then, you insert this phrase) 
due to such meditation on the completion stage, you cannot obtain an illusory body conforming precisely with the intermediate state.  
So to obtain the illusory body of the third level, which means to obtain the impure illusory body, you must first establish actual mental isolation (isolation of mind) or an equivalent completion stage practice.  If you do not attain the actual mental isolation, then you must obtain something that equally powerful, an equivalent completion stage.  In that way, you will be able to attain the impure illusory body.  
Why is it that an alternative is provided here?  Besides saying actual mental isolation, it says “or equivalent completion stage practice,” this is probably because the expression mental isolation (isolation of mind) is used in Guhyasamaja.  However, this expression is not used in Yamantaka or Vajrabhairava. In Vajrabhairava, there is description of what is called the Yoga of Commitment.  This equivalent completion stage practice can refer to, for example, this Yoga of Commitment in the Yamantaka practice.  
As explained previously, when you practice the bringing of death, intermediate stage and rebirth as a path of three Buddha bodies, you have to visualize these absorption or dissolution.  When the coarse mind absorbs, you have the white attainment, the red increase and black near attainment.  In order for the clear light mind to manifest, the wind has to absorb into the central channel.  Then the clear light mind manifest and after that you have the bardo on the intermediate stage occurring.  During this clear light of death, the winds dissolve into the indestructible drop at the heart in the central channel. When you arise from this clear light of death, you enter the intermediate stage.
The achievement of ordinary intermediate stage is actually similar to the attainment of the impure illusory body.  If you want to attain this impure illusory body, you have to mediate and cause the winds to enter the indestructible drop.  If you are not able to do that then basically there is no way for you to attain the impure illusory body.
This means that if you want to attain an illusory body conforming precisely to the intermediate stage, you have to dissolve all the winds into the indestructible drop at the heart according to the stages of death through the force of such meditation on the completion stage.  If you do not do that, then basically you will not be able to attain this illusory body conforming to the intermediate stage.  This means that you have to be able to dissolve all the winds in the indestructible drop through the force of such meditation.  Where do you do that? You do that on the mental isolation (isolation of mind).  This means that without attaining the mental isolation or its equivalent completion stage practice, you will not attain the impure illusory body.  
To obtain actual mental isolation or an equivalent completion-stage practice you must first establish the completion-stage practice of verbal isolation that is a branch of vitality exertion called vajra recitation or an equivalent practice. 
For you cannot generate actual mental isolation or an equivalent completion-stage practice without completely releasing the channel knots at the heart by such a completion-stage practice.
If you want to attain this actual mental isolation or the metaphoric clear light (example clear light), you have to be able to absorb all the winds into the indestructible drop at the heart.  In order to do that, you have to completely release the channel knots at the heart.  Without doing so, you will not be able to attain this dissolving of the winds into the indestructible drop.  
In order to attain this mental isolation you have to establish first the verbal isolation (isolation of speech) through what is called vajra repetition (vajra recitation).  This is because the central channel is such that at the heart, the left and right channel has three knots each; giving a total of six knots.  When these channel knots are released at the heart, then it is possible for the winds to go to the indestructible drop.  In order to loosen these six knots, three knots each from the left and right channels, you have to perform vajra repetition.  This is why it is said that in order to attain isolation of mind, you must first establish the isolation of speech. 
The point is by performing the vajra repetition of the isolation of speech, you are able to loosen these channel knots at the heart.  By doing so, then the winds can enter the central channel.   
You have to do this practice of vajra repetition of the isolation of speech in order to loosen those knots, or an equivalent practice.  What would be an equivalent practice?  In the practice of Yamantaka, this would correspond to what is called the Yoga of Speech.  There is no explanation of the isolation of body, isolation of speech, isolation of mind.  However, the Yoga of Speech is explained, so this would be the equivalent practice.  
To completely loosen the channel knots at the heart through such yoga in easy steps, you must first establish actual physical isolation or a completion-stage practice of similar type.
For it is more difficult to loosen the channel knots at the heart than the other channel knots, and it is easier to gather the winds in other places than to gather them at the heart.
Why is it kind of easier to loosen the channel knots at other places? At the crown, there are only two knots - one from left channel, one from right channel.  Similarly, at the secret place, there are also two knots - one from each of the left and right channel.  It is more difficult to loosen the channel knots at the heart where there are six altogether.  
Before verbal isolation you should first establish physical isolation because it is easier to loosen the knots. In body isolation (physical isolation), you loosen the upper knots and the lower knots.  Once you have done that, it is easier to loosen the knots at the heart.
To fully generate such a completion-stage practice in your mental continuum, you must first cultivate the coarse and subtle generation stages in four daily sessions; for this definitely matures the mental continuum so that you may generate complete comprehension of the completion stage…
If you want to fully generate such a completion stages in your mental continuum, you have to first cultivate the subtle generation stage.  In order to cultivate the subtle generation stage, you need to first cultivate the coarse generation stage in four sessions.   
You can see that in order to practice this completion stage, you must first have very stable clear appearance and divine pride of being the deity in which your body is visualized as being in the nature of light.  It is on the basis of this visualization that you can visualize all the channels within your body.  You certainly do not do this visualization of the channels on the basis of visualizing this ordinary body that you have.  You have to have clear appearance being the deity, divine pride being the deity, in which your body is in the nature of light.  And in this body of light, you visualize and meditate on the channels. 
…and you must obtain the pure empowerment in its entirety and properly protect the commitments and vows.
To fulfil the definition of being a vessel protecting the commitments and vows, you must train in the stages of the shared path of the practices of the two bodhicittas and their branches. 
Translator: Here you need to change the translation a bit. It is a bit problematic.  
Practices that enhance, and such practices are exemplified by external vitality exertion.  All paths are understood to be fixed in number and fixed in their order.  