Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L67.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:16.270928
================================================================================

We are in the context of discussing physical isolation (isolation of the body). This is actually the 1st of the five stages of the completion stage. 
What is this completion stage physical isolation? 
As we have discussed previously, this occurs in somebody who has already fulfilled the generation stage. This person meditates on the subtle drop at the lower opening, and in this way causes the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. In that way, this person causes the exalted wisdom of white appearance to arise. This person transfers then from the generation stage to the completion stage. 
You should be able to answer the following question:
When does one transfer from the generation stage to the completion stage?
You should be able to say that “through the force of meditation, one causes the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel and cause the exalted wisdom of white appearance to be generated. At that point, one transfers from the generation stage to the completion stage”.
As mentioned earlier in the previous session, at this stage on the occasion of physical isolation (isolation of body), the winds can enter the central channel but they do not enter in the central channel at the heart. 
As we went through the previous session, physical isolation is divided into two types:
Individual withdrawal
Absorption
Physical isolation is classified in two types:
1. Individual withdrawal in post-equipoise, where all functional phenomena such as objects, sense faculties, and so forth appear as the manifestation of bliss and emptiness
2. Absorption where the deities appear as the manifestation of bliss and emptiness
Individual withdrawal in post-equipoise
In the first, individual withdrawal, everything that appears is sealed by the recollection of the bliss and emptiness of equipoise.
On the occasion of the physical isolation, 
Everything that appears arises as the expression of emptiness. 
And then everything that appears as emptiness arises as the expression of bliss. 
Then, everything that is bliss is seen as the sport of bliss.
The basis of emptiness and its emptiness are one entity but different isolates. For example, form and the emptiness of form are one entity. 
In the sutra system, everything that appears is the expression of emptiness - everything is the sport of emptiness. We talk about arising from the state of emptiness. We should know that this mere appearance and mere emptiness assist each other mutually. In order for this mere appearance and mere emptiness to appear in such a way, we need to have completed the analysis of the view so that whatever appears arises as emptiness. When we have this appearance of emptiness, then it induces the conviction in the appearance.
We say that appearance and emptiness are one entity. This is something that is true in reality. It is not just because we think it is like that. In reality, appearance and emptiness are one entity. So the basis of emptiness and its emptiness are one entity. 
Bliss is emptiness. Through the force of meditation it cause winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel and the bliss consciousness is generated. This bliss is used to ascertain emptiness. 
Emptiness and bliss are meditated as being of one taste. So the object and the object possessor in emptiness and this bliss are meditated as being of one taste like water placed in water. So we should meditate while visualizing this. 
We use the exalted wisdom and great bliss to meditate on emptiness like water placed in water so that this bliss and the emptiness are indivisible. This is how we should imagine the bliss and emptiness to be when we meditate. 
During meditative equipoise, one uses bliss to meditate on emptiness. When one arises from that meditative equipoise then everything that appears, appears in the nature of emptiness. Everything that is in the nature of emptiness is in the nature of bliss. The yogi uses the power of imagination or visualization to meditate on this. 
So whatever appears appears as the sport of bliss and meditates on them as being one entity but in reality they are not one entity. This bliss is a consciousness and this emptiness is an object. However, you meditate on this through the force of imagination or visualization. 
The yogi meditates on the sport of bliss through the force of imagination. If your meditation goes well, then everything like outer form, sound, odor will appear as a sport of bliss. Even an object that gives you suffering will give you the sense of bliss. 
Usually if we were to touch a piece of red hot iron, it will give us pain. It gives us suffering. However, if one becomes very familiar with this meditation, then through the force of familiarization, this contact of the red hot iron with one’s body will actually cause this bliss to arise. 
We have to recall that outer apprehended objects and inner apprehended subjects. They are all empty of existing from their own side, empty of being to set themselves up. So whatever appears appears as this expression of emptiness. Not only that, immediately you will also be able to induce the sense of bliss. 
On the occasion of the individual withdrawal in subsequent attainment (post-equipoise), whatever appears becomes the method for inducing bliss. It becomes the condition for bliss to be produced. In this way, your bliss increases more and more and this leads to the sense consciousness stopping. So as much as you are able to put a stop to the sense consciousness, then the bliss will increase through the winds entering the central channel. Because you have this greater bliss, this means that you are able to place yourself in meditative equipoise in a stronger manner. 
It is important for you to understand this point. As stated in the text, whatever appears is emptiness, whatever is empty is bliss. So then you are able to create the conditions for great bliss to increase more and more. This is the meaning of viewing all appearances as the sport of bliss. So you should understand what this means. 
Khen Rinpoche: You understand or not? I think I explained last class.  I am repeating. Whether you get my point, I don’t know. 
We actually read through the text explaining this point [the meaning of viewing all appearances as the sport of bliss], so you need to reflect on what that means. If you don’t think about it, then it will be difficult of you to understand. 
For when you have completed the analysis of view, you know that emptiness is the essence of that object which is the empty basis, and that object is the representation of that emptiness. This knowledge is common to both sutra and tantra.
Here, due to your conviction that bliss and emptiness possess the same taste, objects are established by the power of conviction to be the appearance of bliss just as they are established as the appearance of emptiness.
For when practicing the path of great bliss, it is imperative that whatever appears fans the flames of bliss, through the power of cultivating that conviction.
As stated that everything is in the appearance of emptiness, that is a fact and that is reality. Then you meditate on this as the appearance of bliss. That is something that occurs through the force of your own visualization or imagination. By meditating on everything that appears as being the appearance of bliss then you is able to create a condition for bliss to be developed i.e. it becomes an assistant for bliss to develop. This occurs during subsequent attainment through the force of visualization. So whatever appears to your mind becomes an aid to the generation of bliss. So everything is being merely empty. Then from that mere emptiness, there is this appearance and whatever appears is the expression of bliss. So simply through that appearance, then bliss is generated. This is what is taught. For that to happen you have to meditate and you have to visualize. So if you are able to do that, then there will be no suffering because whatever appears, there is only bliss and there is no suffering at all. 
This is something that we also learn in the context of sutra. When we were looking at the lojong or thought transformation teaching, you learn how to transform all unfavorable adverse conditions into the path. 
Having completed individual withdrawal, let’s us look at the second part on absorption.
Absorption where the deities appear
Absorption has five types:
Investigation that meditates in a coarse way on the bodies of the deities, which are objects of indivisible bliss and emptiness
Analysis that meditates on them in a detailed way
Mental bliss concordant with the pristine wisdom of indivisible bliss and emptiness
The bliss of pliancy concordant with that mind
The concentration of single-pointed mind
The three states of individual withdrawal, investigation, and analysis are the physical isolation of post-equipoise; the three states of joy, bliss, and concentration are the physical isolation of equipoise meditating on the ultimate deity. 
From among the five types of absorption, the first two - investigation and analysis - are posited as the physical isolation of post-equipoise (subsequent attainment). 
Then the remaining three - joy, bliss and concentration - are posited as the physical isolation of meditative equipoise. 
Previously in the context of individual withdrawal, whatever that appears is arising as bliss. Here, in the context of absorption, whatever that appears then appears as the bodies of the deities which are the apprehended aspect of indivisible bliss and emptiness. 
The main types of absorption are:
Investigation
Analysis
In the case of investigation you meditate on the deity or you reflect on the nature of the deities in a rough way, whereas in analysis you reflect on the nature of deities in a detailed way or in a fine way.
These investigation and analysis arise in the subsequent attainment (post-equipoise).
The next three types are mental bliss, bliss of pliancy and concentration of the single-pointed mind concordant with the exalted wisdom of indivisible bliss and emptiness, or concomitant with the exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness. These occur on the occasion of meditative equipoise and meditate on the ultimate deity. 
The four lineages
Physical isolation is classified into:
1. The physical isolation of one hundred pure lineages
2. The physical isolation of just five lineages
3. The physical isolation of three secret lineages
4. The physical isolation of one extremely secret lineage
Physical isolation of one hundred pure lineages
Firstly, the hundred lineages consist of the twenty coarse phenomena, namely 
(1–5) the five aggregates, 
(6–9) the four elements, 
(10–15) the six bases such as the eyes and so on, and 
(16–20) the five objects such as form, sound, and so on, which are differentiated into five aspects each and meditated on as 
(1–5) the five tathāgatas, 
(6–9) the four consorts, 
(10–15) the six bodhisattvas such as Kṣitigarbha and so on, and 
(16–20) the five goddesses such as Rūpavajrā and so forth, for each of the five lineages.
First of all, we have the basis of purification and that is the five aggregates. The purified factors of these 5 aggregates arise as the 5 Tathagatas (Buddhas) of the 5 families. 
Each of these are differentiated into 5 aspects. This means that each is divided into the Buddhas of the 5 families. 
Let’s give an example: Vairocana is differentiated into the 5 Tathagatas. This means that there is:
Vairocana of Vairocana,
Vairocana of Ratnasambhava,
Vairocana of Amitabha, 
Vairocana of Amoghasiddhi 
Vairocana of Akshobhya
The 5 aggregates are meditated on as the 5 Tathagatas where each of the 5 Tathagatas is differentiated into 5 aspects. This means we will end up with 25 in total. 
Next, we have the 4 elements (constituents). The purified factor of these is the 4 consorts (exalted mothers). These 4 consorts are differentiated into 5 aspects each. 
Next, we have the 6 bases (sense sources or sense spheres). These have purified factors of the 6 bodhisattvas. These 6 bodhisattvas are in turn divided into 5 aspects each. 
Similarly, the 5 objects or the so-called purified factors of these 5 objects arise as the 5 goddesses Rupavajra  and so forth. Each of these 5 goddesses is then divided into the 5 lineages. 
In brief,
there are 20 basis of purification 
the purified factor of these 20 basis of purification are meditated on as the 20 deities. 
each of these 20 deities are differentiated into the 5 lineages. 
So that is how you get the 100 pure lineages. 
From the thirty-two deities, the ten wrathful ones plus Maitreya and Samantabhadra are not mentioned here since they are not clearly and explicitly stated in the Root Tantra. However, in general there are thirty-two deities of physical isolation because the complete thirty-two deities are stated in the context of physical isolation and implicitly explained in the introduction. This is understood from the Annotations.
What it is saying is that it is explaining that in Guhyasamaja there are 32 deities. However, the Guhyasamaja’s Root Tantra does not explicitly mention the 10 wrathful ones and the 2 bodhisattvas Maitreya and Samantabhadra. So in general there are 8 bodhisattvas but among them Maitreya and Samantabhadra are not mentioned explicitly. This means that from among the 32 deities, only 20 are explicitly mentioned. These 20 are taken as the basis of purification. From there you divide and obtain the 100 pure lineages. 
There are 32 deities in Guhyasamaja. If each of these is differentiated into 5 aspects, you should have a total of 160 lineages. However, here only 100 pure lineages are explained. 
So the above passage explains why there are only 100 and not 160. So the purpose of this section is to explain why there are 100 pure lineages according to the Guhyasamaja path. This explains how we should count so that there are 100 pure lineages.
If you meditate extensively in the context of the body isolation then you should meditate on the 100 pure lineages that we have just counted. But you can also do so in a way that is more condensed i.e. you can meditate on the 5 lineages instead. 
You can condense these 5 lineages even further to obtain the 3 secret lineages. So you can meditate on the 3 secret lineages which refer to the body, speech and mind vajras. 
The body vajra is Vairocana. Through condensing the 5 lineages into the 3 lineages, Ratnasambhava is included within Vairocana
The speech vajra is Amitabha. Amoghasiddhi then is included within Amitabha
The mind vajra is Akshobhya. 
So this is the way in which you condense the 5 lineages into 3 lineages. 
When you meditate on these 3 lineages, 
you are meditating on Vairocana which include Ratnasambhava,
you are meditating on Amitabha which include Amoghasiddhi 
you are meditating on Akshobhya. 
These 3 secret lineages can be further condensed to obtain just one very secret lineage. This one very secret lineage refers to the lineage of the victorious one, Vajradhara.
This is how you meditate on the deities in the context of physical isolation. 
You can meditate on 100 lineages, 
You can condense that into 5 lineages, 
The 5 lineages can be condensed into 3 lineages,
The 3 lineages can be condensed into 1 lineage. 
I wonder whether the hundred pure lineages shouldn’t be primarily classified as analysis because individual withdrawal does not meditate on deities with faces and hands; the three states of joy, bliss, and concentration possess ultimate objects; and investigation prefers the five lineages through condensing the bases of purification to five or Vajradhara alone, without associating the twenty coarse phenomena with each of the twenty deities.
For, as Gyaltsap Jé’s Notes on the Five Stages states:
Investigation prefers the aspect of Vajradhara alone, while analysis is detailed contemplation that associates each deity with their individual object and sense faculty.
The Later Guhyasamāja Tantra states:
The three secret states are investigation . . . 
Illuminating Lamp states:
Investigation means investigating the five lineages divided into three groups of five for each of the three secret states, namely the sense faculties, sense objects, and sense awarenesses. 
Therefore Sun Illuminating the Profound Meaning states:
The branch of investigation investigates the nature of the deities. The branch of analysis analyses in detail the face, hands, and so on.
As we have mentioned, physical isolation is divided into 2 types - individual withdrawal and absorption. Absorption is in turn divided into 5 types. Among these, we have what is called analysis. 
Here the author is wondering whether the 100 pure lineages shouldn’t be primarily classified as analysis. 
As we have said earlier, analysis involve detailed meditation on the fine features. Here the author is saying that from between investigation and analysis, the meditation on the 100 pure lineages should be primarily classified as analysis. 
Here the text is saying that individual withdrawal does not meditate on the deities with faces and hands. As we have mentioned earlier on that during individual withdrawal, you cause everything to appear as bliss, emptiness so one does not meditate on deities having faces, hands and so on. 
Then also the next phases of joy, bliss and concentration, they do not meditate on the deities with faces and hands either. This is because they have ultimate aspects. 
How about investigation?
Investigation meditates on the 20 coarse phenomena by condensing them into the aspect of the 5 lineages or into a single lineage. The author is saying this do not associate with the 20 deities. 
This passage is an explanation of what are investigation and analysis. He is expressing his opinion that there is this meditation on 100 lineages then you can condense and meditate on 5 lineages. You can condense it further to get a single lineage. So he is expressing his thought on what should be analysis and what should be investigation. 
One way of explaining investigation and analysis is that:
investigation meditates on just the rough entities of the deities, whereas 
analysis meditates on the deities in a detailed way i.e. meditating on the fine details such as faces, hands and so on. 
This should be analyzed. 
Meditation on subtle objects
Meditation on a subtle object is a means of gathering the winds. Melting the substances through gathering the winds is a method of generating bliss. Through these you establish the four joys and the four empties.
A yogi who has completed the coarse and subtle generation stages of this system through meditating on the subtle drop at the lower opening causes the winds to gather where the mind is held. This is due to the key point that the wind and mind share the same point of engagement.
In dependence upon that, the winds enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel, and the four empties together with their signs arise.
When the winds enter the central channel, the downward voiding wind reverses in the central channel, igniting the caṇḍālī. This causes the white substance to melt and the stream of bodhicitta to descend and drip, and from this the four descending and ascending joys are generated.
First, you meditate on coarse generation stage.
Then you meditate on the subtle generation stage. 
After you have completed the generation stage then you meditate on the subtle drop at the lower opening. 
Due to your meditation then the winds will gather where your mind is held. So the winds will go to where your mind is holding the object. 
When you meditate on the subtle drop at the lower opening, referring to the lower end of the central channel, you focus your mind there. Because you focus your mind there, the winds will gather there. As the result the winds will enter, abide and dissolve into the central channel, the 4 empties along with their signs will arise.
The winds are actually of various types - the 5 root winds and 5 secondary winds.
One of these root winds is called downward-voiding. Usually it moves downwards. However through your meditation, through the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel, those downward-voiding winds that usually move downward reverses and it moves upward. 
These winds that usually move downward move upward because all the winds enter, abide and dissolve into the central channel. These winds then ignite the candali (tummo). This candali is in the nature of heat. Due to these downward-voiding winds moving upward, the heat here is ignited and this melt the bodhicitta and causes bliss to be generated. Due to the winds entering through the lower opening of your central channel, the tummo (candali) fires and blazes. 
As the result of that, the bodhicitta melt. 
As a result of that, you will obtain what are called the 5 descending joys and the 4 ascending joys.
Further, it is stated in the Vajra Garland [Explanatory Tantra] that when bodhicitta descends from the crown to the throat, from there to the heart, from there to the navel, and from there to the secret place, the four joys are generated.
Also Drop of the Great Seal states that in accordance with the descent of white bodhicitta, sixteen joys are derived by classifying each of four such joys into four parts each.
And in accordance with the decent of the red drops there are twelve joys through classifying them as three each. This is the method of the four descending joys.
The 4 descending joys are generated through the descent of the bodhicitta. 
First, it will descend from the crown to the throat.
Then descent from the throat to the heart
Then from the heart to the navel 
Then from the navel to the secret place
This is when you have the 4 descending joys. 
These 4 joys are given specific name.
When the bodhicitta descend from the crown to the throat, you experience joy.
From the throat to the heart, you experience supreme joy. 
From the heart to the navel, you experience special joy. 
From the navel to the secret place, you experience innate joy.
There is also the explanation that correlates these 4 joys with the 4 empties. 
The 4 empties are:
Empty
Great empty
Very empty
All empty
There is also the explanation that correlates these 4 joys with:
White appearance
Red increase
Black near attainment
Clear light
On page 170, you see the explanation of the ascending joy.
The four ascending joys are generated through bodhicitta moving from the secret place to the navel, from there to the heart and so forth, and the method of generating the sixteen and twelve joys is similar.
When you have the bodhicitta moving from the secret place to the navel, from the navel to the heart, from the heart to the crown then you generate the 4 ascending joys.
The difference in superiority between descending and ascending joys
It is said that the ascending joys are far superior to the descending joys and all the ascending joys must be innate joy. 
The essence of this section is that due to the winds entering through the lower end of the central channel then you melt the bodhicitta and experience the 4 descending joys from the crown to the throat, from the throat to the navel, from the navel to the secret place. Then after that you experience the 4 ascending joys from the secret place to the navel and to throat and to crown.
Drilbupa’s Explanation of the Five Stages also states that at times the bliss of the first three descending joys is innate bliss.
Variations in the generation of the four joys
It is not logically necessary that all means of generating the four joys accord with the previous explanation of the stages of descent of bodhicitta because it is said that the four joys are generated from the convergence of melted bodhicitta in the heart from above and below, once candali is ignited by Vajra recitation.
There are many issues requiring analysis, but these will be explained in brief in the context of mental isolation.
What is being said here is that the system that we have explained?
We have these 4 descending joys followed by the 4 ascending joys due to winds entering and so on is the Nagajurna’s system of Ghuyasamaja but it is not the case that every single system is like that. For example you have Drilbupa’s explanation. This explanation gives the presentation that is different from that of the Nagajurna’s system of Ghuyasamaja.
Relation between the four joys and the four empties
In general the four joys are not posited as the four empties since it is said that some beings generate the four joys without dissolving the winds in the central channel.
Nevertheless, the four joys are generated in the nature of the four empties because many scholars explain this point in accordance with Drop of the Great Seal, which states that the four joys are the four empties.
Different assertions regarding the generation of the four empties
In this context Munisri explained that the four empties are serially generated when the bodhicitta reaches the root of the Vajra and the neck of the jewels, the center of the jewel, and the tip of the jewel.
Illuminating Lamp states this to be an important point that conform with fault
(Translator: The sentence Illuminating Lamp states this to be a serious departure from the standard presentation is incorrect. It should be “Illuminating Lamp states this to be an important point that conform with fault”)
Je Rinpoche has frequently stated that those who assert that all pristine wisdom of the four empties is the four joys derived entirely from bodhicitta descending from the crown to the secret place and ascending back to the crown have not yet comprehended the important points of this system.
Uniting bliss with emptiness
Thus when you are able to generate innate bliss during descent and ascent, you should meditate in equipoise on the emptiness that is the lack of inherent existence through uniting the object and subject.
When you arise from equipoise due to the movement of winds, you recall the bliss and emptiness of equipoise, and you seal whatever appears with that. If you restrain inappropriate attention, all appearing objects arise as bliss. After that, sense awareness withdraws from its objects when the winds engaging objects through the doors of the senses reabsorb due to the increase of bliss. Therefore, as stated before, bliss is generated through the winds dissolving.
This part you should make sure you understand.
Due to the winds entering the central channel, the 4 joys will be produced. But simply having the 4 joys is not going to be beneficial. 
What are the 4 joys are?  They are basically blissful consciousnesses. These blissful consciousnesses which are object possessors have to be made to meditate on emptiness as its object. One has to meditate on the emptiness of inherent existence during meditative equipoise using these blissful consciousnesses. 
You meditate on bliss and emptiness during meditative equipoise. You unlikely to be able to do that forever, so at some point either the winds will move and then you will arise from your meditative equipoise.  When that happens, then you will receive appearances and immediately, as soon as you receive appearances, you should recall that these are the nature of emptiness.  Whatever is in the nature of emptiness is in the nature of bliss. If you do that, then this become a favorable condition for your bliss to increase more and more. 
When your bliss becomes stronger and stronger, then this causes the winds to gather in the central channel.  Appearances will also gather.  Then this serves as condition for you to be able to place yourself in meditative equipoise on bliss and emptiness again. 
The 4 empties occur naturally at the times of death.  From empty naturally you will be led to great empty and so on.  It occurs naturally in sequence.  However, if you are meditating on the 4 empties, and you generate the first empty, it is not necessarily the case that the next empty - great empty - will occur naturally in sequence. 
When the white appearance, red increase, black near attainment and clear lights manifest, you want to use these as an aid to increasing your bliss.  Therefore, you have to strive at generating great bliss.
Etymology
Regarding the etymology of the term physical isolation, the physical basis of isolation is the twenty coarse objects and so on, what is isolated is ordinary appearance and conception, and the purpose of isolation is to meditate on those as the appearance of bliss and emptiness or as deities.
What this is saying? We have the expression “isolation of body”.  
What is the body that is the bases of isolation?  Isolation of body, what is this body that is the bases of isolation?  It is the 20 coarse objects.  
What are the 20 coarse objects?  We went through at the beginning of class:
the 5 aggregates, 
the 4 elements, 
the 6 basis, 
the 5 objects.  
That is the bases of isolation.  
The next point is: From what is it isolated? It is isolated from ordinary appearance and conception. For example the 5 aggregates isolated from ordinary appearance and conception.
What is isolated from? It is the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence of ordinariness.  
What is the method of isolation?  You meditate on those as the appearance of bliss and emptiness or as deities.  There are two ways here
View the 5 aggregates as bliss and emptiness.  
View them as deities.  This means that to meditate on emptiness and then meditate on emptiness as bliss and this bliss as the deities. 
Therefore, during physical isolation (isolation of the body), you cultivate individual withdrawal and absorption.  In that way, you isolate the basis of isolation from appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness.  
Physical isolation does not necessarily fully conform to this etymology, and that which fully conforms with the etymology of physical isolation is not necessarily physical isolation because from the stage of verbal isolation on, you meditate on everything that appears as sealed by bliss and emptiness.
First of all, it said that physical isolation does not necessarily fully satisfy this etymology.  For examples, we talked about the 3 stage of joys, bliss and concentrations. We have these 3 stages of joys, bliss and concentrations.  They are the physical isolation of equipoise meditating on the ultimate deity.  Therefore, they do not satisfy this etymology.  Similarly, there are certain stages which actually satisfied the etymology but they are not physical isolation. 
For example, you have verbal isolation.  In verbal isolation you meditate on everything that appears. There is also this meditation on everything that appears and being sealed by emptiness.  However, verbal isolation is not physical isolation even though it satisfies the etymology of physical isolation.  
With this, we have completed the physical isolation.  Next section is on verbal isolation.  Hopefully next session we will complete verbal isolation. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. Difficult?  Maybe next time, you have questions then next time.  So, if you have any questions on physical isolation, please ask them next week.  