Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L68.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:17.717033
================================================================================

We have gone through the first of those five stages of the completion stage - the isolation of body (physical isolation).  Did you understand the explanation?  
So when we say isolation of body, do you have an understanding in your mind of what that is?  
Khen Rinpoche: Zero? You have some idea what I am talking or not?
Question: In order to satisfy the etymology of isolation of body, what example can you posit?  Can you give an example?  
Khen Rinpoche: Anybody have?  I just want to understand how much you understand.  I want to know that.  Anybody have?  Can you give an example of this isolation of body?  Come. Quick quick, I just want to understand how much you understand.  Don’t know what you understand.  If you really have zero understanding, then I need to repeat again.
Student 1:  When you have the white appearance, red increase, and black attainment, and that is the time you have the physical isolation.  Am I right?  
Khen Rinpoche: White appearance?
Student 1: Red increase and the black attainment.  That is the time you have the physical isolation.  
Khen Rinpoche: Which part?  There are many?  This happen in many places, many times. Which part are you talking about that?
Student 1: Reverse…
Khen Rinpoche: There are so many different channels. You have to be specific.
Student 1:  When the wind reaches the central channel but has not reached the heart channel.  
Khen Rinpoche: This occurs at every point in the isolation of body.  Is like that?  So is that a feature of every instance of isolation of body?
Student 1: What do you mean by every instance?  Can you elaborate of what is your question?
Khen Rinpoche:  [On page 152 and 153] The boundary of this physical isolation (isolation of body) begins from the generation of pristine wisdom of the empties derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditating on the subtle drop at the lower opening.  It extends up to but not including the generation of pristine wisdom derived from the dissolution of the upper and lower winds in the central channel at the heart.  
Those are the boundaries. During this period from beginning until where it extends, you have this isolation of body at various points during this period. Can you give an example of something that satisfy the definition of isolation of body but does not satisfy the etymology of isolation of body? It is isolation of body but it does not satisfy the etymology of isolation of body.
Translator: You know the definition and etymology right?  So Rinpoche is asking “Can you give an example of something that satisfied the definition but not the etymology?”
Student 2: I think can you define which part is the definition which part is the etymology?
Student 1: I think definition is very specific.  Etymology is not specific. That is the difference.  For example in page 174, it mentions about lotus water born, it means any lotus but it does not have to be in the water as it can be on the land as well, right?
Khen Rinpoche: Correct.
Khen Rinpoche: Somebody answer my question.  I just want to know how much you understand.  Otherwise, I talked 3 hours you don’t understand a single thing. I don’t know what is wrong.  Something is wrong somewhere. I don’t know.
Student 1:  Physical isolation can occur during subtle generation stage and also completion stage. It can occur in these two stages.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah
Student 1: What more do you want to know?
Khen Rinpoche: Translator, can you translate once more?  You listen carefully what my question is.  
Translator: On page 174, you see this explanation in the middle of the page: Physical isolation does not necessarily fully conform to this etymology. This is saying something that satisfied the definition of isolation of body may not satisfy the etymology of physical isolation.  Rinpoche is saying: “Can you give an example of such a thing that there is a physical isolation that satisfies the definition of physical isolation but it does not satisfy etymology of physical isolation”.  That is the question.
Khen Rinpoche: No answer. Then today we have to stay here until you get the answer. Must try. 
Student 3:  Individual withdrawals in post-equipoise where all functional phenomena such as object sense faculties and so forth appear as manifestation of bliss and emptiness. So it is a type of physical isolation but it does not necessary mean that the winds will be entering the channel.
Khen Rinpoche: It is not correct.  Still you are not getting my question.  So you are saying that this is an example of this state of individual withdrawals of post-equipoise (subsequent attainment) is a case where the definition is satisfied but the etymology is not satisfied.  Is that what you are saying?  
Khen Rinpoche: That’s why you are not getting my question. So give an example of something that is a physical isolation but does not satisfy the etymology of physical isolation.  This is my question from beginningless time until now.
(Student response inaudible)
Student 4: The definition of physical isolation that put out just now...
Khen Rinpoche: Answer my question. My question is to give an example of something that is isolation of body but does not satisfy the etymology of isolation of body.  
Student 4: For example, let’s say you are meditating on tummo when the winds dissolve and enter the central channel below at the navel level and not at the heart.  So I think that is physical isolation. At that point in time there is no appearance of the deities and all because you are meditating on emptiness or you are meditating on something other than the etymology which are the 20 coarse objects appearing as deities, because at that point in time when the winds dissolves in the central channel, the appearance is maybe white, red and dark appearance. I don’t know, I am not sure.  Something like this where there is no appearance.  I believe the etymology refers to post-equipoise where everything appears as deities.  So do you think meditative equipoise itself this etymology parts does not apply?  That is what I want to ask actually.
Khen Rinpoche:  Take a look at the top of page 174. This passage explains the etymology of the expression physical isolation (isolation of body).  It said the goal of isolation is to meditate on those as the appearance of bliss or emptiness or as deities.  So it is not just meditating on those as deities, it is also meditating on those as the appearance of bliss and emptiness. 
Etymology
Regarding the etymology of the term physical isolation, the physical basis of isolation is the twenty coarse objects and so on, what is isolated is ordinary appearance and conception, and the purpose of isolation is to meditate on those as the appearance of bliss and emptiness or as deities.
When the winds enter the lower end through meditation then white appearance will appear. At that point one attains the isolation of body. There is the appearance of white appearance. One generates the exalted wisdom of white appearance. At that point one attains the isolation of body. We can say that at that point you have the mind of empty.  It is the mind of empty.  At that point there is white appearance.  Is that white appearance in the nature of bliss?  In that case wouldn’t it satisfy the etymology?  
Student 5: The appearance of bliss or emptiness or appearance of deities of the yogi who is meditating on the verbal isolation.  Appearance…
Khen Rinpoche: Again you are not getting my question.  No, it has to be physical isolation and the question is to give an example of something that is physical isolation.
Student 5: So appearance of bliss and emptiness to yogi.
Khen Rinpoche: So you get the question, ya?
Student 5: That is an example of physical isolation appearance of bliss and emptiness to a continuum of a yogi.
Khen Rinpoche: Yogi who?
Student 5: Someone who is one the completion stage, verbal isolation for example.
Khen Rinpoche: If this person is on the verbal isolation, that consciousness cannot be body isolation.
Student 5: The appearance of bliss and emptiness, is that not physical isolation?  
Khen Rinpoche: So what are the boundaries of body isolation?
Student 5: Body isolation will be first entering the central channel up to and before reaching the heart of the central channel.
Khen Rinpoche: When one attains verbal isolation, there is no more body isolation, right?  
Student 5: Will the appearance of bliss and emptiness…
Khen Rinpoche: Yes or no, when you achieves?  Show example putting verbal isolation, so it is not correct.
Student 5: But in the text mentioned about verbal isolation at the bottom there.
Khen Rinpoche: That is why first you must get my question. That is different answer, not for that.
Student 5: So physical isolation would be see appearance as manifestation of bliss and emptiness or as deities.  That why we have isolating from.
Khen Rinpoche: Give an example.  My question is still one question.  Give one example of something that is physical isolation but does not satisfy the etymology of physical isolation.  
Student 5:  So if it is must be within the boundary of physical isolation…
Khen Rinpoche: This example has to be physical isolation but does not satisfy the etymology.
Student 5: That I would not know then because…
Khen Rinpoche: Must be example, if you have. 
Student 6:  Can I say that a practitioner who has clear appearance of own self and his environment as a deity.  That means I can see myself as my yidam then I also see the environment as the mandala but I cannot generate pure view.  Then is this example of physical …
Khen Rinpoche: Out. First place you are not getting my question. Look like almost nobody get my question. So I am just wondering why.
Student 7:  Sorry, I think quite get the technical part as it is quite profound, I am just going to read … from the last lesson and without… 
Khen Rinpoche: It is not profound. It is very simple. I don’t want you to read. I want you to understand and answer. If the answer is not that then I will ask another question why and what.
Student 8: How about if the practitioner is into a consort practice.  Can or not?  Before I elaborate, I mean he was… 
Khen Rinpoche: Very simple. My question is get for example such and such is this not this.  Just tell me, simple as that.
Student 8: So someone who is engaging in external consort practice…
Khen Rinpoche: For example very simple white and black something?  Not white not black.  Say like that simple as that…
Student 8: So he is able to generate bliss causing the wind to enter the central channel and that is physical isolation but may not necessary satisfy the etymology because it is not based on the 20 coarse objects.  
Khen Rinpoche: What?  I didn’t get you what…For example?
Student 8: Someone who is engaging in a consort practice is able to cause the winds to enter, the central channel and cause the four minds to arise and that is a physical isolation but does not satisfy the etymology of physical isolation.
Khen Rinpoche: Why is this that does not satisfy the etymology?  At that time there is this white appearance, why is this that does not satisfy the etymology?
Student 8: Because it is not a physical basis of isolation that is on the 20 coarse objects.  
Student 9: Here the commentary says that the verbal isolation conforms to the etymology of physical isolation but it is not physical isolation.  It comes from the commentary to the root text.  
Khen Rinpoche: Give me the example you have.
Student 9: So therefore, if verbal isolation conforms to the etymology of physical isolation that means the etymology of the physical isolation need not be within the boundary of the completion stage physical isolation itself.  That conforms to the etymology.  So it is the other way round now in that sense.  
Translator: That is a different question.  That is addressing the question of something that is not physical isolation but satisfy the etymology of physical isolation. Here, Rinpoche is asking the other way round: That is the definition but not etymology.  
Khen Rinpoche: You are talking about something that satisfies etymology but not definition.  These two questions are different.  Last one, you don’t have then we finish class.  We end the class then you bring this answer next Saturday. 
Student 10: Mental bliss.  
Khen Rinpoche: What kind of mental bliss?  
Student 10: Physical isolation has 2 parts.  The first one is individual withdrawal, and the second one is absorption. Under absorption there are 5 parts and one of them is mental bliss. Mental bliss is a physical isolation.  That is answer given to your question.
Khen Rinpoche: But explain why it does not satisfy the etymology?
Student 10: Because it does not appear as a deity.
Khen Rinpoche: OK. Somewhere there. Then I continue.
You have to try your best every day to remember and to understand properly and then hold it.  Here, you must generate this motivation:  “I am going to learn what physical isolation is. I am going to learn how to answer this question: “What is physical isolation?” I am going to listen to the explanation carefully and I am going to make know what physical isolation is.  
Let us look at this expression “isolation of body”. 
What is this body that is the basis of isolation?  
We posited it as the aggregates of ordinary person. This means it is the form, feeling, discrimination, compositional factors, consciousness aggregates that are propelled by ordinary karma and afflictions. That is the basis of isolation.
What it the basis of isolation? 
Physical isolation (isolation of body) is the contaminated appropriated five aggregates that arise from ordinary karma and afflictions.  
Khen Rinpoche: This one clear or no?  Don’t forget this one.
When we say isolation of body, so you understand what that body is.  You have to isolate it from something.
What does it mean to isolate such a body?  
Usually these contaminated appropriated five aggregates appear to us as ordinary and we also adhere to them as ordinary.  What we want to do is to isolate ourselves from these ordinary appearances and ordinary adherence.  We want to put a stop to such appearances to ordinariness and adherence to ordinariness.  
Khen Rinpoche: When you say isolation of body you have to understand what that isolation is.  Clear?  Don’t fall asleep. Concentrate!
Isolation of body - the body refers to the five contaminated appropriated aggregates and you isolate them from ordinary appearances and adherence to ordinariness.
For example, you cause the form aggregate to arise the body of the deity.
First, you meditate on emptiness.  
You purify everything into emptiness. 
From the state of emptiness the body of the deities arises.  
Again:
First, you purify everything into emptiness. 
Then you ascertain that emptiness. 
Then the apprehended aspect of that mind ascertaining emptiness arises as the body of the deity.
The non-dual exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness arises as deity.
On the occasion of the isolation of body, such exalted wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness arises as the deity.
One meditates on the subtle drop at the lower opening and through the force of this meditation, the winds enter, abide and absorb in the central channel.  In dependence on this, the 4 joys is generated.  One then realizes emptiness. The apprehended aspect of this exalted wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness then arises as the body of the deity.  
Through the force of the winds entering, abiding and absorbing in the central channel then the white appearance, red increase, black near attainment and the clear light mind arises.
White appearance  Red increase  Near-black attainment  Clear light mind
You have white appearance, follow by red increase, follow by black near attainment, and follow by clear light. Even though this clear light mind is not the full fledge clear light mind, the mind become subtler and subtler during this process. So at the point of the clear light mind it is as though dualistic appearances have vanished.  With this mind you have to ascertain emptiness and set yourself in meditative equipoise realizing emptiness.  
At this point, you meditate single-pointedly on emptiness using this clear light mind. Such a meditation is a meditation on the ultimate deity.  During this time there is no an appearance of bliss or deity.
This is known as the meditation on the ultimate deity as mentioned in the text.  
At this point, even though it is not the case where all dualistic appearances have vanished it seems as though all dualistic appearances have vanished.  Then one meditates as though the object and subject do not have different entity.  In this way one is set in meditative equipoise on emptiness.
During meditative equipoise, the yogi meditates as though his mind and emptiness has become an indivisible entity, so that all that appear, appear as the sport of emptiness (as the play of emptiness).  After this, when the yogi arises into subsequent attainment then through the force of that meditative equipoise everything that appears appear as emptiness.  Everything that appears as emptiness appears as bliss.
This is the significant of saying that bliss and emptiness are indivisible.  This is significant of saying indivisible bliss and emptiness.  
Through the force of such a meditative equipoise when one arises into subsequent attainment (post-equipoise), then any object that appears will appear as a sport of bliss. It appears as a deity. 
When you arise into subsequent attainment then whatever appears appear as the appearance of bliss (as the sport of bliss). What does this mean? I have already explained this a few times in the previous sessions.
Khen Rinpoche: What does it mean? Can someone say a few words? 
To view an object as a sport of bliss, what does that mean? 
Does it mean it is one taste with all phenomena? One nature with all phenomena? Is it that all phenomena are in one nature with bliss?
Student 11: That means the subject of observation and the object of observation are one. Bliss is empty, emptiness is bliss, emptiness is none other than bliss, bliss is none other than emptiness. So they are one. You see everything as bliss. Is it like that? 
Khen Rinpoche: Everything is bliss? You think everything as bliss? So that means?
Student 11: Everything is emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes I agree that. Everything bliss?
Student 11: You see it as in bliss. You say it is a sport of bliss. Because it arises. 
Khen Rinpoche: My question is: Everything emptiness correct. Everything bliss correct or not?
Student 11: You try to see everything.
Khen Rinpoche: Try. You can try anything.
Student 11: That’s what you say.
Khen Rinpoche: That’s not my question. Everything bliss?
Student 11: Have to. Well according to the bases you have to. Because everything we see as a pure concept.
Khen Rinpoche: Everything is bliss? What is your answer? 
Student 11: Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: Everything is mind?
Student 11: Yes. But that’s according to the book. 
Khen Rinpoche: According to the book is nonsense.
Student 11: Bliss is empty. Then emptiness is bliss, emptiness is none other than bliss. 
Khen Rinpoche: That part I understand.
Student 11: I follow the Heart Sutra. It should be bliss is empty. No. Then what is the answer? Just now you also never give the answer. 
Khen Rinpoche: I have explained this twice in the past. And if you had paid attention then you would have developed some understanding. What is it mean to view all phenomena as the nature of bliss?
Student 12: When you arise from post meditative equipoise it is the understanding in emptiness you are able to see that the nature of any object, any phenomena is emptiness. In this way whatever you see, you see the basis is in the nature is emptiness. Then every phenomenon comes to your mind as bliss.
Khen Rinpoche: How
Student 12: Because whatever phenomena, its nature is bliss...
Khen Rinpoche:  All phenomena’s nature is bliss?
Student 12: The nature of every phenomena is emptiness, emptiness is bliss. Therefore, bliss is emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche:  What does it mean? We said  this word, but what do you really mean? Sometimes it sound so easy but when you try to explain ..
Student 12: Actually I tried to relate this to mental factors of feelings..
Khen Rinpoche:  Don’t go to mental factors. Just do this..
Student 12: Because I am able to get some realization of emptiness, therefore whatever phenomena I come across, they come to me as being blissful because my mind is kind of being purified of obscurations which see suffering. So whatever appears is happiness. It is like the mental factors of feeling. If you feel there is unpleasant feeling it is due to the non-virtue ripening and suffering. So when I have purified my mind, whatever phenomena I see, the mental feeling of virtue ripens and this result in me experiencing happiness. 
Khen Rinpoche:  So profound.
So the basis of isolation in isolation of body is the ordinary five aggregates. 
What is it that you want to isolate the basis from? 
You want to isolate them from the appearances of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. 
What is the method for you to do this? 
The method for you to do this is to meditate on the aggregates. However, they appear as the appearance of bliss or as appearance of deity.
So when through the force of meditation, the winds enter, abide and absorb in the central channel, eventually the clear light mind will arise. The more subtle mind meditates on emptiness. At this point then there is no appearance of bliss or the appearance of the deity. This means that even though this is isolation of body, it does not satisfy the etymology of isolation of body. 
How to posit examples of isolation of body that does not satisfy the etymology? You basically have to give those types of absorption (on page 156). 
Absorption where the deities appear
Absorption has five types:
1. Investigation that meditates in a coarse way on the bodies of the deities, which are objects of indivisible bliss and emptiness
2. Analysis that meditates on them in a detailed way
3. Mental bliss concordant with the pristine wisdom of indivisible bliss and emptiness
4. The bliss of pliancy concordant with that mind
5. The concentration of single-pointed mind
There are 5 types of absorption: (3), (4), (5) are posited on meditative equipoise: mental bliss, the bliss of pliancy and concentration. So if you posit mental bliss, bliss or concentration of this meditative equipoise, even though they are isolation of body, they do not satisfy the etymology of isolation of body.
After you arise into subsequent attainment, objects can appear. Due to your good meditation during meditative equipoise, when the objects appears appear as the appearance of bliss. It is in the nature of emptiness and the appearance of bliss. 
When any object appears, form aggregate appear. Then one meditates on this form aggregate as having the nature of bliss. Also one meditates on bliss. This means that bliss and emptiness become of one taste. Even though this is not actually happening, bliss and emptiness being of one taste, the yogi imagines this, visualizes this and meditates in that way. 
Here we are not saying that bliss is emptiness. We are not saying bliss and emptiness are one nature. So bliss and the emptiness of that bliss are one nature. So bliss and the emptiness of that bliss are one entity. Like one of you said previously, bliss is emptiness, emptiness is bliss. 
In the beginning there are the ordinary aggregates, say the ordinary form aggregate that is the basis of isolation. In order to isolate it from ordinary appearances and adherence to ordinariness, the yogi meditates on the form aggregate as being the nature of emptiness. This exalted wisdom of bliss meditates on the emptiness of the form aggregate. 
The yogi meditates by imagining that the bliss and emptiness are one taste. Just as the yogi views the form as the sport of emptiness, the yogi also views this form as a sport of bliss. Why? He views bliss and emptiness as one entity because form and the emptiness of form are one entity. So the yogi meditates by imagining that the emptiness of form and bliss are one taste. He meditates and imagining that they are one nature. Through the force of imagination, the yogi is able to meditate on this form as the nature of bliss. Because just as the form is the sport of emptiness, it is viewed as the sport of bliss. 
It is not the case that form and bliss are the same. They are not one entity. Form is matter whereas bliss is consciousness. They cannot be one entity. So the yogi meditates by imagining, just as whatever appears during subsequent attainment is the sport of emptiness. The yogi imagines that they are the sport of bliss. This makes it possible for whatever to appear during subsequent attainment to appear as the sport of bliss. 
As much as whatever appears is able to arise as bliss or as deity, that much it serves to increase one’s bliss. It becomes an aid to increasing one’s experience of bliss. As much as one is able to increase the bliss, that much one is able to reduce the coarse consciousness. Through the withdrawing of coarse consciousness, that serves as a condition for the clear mind to arise, and for one to meditate on that during meditative equipoise. As much as you are able to increase bliss, then that much you will be able to aid your meditation. This means that through the vanishing of many types of dualistic appearances then you are able to meditate on this exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness. 
To understand the etymology you have to know that in this expression isolation of body, you are isolating the ordinary body from the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. 
How you do that? 
You cause everything to appear as the sport of bliss or as the deity. 
How to cause everything to appear as a sport of bliss? 
You have to first understand the nature of emptiness. By understanding emptiness well then you are able to view everything as the nature of emptiness and that way you can view everything as the sport of bliss.
It is important for you to understand the meaning of emptiness as explained in the sutra system. In order to practice tantra you must have an understanding of emptiness. Otherwise, there is no way for you to practice tantra in a detailed way. 
So when we say: all phenomena are empty. What does that mean? You have to have an understanding when we say form is empty. You need to have an understanding. If you have a good understanding of emptiness, then there is something you can do when you are told to view everything as a sport of bliss. 
Today you have to make sure that you are able to understand what physical isolation is. You should be able to explain this is physical isolation. Isolation of body means this and this. How do you get to meditate on the physical isolation?
First of all you have to meditate on the coarse generation stage. 
After that you meditate on the subtle generation stage. 
After you have completed that then you meditate on the completion stage. 
To meditate on the completion stage you first meditate on the isolation of body.  
What do you do during isolation of body? 
You meditate on a subtle drop at the lower end of the central channel. At the lower opening of the central channel, you meditate on the subtle drop. As a result of focusing your mind there, the winds will gather there. This will make the winds enter, abide and absorb in the central channel.  As a result of the winds entering, abiding and absorbing in the central channel the 4 empties will arise and the 8 signs will also appear. 
These 8 signs are the same 8 signs we have discussed previously - the appearance of mirage, smoke, sparks, lamp, white appearance, red increase, black attainment and clear light. 
There is a wind called the downward voiding wind.  This is the wind that is responsible for urination and excretion. When the winds enter the central channel this downward voiding wind also ascend. 
Now there is this red bodhicitta that we obtain from our mother. So this red bodhicitta mainly reside at our navel. As a result of the winds entering the central channel, the downward voiding wind also reverses in the central channel. As a result, it ignites this red bodhicitta that is in the nature of heat causing the tummo (candali) to be ignited. This tummo (candali) then is ignited and it is in the nature of heat. Due to it being ignited this causes the white constituent to melt. Then this causes the bodhicitta to descend giving rise to the 4 joys and the 4 empties. 
As for the arising of these 4 joys and the 4 empties, sometimes they are able to occur in a very coordinated way. However, there are also other situations where, for example, the first the empty arises, then the joy arises. Or sometimes it is the joy which arises first, and then the empty will arise. But sometimes they are able to arise together. These joys arise due to the bodhicitta melting. 
These 4 joys are:
Joy, 
Supreme joy, 
Special joy 
Innate joy. 
When these joys arise the essential point is that you have to use it to meditate on emptiness. Because when these joys arise the dualistic appearances are reduced to a certain extent. So you must use these joys to ascertain emptiness. Among these 4 descending joys the best is the 4th one, the innate joy. 
When this melted bodhicitta reaches the secret place, then you generate innate joy. As much as this joy or bliss that you are able to generate as great that bliss is, that much you are able to reduce the appearances. The essential point is that when this innate bliss arises, then you have to use it to ascertain emptiness. This is because at that point, the dualistic appearances have vanished. Then if you are able to use that mind to ascertain emptiness then you attain a mind that realizes emptiness with extraordinary power. So this is what we mean by the exalted wisdom of indivisible bliss and emptiness in which bliss and emptiness are non-dual. 
During such a meditative equipoise, mostly there are no more dualistic appearances. It is as though dualistic appearances have totally vanished. With that bliss you meditate on emptiness. It is as though your mind has become the nature of emptiness. This is how you meditate on the exalted wisdom of indivisible bliss and emptiness. 
This bliss and emptiness are such that:
emptiness is the object and 
bliss is the object possessor, the subject. 
You meditate on emptiness with this bliss as though you are having water placed in water; they are indivisible. With this bliss you ascertain emptiness and you meditate. During that time it is as though there are no more dualistic appearances. You meditate as though there are no dualistic appearances at all. So besides emptiness, nothing else appears. The yogi meditates on great bliss and emptiness through imagination, imaging that they have become one entity. In reality they are not one entity. The object emptiness and the object possessor great bliss they are not one entity. But the yogi meditates by imagining they are one entity. 
You have to be careful not to become confused. As we have said just now, bliss and the emptiness of bliss are one entity. But this is not what we are saying here when we say that you meditate on great bliss and emptiness as though they are one entity. 
Bliss and the emptiness of bliss - they are one entity. But here you are meditating on bliss and emptiness as being indivisible in entity. In fact the object and the object possessor are not one entity. But the yogi imagines they are one entity and meditates on them. 
I gave this example form and emptiness of form just now. Basically, first, you purify everything into emptiness. Then from this state of emptiness, you meditate on the emptiness of form. 
Form does not exist inherently. So form merely appears. If you look for form, you will not be able to find it. In this way you meditate on then on the nature of emptiness of form.
Form is the sport of emptiness. 
Form has the nature of emptiness. 
From the state of emptiness, form is established.
Form and the emptiness of form are one entity. 
This is precisely what the statement of the Heart Sutra means when it says “Form is empty. Emptiness is form.”
First of all, we already understand that form and the emptiness of form are one entity. So the yogi understands that form is the sport of emptiness.
So using form as the basis, we can talk about:
Form being the nature of emptiness, 
Form being the sport of emptiness.
Form having this expression of emptiness.
For example, for a yogi on a completion stage can meditate on this innate bliss, and use this innate bliss to meditate on the emptiness of form.
This yogi meditates on this innate bliss and the emptiness of form as being one entity, as though all dualistic appearances have vanished.
The yogi imagines that this innate great bliss and the emptiness of form are like water placed into water, and meditated them as being one entity.
The yogi then meditated in this way so that the innate bliss and the emptiness of form do not appear differently to him.
Therefore, just as form is the appearance of emptiness, the yogi can meditate on form as the appearance of bliss.
Khen Rinpoche: That it. So if you that point, that’s all. You don’t get then. I think I repeat this for three classes. Repeating same thing but whether you get that I am not sure. You got it? I don’t think so.
The yogi meditates by imagining that this innate great bliss and the emptiness of form are one entity. The yogi meditates on these two as being indivisible - as being one entity. 
The yogi already understands that form is the appearance of emptiness. 
Now he meditates on this emptiness and bliss as being indivisible. 
Just as he sees form as the appearance of emptiness, he can see form as the appearance of bliss. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, now listen, this is the last time and I am not going to repeat. You must get it 
The yogi is meditating on the equality of emptiness and bliss. Then he already knows form is the appearance of emptiness. Since emptiness and bliss is indivisible, therefore form is also the appearance of bliss.
Basically, through the power of imagination, whatever appears then appears as the sport of bliss. If you are able to do that, this means that anything that appears becomes an aid to your bliss increasing. When this bliss becomes greater and greater, then the dualistic appearances become less and less. So a lot of dualistic appearances will be eliminated. So that will contribute to you being able to generate this innate bliss. 
This is what you need to train in:
Anything that appears is emptiness. 
Anything that is empty is bliss. 
Anything that is bliss is the sport of the deity.
This is like a formula that you see in the tantric text. Again this is how you have to train:
You have to train that:
Anything that appears is empty. 
Anything that is empty is bliss. 
Anything that is bliss appears as the sport of the deity.
In the beginning of the completion stage, you train in the isolation of body. In this stage, you cause the winds to enter the central channel and as a result of that you are able to generate joys. Then using this joy you have to ascertain emptiness. Eventually you want to generate this innate joy and then you want to set yourself in meditative equipoise on emptiness using this innate joy. After meditative equipoise, you arise into subsequent attainment. During subsequent attainment, you want to view everything that appears as the sport of bliss or as deities.
Recall that we talked about the two main divisions. 
Physical isolation is classified in two types:
1. Individual withdrawal in post-equipoise, where all functional phenomena such as objects, sense faculties, and so forth appear as the manifestation of bliss and emptiness
2. Absorption where the deities appear as the manifestation of bliss and emptiness
Physical isolation is classified into two types: 
Individual withdrawal
Absorption. 
Absorption has five types:
1. Investigation that meditates in a coarse way on the bodies of the deities, which are objects of indivisible bliss and emptiness
2. Analysis that meditates on them in a detailed way
3. Mental bliss concordant with the pristine wisdom of indivisible bliss and emptiness
4. The bliss of pliancy concordant with that mind
5. The concentration of single-pointed mind
Absorption has five types. One of these types is “analysis”. This analysis occurs during subsequent attainment of isolation of body. During that time, you meditate on the deities in a detailed way. Therefore, there is an explanation of, for example, the physical isolation of one hundred lineages.
The four lineages
Physical isolation is classified into:
1. The physical isolation of one hundred pure lineages
2. The physical isolation of just five lineages
3. The physical isolation of three secret lineages
4. The physical isolation of one extremely secret lineage
How are these 100 lineages obtained?  Of the 32 deities of Guhyasamaja tantra, 20 are divided into 5 each, and that will give a total of 100 lineages.  20 x 5 = 100
When these 100 lineages are condensed then you obtain the 5 lineages - the 5 tatagatha lineages. 
When these 5 are condensed and you obtain 3 lineages. 
When these 3 are further condensed then you just obtained a single lineage of Vajradhara.
So perhaps these condensed ways of meditation can be called investigation.
There is this stanza from Guru Puja that talks about how you should meditate on the merit field. 
(On page 160). 
Your five pure aggregates are the five sugatas,
your four constituents the four consorts,
your bases, channels, sinews, and joints
are actually bodhisattvas.
The first line of this stanza says: “Your five pure aggregates are the five sugatas” which means that you meditate on the purified factors of your five aggregates as being the five buddhas.
For example, we take the first of the five aggregates - form aggregate and this is divided into five; according to the five lineages.
Let’s take Vairocana as an example.  Vairocana can be divided into five:
Vairocana of Vairocana
Vairocana of the Ratnasambhava
Vairochana of Amitabha
Vairocana of Amoghasiddhi 
Vairocana of Akshobhya
As stated in the Guru Puja; 
Your five pure aggregates are the five sugatas,
your four constituents the four consorts,
your bases, channels, sinews, and joints
are actually bodhisattvas.
The Guru Puja goes on to talk about how the 10 limbs are meditated on as the 10 wrathful deities. 
In essence, 20 of the 32 deities of Guhyasamaja are divided into 5 each giving a total of 100 lineages. Why 12 of the 32 deities are left out. It is not because they don’t exist. As explained on page 162, it is because they are not explicitly mentioned in the Guhyasamaja Root Tantra.
From the thirty-two deities, the ten wrathful ones plus Maitreya and Samantabhadra are not mentioned here since they are not clearly and explicitly stated in the Root Tantra. However, in general there are thirty-two deities of physical isolation because the complete thirty-two deities are stated in the context of physical isolation and implicitly explained in the introduction. This is understood from the Annotations.
It is not that in general those 12 deities do not exist. They do exist. If we do not leave out these 12 deities and we divide each of the 32 deities into 5, we will obtain a total of 160 lineages. (32 x5 = 160)
In the commentaries there is also mentioned of 6 lineages. This means we add Vajradhara to the usual 5 lineages. Then Vajradhara is the 6th lineage. That is the classification of the 6 lineages. If you divide further then you obtain a total of 192 lineages. ( 32 x 6 = 192)
How do we obtain this 192? It is because of these 6 lineages. This means that we divide each of the 32 lineages of Guhyasamaja into 6 lineages. ( 32 x 6 = 192)
Khen Rinpoche: Correct? Okay just to leave some imprint in the mind.
If you think about it, how would you divide each deity into 6? 
Just now we have:
Vairocana of Vairocana
Vairocana of the Ratnasambhava
Vairochana of Amitabha
Vairocana of Amoghasiddhi 
Vairocana of Akshobhya
If you add a 6th division, then basically you will end up with Vairocana Vajradhara.
How do you differentiate between Vairocana Vairocana and Vairocana of Ratnasambhava? 
Khen Rinpoche: How do you differentiate? 
Perhaps Vaironcana Vairocana is easier to understand. It is just Vairocana. 
What if we have Vairocana Ratnasambhava? Perhaps this would be a deity that is yellow in color, just as Ratnasambhava is yellow but it has the implement of Vairocana. If I am not mistaken, I think Vairocana Ratnasambhava will be a yellow colored deity holding implement of Vairocana.
Khen Rinpoche: Something like that. Not sure. Anyway, you don’t need that also. I don’t think so you need that. So I don’t know much detail also.
When you are looking at this isolation of body, you understand that this occurs in the completion stage and the winds enter the central channel. So the winds do not enter on the generation stage.
To make things simpler, we can think of the boundaries in this way: It is the secret place and above but below the heart. 
When the wind enters the central channel, on the level of isolation of body, the wind enters the central channel at the secret place and above but below the heart.
When the winds enter the central channel, the four joys are generated. With the joy one has to ascertain emptiness. 
On top of the four descending joys, there are also the four ascending joys. At the end of the four descending joys, you have the innate joy. The joy ascend you reverses direction and goes upward to the crown.
On page 170, 
The difference in superiority between descending and ascending joys
It is said that the ascending joys are far superior to the descending joys and all the ascending joys must be innate joy. Drilbupa’s Explanation of the Five Stages also states that at times the bliss of the first three descending joys is innate bliss.
“It is said that the ascending joys are far superior to the descending joys and all the ascending joys must be innate joy” - All the ascending joys are pervaded by being innate joy. 
That is the explanation of isolation of body. So do you have any questions on the isolation of the body? 
Student 13: During the occasion of individual withdrawal, investigation, analysis, these three states are done in post meditative equipoise. Are the winds still within or inside the central channel? If they are, how does the yogi goes about his post-equipoise activities? While the wind are residing within the central channel in post- equipoise and the yogi is cultivating all these three states, how does he goes about post equipoise activities? 
Khen Rinpoche: In order to obtain the isolation of body, the winds have to enter and abide in the central channel. However, during meditative equipoise, the wind will not stay there. If the winds stay in the central channel, then one would be still in meditative equipoise.
If the winds are in the central channel one would still be in meditative equipoise.  If you enter post-equipoise (subsequent attainment) then the winds will not stay there.
When one is going through the stages of death, the empty - white appearance, red increase and so on - occurs in exact sequence. However, when one is doing practice, there is no necessity that they arise one after another in exact sequence. For example, white appearance then red increase after red increase, black attainment and so on. Empty of the empty, great empty and so on. There is no necessity that they arise in that sequence. If you are meditating then you have to make great effort for these to arise in sequence. They will not arise naturally in their natural sequence as when one is dying during the death process. When one arises into subsequent attainment and meditate on, for example, the 100 lineages, then during those times, the winds don’t have to stay in the central channel.
Khen Rinpoche: When people is asking question, yourself have to concentrate to know what they are asking and what I am answering. Otherwise, you will be lost.
Student 13: So there will be, for example, appearances of ordinary limbs of his body to his sense consciousness but his mental consciousness perceives them as manifestation of bliss, emptiness as well as the deities. So his mental consciousness overpowers the appearance to the sense consciousness in post-equipoise meditating on 100. Is that right to say? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah.
Student 14: I just want to clarify on the discrepancies on the four empties. Today and last week lesson you mentioned the four empties are: empty, very empty, great empty and all empty. But in lesson 66 you mentioned the four empty are: empty, great empty, all empty and extreme empty. So which is the correct one? I presumed today one is the correct one.
So maybe it is: empty, great empty, very empty, all empty. 
Student 14:  Is innate joy the same as simultaneously born joy? In lesson 40 you mentioned the four joys are 1) joy 2) supreme joy 3) exalted joy and 4) simultaneously born joy. But now the 3rd and 4th are slightly different: 3rd is special joy, 4th one is innate joy. 
Translator: The literal translation of “hanke (??)” in Tibetan is simultaneously born. Another translation term for it is innate. So simultaneously born and innate are just different translation of the same term.
Student 14: So simultaneously born and innate are the same. Is the exalted joy the same as special joy? 
Translator: Special joy and exalted joy mean the same.
Student 15: Regarding the generating of the four empties, when the winds enter the central channel, what actually does it refers to? What is the role of these four empties in the meditative equipoise? Does it refer to the white appearance and red increase and the one? 
Khen Rinpoche: The four empties correspond to the white appearance, red increase, black near attainment and clear light. You can think of the set of four empties equivalent to the other set of four.
The first of the four empties is empty. This does not refer to the emptiness of inherent existence. But rather it refers to the dissolution of the 80 indicative conceptions. These occur at the white appearance. So at the time of white appearance, many kinds of appearances have vanished. At this point the mind has become very subtle. Besides white appearance, there are no other appearances.
This mind of white appearance is such that many appearances have vanished. For that reason, it is called empty. During this stage, if you have a good understanding of emptiness, then you should use this mind of white appearance to ascertain emptiness.
When we move on to the mind of red increase then it has fewer appearances compared to the mind of white appearance. Because of that the mind becomes clearer. So the same, when you move on to black near attainment, you will have even fewer appearances and greater clarity of mind.
When you reached the 4th empty, which is all empty, basically you have this clear light mind it is a very subtle mind. When you arrive at all empty, basically you have this clear light mind in which the dualistic appearances are even lesser than before. As a result of that, the mind becomes clearer. Thus, the power to realize emptiness becomes greater.
Khen Rinpoche:  I don’t know what you are asking in your question. I have no idea.
Student 15: Then regarding the appearance of deity during this time, since there are no other mind that is manifesting except for the four empties, does that means the deity appearance comes from the apprehended aspect of these four subtle minds? Maybe the mind of white appearance? 
Khen Rinpoche: Actually I have already given the explanation before. Perhaps you did not catch it. Did I? No? Did I give the answer or no? He is asking a question and nobody give the answer? 
These are stages of meditative equipoise and during meditative equipoise, deities cannot appear. Deity appears only after you arise into post- equipoise (subsequent attainment).
Khen Rinpoche: Okay I think should be clear in the isolation of the body. Make sure you understand something. Okay? That is the point.
(BP 1)
Four descending joys: Through meditating on the subtle at the lower opening of the central channel, the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel.  The blazing of the tummo at the navel melts the white bodhicitta at the crown which starts to drip and descends down the central channel:   
As the bodhicitta descends to the throat, one joy is generated. 
When the bodhicitta moves from the throat to the heart, another joy is generated. 
When the bodhicitta moves from heart to the navel, another joy is generated. 
When the bodhicitta moves from the navel to the tip of the secret place, then the last joy is generated. 
Four ascending joys:
- When the bodhicitta moves upwards from the secret place to the navel, from the navel to the heart and from the heart to the throat and from the throat to the crown, the four ascending joys are also generated. 
- It is said that the four ascending joys are stronger than the four descending joys. 
- After the bodhicitta descends from the crown to the secret place, it must not be lost. One has to prevent the emission of the bodhicitta. Instead of letting the bodhicitta emit from the body, one causes that bodhicitta to ascend the central channel. Such a practice is necessary during the completion stage of the physical isolation.