Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L69.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:18.702697
================================================================================

We have completed with the isolation of body in the previous session. Today we are going to discuss the isolation of speech. In the beginning you must think that “I am going to understand this topic of isolation of speech. I am going to focus my mind and concentrate so that I can understand this topic”. 
What is verbal isolation? If you already know the answer to this question, then that is fine. If you do not know the answer to this question, then you must generate a strong wish to understand what verbal isolation is. If you have this strong desire to know what the isolation of speech (verbal isolation) is, then you will be able to focus your mind and listen intently. We meet for about three hours or maybe two and a half hours. So you must make sure that at the end of the session, you have some understanding of what the verbal isolation is in your mind. 
In the text, this is the second outline. The first of these outlines is the physical isolation (isolation of body) which we have completed. Now we are looking at the second, which is the isolation of speech (verbal isolation). 
What is the isolation of speech? You have to understand what it is by looking at the definition (page 175)
Verbal isolation that is concentration producing the vajra speech
The nature of the second stage in the sixfold division of the completion stage of the Ārya system is “the completion- stage practice that begins from the generation of the pristine wisdom of [white] appearance derived from causing the upper and lower winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel at the heart due to a yogi of this system meditating on a mantra drop at the point of the heart. It extends up to but not including the generation of the pristine wisdom of [white] appearance derived from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the indestructible drop at the heart due to meditation that completely releases the channel knots at the heart.”
Recall that on the occasion of the isolation of body, the yogi meditates on the subtle drop at the lower end of the central channel and thus causes the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel below the heart. On this occasion, due to these winds dissolving, then the pristine wisdom of white appearance and so forth arises. 
During verbal isolation, you meditate on this mantra drop at the heart. Due to such meditation, then the upper and lower winds are caused to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. This then causes the generation of the pristine wisdom of white appearance. When this occurs, then you transfer to the verbal isolation (isolation of speech). 
According to the explanation of the author, Ngawang Palden, this is when one transfers from the isolation of body to the isolation of speech. To be more precise, we should say that this is the juncture at which one transfers from the isolation of body to the level of isolation of speech. So instead of saying that you transfer to the isolation of speech, it is better to say you transfer to the level of isolation of speech. This distinction is to be made and you will realize its significance later. 
Here, the beginning of the level of isolation of speech is marked by this generation of the pristine wisdom of white appearance derived from the winds entering, abiding and dissolving at the heart in the central channel. It extends up to but not including the generation of the pristine wisdom of white appearance derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the indestructible drop at the heart. So if you are able to cause the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the indestructible drop at the heart due to meditation, then you would not be at the level of verbal isolation, rather you would be at the level of mental isolation (isolation of mind). 
During isolation of body, you are able to cause the winds to enter below the heart in the central channel but you are not able to cause the winds to enter at the heart of the central channel. 
But you have to cause the winds to gather at the central channel at the heart. There is a meditation you can do to cause this to happen. This meditation meditates on a mantra drop at the heart. So by doing this meditation, you are able to cause the winds to enter in the central channel at the heart. So through such meditation, as soon as the winds are able to enter the central channel at the heart, then you generate this pristine wisdom of white appearance. As soon as that occurs, you are said to have transferred to the level of isolation of speech.
Khen Rinpoche: The definition is clear? Should be. 
On the occasion of isolation of speech, you are still not able to cause the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the indestructible drop at the heart. As soon as you are able to generate the pristine wisdom of white appearance derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the indestructible drop at the heart, then you have transferred to the level of isolation of mind. 
Here if you look at the beginning of this definition, the definiendum says “the nature of the second stage in the sixfold division of the completion stage of the Arya system” - it talks about the nature of the second stage. 
(Page 176)
Vitality exertion and vajra recitation
Calling this level verbal isolation or vajra recitation is misleading calling it with the name of one of its parts because it includes three yogas of vitality exertion, and neither the yoga of vitality exertion meditating on the mantra drop nor the substance drop are either verbal isolation or vajra recitation.
“Calling this level verbal isolation or vajra recitation is misleading” - the Tibetan text literally says “calling this verbal isolation or vajra recitation is calling it with the name of one of its parts” rather than misleading. So it is “calling it with the name of one of its parts.”
Three vitality exertions are mentioned here. 
The three vitality exertions are:
Meditation on the mantra drop at the heart
Meditation on the light drop at the tip of the face
Meditation on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place
Among these three types of vitality exertion, the meditation on the mantra drop at the heart and meditation on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place are neither verbal isolation nor vajra recitation. 
The two expressions verbal isolation and vajra recitation mean the same thing. They have the same meaning but they are just different words. 
In reality, only the meditation on the light drop at the tip of the face is verbal isolation. Only that is vajra recitation. The other two vitality exertions - meditation on the mantra drop at the heart and meditation on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place - are not actual verbal isolation. However, all three are called by the name verbal isolation. 
The source for this assertion and the explanation comes from Illuminating Lamp
Illuminating Lamp states: 
Calling this verbal isolation or vajra recitation is misleading imputing with the name of one of its parts for the general name for this level in the Later Guhyasamaja Tantra is vitality exertion, the third of the six levels. 
“Calling this verbal isolation or vajra recitation is misleading”– the Tibetan text doesn’t say misleading; it says “is imputing with the name of one of its parts. 
What is stated here in the Later Guhyasamaja Tantra is that the third of the six levels is vitality exertion. 
There are three types of vitality exertion and among these, only one is the actual verbal isolation. However, all three levels of vitality exertion are given the name verbal isolation. They are called verbal isolation. 
Basically there are three levels that are all called verbal isolation but actually only one of them - meditation on the light drop at the tip of the face - is the actual verbal isolation. However, all three levels of vitality exertion are given the name verbal isolation. 
One says In another way: Take both meditation on the mantra drop and meditation on the substance drop—they are neither verbal isolation nor vajra recitation because verbal isolation or vajra recitation must be  yogas of vitality exertion meditating on the light drop at the base of the nose.
Basically, the version of the Tibetan text says shenyang (??) is sometimes translated as furthermore and sometimes is translated in another way. 
Khen Rinpoche: In another way. 
The translation here “base of the nose” is a bit dubious. Basically we are referring to tip of the face that we have mentioned earlier. This light drop is meditated at the tip of the face and that is usually taken to refer to the point between the eyebrows.
Khen Rinpoche: Because Asians don’t have tip nose but flat nose. So there is no tip.  There is some drawing. 
We have the central channel. On the sides we have the left and right channels
Khen Rinpoche (demonstrating): Left channel, right channel, the middle channel.  The middle channel is somewhere. The left and right come here and then a little be like that (Khen Rinpoche showed with fingers bend at eyebrow).  
They basically bend towards the central channel. I think you can say that the left and right channels are kind of bend and meet the central channel between the eyebrows. I think the shape is like of hooks. The left and right are like hooks and they bend towards the central channel. 
Basically, what you have to remember is that there are three types of vitality exertion. From among these, only one of them is the actual isolation of speech and that is the meditation on the light drop at the tip of the face. Besides the meditation on the light drop at the tip of the face, the remaining vitality exertions - meditation on the mantra drop at the heart and meditation on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place - are not the isolation of speech. 
The basis of verbal isolation 
For the speech that is the basis for achieving isolation is the winds arising, entering, and abiding in natural recitation. 
And the object of negation that one is to be isolated from is conceiving those three winds to be different from the tones of the three letters. And the purpose of isolation is indivisibly uniting the three tones of the winds arising, entering, and abiding and the tones of the three letters. And this is done via vajra recitation. 
What is the basis of isolation of speech? Usually our winds arise, enter and abide naturally. So these very ordinary winds are the basis of isolation of speech. 
But usually we will not think of our ordinary winds that arise, enter and abide as having the tones of the three letters. We will not even think that they are those tones. We in fact may adhere or grasp to our winds that arise, enter and abide as being different from the tones of those three letters. That was the object of negation. 
What is the purpose of isolation? 
You want to indivisibly unite the three tones of the winds of the ordinary winds arising, entering and abiding and the tones of the three letters. So that is the purpose of verbal isolation. 
In the isolation of speech, the speech that is the basis of isolation is our ordinary winds that arise, enter and abide and then we adhere to the tones of these three winds as being different from the tones of the three letters. Through the practise of verbal isolation, we want to unite indivisibly the three tones of those winds and the tones of the three letters. 
How do we achieve this if we want to indivisibly unite these three tones of the winds arising, entering and abide and the tones of the three letters? There is only one way to do it. We have to meditate on the light drop at the tip of the face. By doing this practice vajra recitation then we are able to cause the tones of the winds and the tones of those letters to be indivisibly united. 
Illuminating Lamp states:
The recitation that is by nature the indivisible union of the three letters of the three vajras and the three tones of the three phases of the winds is called vajra recitation. 
Debate on vitality exertion and vajra recitation
One says: It follows that this type of explanation is unacceptable because the three yogas of vitality exertion explained in the Later Guhyasamāja Tantra are included in the level of vajra-recitation verbal isolation. 
Reply: That is not logically necessary because that included in the level of vajra-recitation verbal isolation does not have to be actual verbal recitation.
Later Guhyasamāja Tantra Illuminating Lamp states:
There are three yogas of vitality exertion meditating on the three points explained in Bright Lamp. Two yogas are vitality exertion but not actual verbal isolation and vajra recitation. However, they are named after the main practice of vitality exertion since that includes both.
In response to this person’s objection, we are basically saying “There is no problem. There is no fault incurred. This is because all three levels of vitality exertions are included in this verbal isolation. The fact that they are included in the levels of verbal isolation does not mean that they have to be verbal isolation itself”. 
One says: In another way It follows that the yoga of vitality exertion is not necessarily vajra-recitation verbal isolation because Tathāgathavajra explains that all yogas that gather the winds into the central channel by meditating on letters, drops, and so on at important points at the body are vitality exertion. Likewise, Jé Rinpoché explains that all meditation on the letters and drops at the cakras are methods for gathering the winds in the central channel and extensively praises this amazing, excellent explanation of vitality exertion.
Again this part “One says” doesn’t really correspond with the Tibetan text. According to Tibetan text, it should be “in another way” or furthermore. 
The translator who translated this text interpreted this “in another way” as “one says” which mean that somebody who is not our system saying something. But that is not the case, because here when the author say shenyang(??), he is not talking about another system. He is actually expanding on his own system. So it is not talking about some kind of opponent. He is explaining the point that he has been trying to make. He is trying to explain why this yoga of vitality exertion is not pervaded by being this vajra recitation or isolation of speech. 
All these passages that we have read essentially mean that there are three levels of vitality exertion. Among these three, only one is actual isolation of speech. The other two are not. Even though the other two are not actual isolation of speech, they are called isolation of speech. All three levels are included within isolation of speech but this does not mean that all of them have to be isolation of speech. 
So basically what you have to understand is this: There are three levels of vitality exertion. Among these three, there is only one that is the actual verbal isolation (vajra recitation or vajra repetition). The other two are not but still they are called vajra recitation. Those two are not vajra recitation but they are called vajra recitation because they are included within vajra recitation. Even though they are included within the levels of vajra recitation, they are not vajra recitation. 
The different levels of practice of vitality exertion
There are different levels of meditation in the three vitality exertions. During physical isolation you meditate on the mantra drop at the point of the heart to gather the winds in the central channel, though you cannot gather the winds in the central channel at the heart. Then through cultivating that for a long time you first generate pristine wisdom of the four empties and then progress to the level of vitality exertion called vajra-recitation verbal isolation.
Since this state precedes mental isolation, it is not actual mental isolation even though it may be called mental isolation.  Since this is a similitude of mental isolation, it may be called mental isolation even though it is not actual mental isolation.
The next sentence is translated wrongly in the text: “Since this state precedes mental isolation” should say “Since this is a similitude of mental isolation, it may be called mental isolation even though it is not actual mental isolation.” 
This is saying that when you meditate in this way as described then you will be able to generate the pristine wisdom of white appearance. Such a state is a similitude of mental isolation. 
This is not mental isolation because you have not actually transferred to mental isolation (isolation of mind). All you have done is transferred to the level of isolation of mind. So this is called mental isolation even though it is not actual mental isolation. It is simply given the name mental isolation. 
The reason is given: Why is it that you can call it mental isolation? It is because it is a similitude of mental isolation. Even though it is not actual mental isolation, and because it is a similitude of mental isolation, it is appropriate for you to call it mental isolation. Even though you can call it by the name mental isolation, it is not actual mental isolation. 
As the source for this, Lama Tsongkhapa cited Illuminating Lamp.
Illuminating Lamp states:
Through properly understanding the point of meditating on the indestructible drop266 at the heart and cultivating such meditation for a long time, you first generate the pristine wisdom of the four empties. Since this state precedes mental isolation, it is not actual mental isolation though it may be called that. Since this state is a similitude of mental isolation, it may be called that even though it is not actual mental isolation.
Again it is the same mistake. It should be corrected as we have done before: Since this state is a similitude of mental isolation, it may be called that even though it is not actual mental isolation. 
Khen Rinpoche: How they translate that?
Translator: They translate as “since this state precedes” which is not the right meaning as “precedes” mean to go before, to occur before, but that is not the meaning.
It is really dangerous if the translation is not precise, then basically the meaning intended by the text is lost and then you arrive at a different meaning. So this is a dangerous thing. 
In order for someone to translate the text accurately, this person has to understand completely the meaning of the text. On top of that, that person needs to have the linguistic skills, at least know the language very well. Without those factors then it is hard to arrive at an accurate precise translation of the text. 
Thus gathering and dissolving the winds in the central channel through meditating on the mantra drop as the means of gathering the winds at the heart is dissolution of the winds in the central channel near the indestructible drop at the heart, but it is not dissolution of winds in the actual indestructible drop. To dissolve the winds in the actual indestructible drop you must loosen the channel knots there. To do that you meditate on vajra recitation indivisibly uniting the tone of the three phases of the winds arising, entering, and abiding with the tone of the three letters, in other words vitality exertion meditating on the light drop at the tip of the upper opening of the forehead.
Translator: Forehead or at tip of the face.
You clear the channel knots by inserting winds into them it, just as you clear a blocked hollow bamboo stem by inserting a long stick into it.
Three misconceptions regarding indivisibility with the three syllables 
Though wind and mantra are indivisibly united, the tones of the three phases of the wind arising, entering, and abiding are not to be taken as the same as:
(1) the three written letters, 
(2) external speech expressed as words, or 
(3) the external tones visualized as the expression of words when not expressed as words.
The method of vajra recitation in this context is to recognize that when winds move in the channels, their resonance is like the tones of the three syllables, and to direct the mind without distraction to just that.
This passage explains how we should train in vajra recitation. 
When you inhale, you think that the natural tone of this inhalation is OM
When the winds abide, then you should think that the natural tone of this wind is AH
When you exhale, the winds arise you think that the natural tone of this exhalation is HUM. 
The natural tones of your inhalation, the winds abiding and then exhalation are these three letters OM AH HUM. You should recognize that those tones of the winds are not different from the tones of these three letters. So focusing your mind on that, you meditate. 
Then there is a visualization that you do while you perform this vajra recitation. We talk about meditating on this light drop at the tip of your face. So basically you meditate on a little drop of wind at the tip of the face:
When you inhale, you think that this little drop of winds then descends to the indestructible drop at your heart, and it abides there. 
When you exhale, then this little drop of winds ascends and goes back to the tip of the face. 
You should meditate in this way thinking that the tones of your winds, inhalation, abiding, and exhalation are indivisible from the tones of the three letters. You have to focus your mind on this without any distraction as though your mind has entered into the winds. 
You shouldn’t be meditating on this as though the three letters are some kind of verbal recitations or like words. It is not like that. You have to meditate as though your mind has entered these very winds. 
As for the passage: Though wind and mantra are indivisibly united, the tones of the three phases of the wind arising, entering, and abiding are not to be taken as the same as:
(1) the three written letters, 
(2) external speech expressed as words, or 
(3) the external tones visualized as the expression of words when not expressed as words.
It is explained how you should meditate and how you should not meditate. It talks about how the wind and mantra are indivisibly united. But you should not take the tones of the three phases of the winds, arising, entering, abiding to be the same as three written letters or external speech expressed as words. 
It also talks about how these tones should not be taken as the external tones visualized as the expression of words when not expressed as words. 
You should not do those actions as mentioned above. Then what should you do? As explained, you have to recognize that “when winds move in the channels, their resonance is like the tones of the three syllables, and to direct the mind without distraction to just that”. 
What this is saying is that when we inhale, there is a natural tone OM. However, we don’t recognize it. The tone is always there but we do not recognize it. 
Similarly, when the winds abide, there is a natural tone AH. It is there but we fail to recognize it. 
Likewise, when we exhale, there is a natural tone HUM but we do not recognize it. 
What we have to do is to recognize these natural tones, focus our mind on them without any distraction. 
There are many diverse kinds of mantras. It is said that the essence of all these different types of mantras is the three syllables OM AH HUM. These three syllables subsumed all mantras. 
This mantra OM AH HUM is like the principle mantra. Previously we mentioned about how you have the three secret lineages. These correspond to the exalted body, speech and mind. Even though there are many deities, they can be subsumed into what are called the three vajras: the body vajra, the speech vajra and the mind vajra. The seed syllables that symbolize these three vajras are OM AH HUM.
Usually we bless things using this mantra OM AH HUM.  
OM symbolized the exalted body or the enlightened body
AH symbolized the enlightened speech
HUM symbolized the enlightened mind. 
We say that OM AH HUM is the roots of all mantras. 
You should understand that mantra is of two types:
Definitive meaning mantra 
Interpretable meaning mantra. 
By interpretable meaning mantra we have for example, OM AH HUM. These three syllables OM AH HUM are the interpretable meaning mantra. 
What is the definitive meaning mantra? When the winds arise, enter and abide, then there is a natural tone. That natural tone is the definitive meaning mantra. We can understand the natural tone of the winds when they arise, enter and abide to be the definitive meaning mantra. 
Similarly, all mantras can be divided into the definitive meaning and the interpretable meaning mantras. We can understand this short AH to be the root of all the mantras. 
Then the three syllables can be included within this short AH. 
The short AH again is of two levels:
Definitive meaning level 
Interpretable meaning level. 
What is this AH? 
It is actually the tone of all languages. In reality what this AH is, it is the tone of sound. We can write AH but that is the form of the letter but that is not the actual AH. The actual AH is a tone. 
What is the definitive meaning AH? 
Within the indestructible drop at the heart in the central channel, there is a very subtle wind call the indestructible wind. This is actually the very subtle life-bearing wind that is everlasting wind that cannot be destroyed. This wind has a natural tone. The natural tone of this indestructible wind is actually AH. That is the definitive meaning Ah. 
With this AH as the basis, then we have different kinds of vowels and consonants. From that, we obtain different words, phrases and so on. So this AH then is said to be something that abides within all these various vowels, words and so on. 
This very subtle wind called the life-bearing wind that abides in our indestructible drop is said to be the basis for the winds in all our channels. Speech is caused by winds. The winds are generated from this root wind - the indestructible wind. Therefore, the speech has its root in this indestructible wind. 
As I was saying just now, there are two  AHs: 
one is interpretable meaning 
one is definitive meaning
By the interpretable meaning AH, we mean the tone of AH. 
The definitive meaning AH refers to this natural tone of the indestructible wind; that is the life-bearing wind. 
With this AH serving as the root, then we obtain syllables. Then on the basis of the syllables, we have the meanings expressed by those syllables. From those meanings then we are able to have the Buddha’s teachings. 
This interpretable meaning AH then is the root of the Buddha’s teachings - all the 84000 heaps of Dharma. By practicing the Buddhadharma, teachings of the Buddha, then one is able to attain the state of highest enlightenment or Buddhahood. 
In the text The Sacred Words of Manjushri, it is said that complete Buddhahood arises from AH. Sometimes when people need to dispose of Dharma, let say they want to burn certain texts, what is the practice to do?  Kyabje Lama Zopa Rinpoche then explained this practice where:
You visualize that the letters in that text then absorb into the letter AH, 
Then AH is purified into emptiness
After that you can burn the paper or whatever. 
This is what I have heard but I have not seen it being written in any text. If it is really necessary for you to dispose of these dharma materials and if you are able to do this visualization then there is less negativity. 
From the letter AH, we obtain the 12 branches of the Buddha’s teachings. By practicing the contents of these 12 branches of scriptures then you are able to attain complete Buddhahood. This is why it is said that complete enlightenment arises from AH. That is the significant of the interpretable meaning AH.
As mentioned just now, the definitive meaning AH is the natural tone of this indestructible wind. So, this very subtle everlasting indestructible wind naturally has its tone. That tone is called the definitive meaning AH. 
At the center of the heart there is white and red bodhicitta that is the size of the mustard seed, you want to gather all the winds into the center of this drop. If you able to cause all the winds to gather inside through your meditation then the clear light mind will manifest.
In the context of vitality exertion, and in particular in the vajra recitation (verbal isolation), the point of your meditation is to cause all the winds to be able to absorb into the indestructible wind in the indestructible drop. So that is the purpose of your meditation.
If you are able to cause all the winds to gather into this indestructible wind that has the tone of AH, then what happen is that clear light will manifest. With this clear light, you realize emptiness. With that you will be able to attain the pure illusory body. With that, the learner’s union and finally the union of no-more-learning. For that reason, it is said that complete enlightenment arises from AH.
When we meditate on the 3 vitality exertions, one of the meditations that we have to do is to meditate on the mantra drop at the tip of the heart. 
What do you do in this meditation? You should meditate that there is a syllable AH in this indestructible drop. By focusing your mind on this syllable AH then you gather the winds into the central channel. This is what you need to do.in order to cause the winds to enter.
It is taught that you should focus on this syllable AH in the indestructible drop at the heart. Through your focusing the mind there then the winds will all gather there. In that way, you will able to cause the winds to enter into the indestructible drop. 
Translator: Sorry, you do not gather the winds into the indestructible drop. 
By focusing your mind on the syllable AH in the indestructible drop, you cause the winds to gather at the heart in the central channel.
As we have described just now, you meditate on this syllable AH in the indestructible drop. Then you cause the winds to gather in the central channel at the heart. The next step is to meditate on the light drop at the tip of the face. 
When you previously meditated on AH, there is the tone of the winds abiding. 
What you do next is to exhale. When you exhale then this has the natural tone of HUM. 
After exhaling then you inhale and then there is the natural tone of OM. 
You inhale and then cause the winds to abide and exhale using equal period. For example, if the inhalation is half a second then the winds abiding will be another half a second and then exhalation will be another half a second. During this time, you should meditate that the tone of the winds arising, entering, abiding are indivisible from the tones of the 3 letters. You meditate as though your mind has entered the winds.
Through such a vajra recitation, your winds can enter into the central channel. Your winds become more powerful and then they are able to loosen the many knots in the central channel so that the winds are able to eventually enter the central channel at the heart. This is the power of the vajra recitation.
There are 6 channel knots at the heart. The knots are probably like that: the left and right channels together encircled the central channel above the heart chakra. 
There are 3 knots above the heart chakra 
There are 3 below the heart chakra. 
This gives a total of 6 knots. 
Because the presence of these knots, it is difficult for the winds to go to the central channel at the heart. So through vajra recitation then you are able to loosen these knots. You are not able to completely loosen the knots but you able to loosen the knots to some extent. 
During the first of the 3 vitality exertions, you were meditating on the mantra drop at the tip of the heart. That is not able to completely loosen the knots. In order to completely loosen the knots, you need to meditate on the light drop at the tip of the face. With that, you are able to loosen the knots. 
So it has this extraordinary power in loosening the knots completely. Vajra recitation has this ability to completely loosen the knots at the heart. This means that it has a special extraordinary power in causing the winds to gather at the heart.
How would you know if the winds have entered into the central channel? If you meditate for a long time, what are the signs that the winds have entered the central channel? 
The winds in the 2 nostrils become of equal strength if the winds have entered the central channel. Usually the winds in our nostrils are not balanced - meaning one is stronger than the other. Those are the signs for the winds entering the central channel. 
What are the signs for the winds abiding in the central channel?
Usually there is some movement at our belly. When the winds abide in the central channel then there is no more movement at the belly.
Khen Rinpoche: Moving? Your belly is moving then it is not there.
What are the signs that the winds have absorbed or dissolved in the central channel? 
The winds at your nostrils stop; the movement of the winds is cut. 
When that happens, then the 8 signs will arise. When the white appearance arises then you become a person of the completion stage. 
In summary, when you meditate on the mantra drop at the heart, what happens is that you meditate on the syllable in the indestructible drop. This causes the winds to slightly enter the central channel at the heart. 
Next you meditate on the light drop at the tip of your face. This means you meditate that the tones of the winds arising, entering and abiding indivisible from the tones of the 3 syllables. Through such a meditation, you are able to completely loosen the knots at the heart. This has this great ability in gathering the winds in the central channel at the heart.
When vajra recitation as the object of recitation is classified by means of the winds, then there are two types— main and secondary vajra recitation—and these two have, respectively, four and five divisions.
There are 10 winds altogether:
5 root winds
5 secondary winds
Here it is mentioned that when you meditate on the vajra recitation, you meditate with the 4 root winds rather than the 5 root winds. The wind called the pervasive wind (pervading wind) is not utilized in vajra recitation. 
As for the secondary winds, all 5 are utilized in vajra recitation. So you utilize for 4 root winds and 5 secondary winds. 
Therefore, here it is said that when vajra recitation is classified by means of the winds, there are the main and secondary vajra recitation, there are 4 root vajra recitation and 5 secondary vajra recitation.
If they are classified by means of the mantra recited, then there are two, namely vajra recitation of the two letters hūṃ and ho, and vajra recitation of the three letters oṃ, āḥ, and hūṃ.
We have already explained the vajra recitation of the 3 letters, OM AH HUM. This is the recitation in which you meditate on the tones of the winds arising, entering and abiding as being indivisible from the tones of the three letters OM AH HUM. 
Besides that, there is another vajra recitation of the two letters HUM and HO.
There are three occasions when completion stage practitioners perform vajra recitation, for it is said that 
(1) they* perform vajra recitation to establish the feats of pacification, increase, power, or wrath, through utilizing the four main winds,
(2) they perform vajra recitation to establish the five higher perceptions of the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and body, through serially utilizing the five secondary winds—the moving wind and so forth,
(3) they perform vajra recitation to establish the empties of mental isolation after first establishing physical isolation, through initially using the four main winds and then having attained mastery over them, using the five secondary winds.
Translator: They* refer to the completion stage practitioners
In the first case, vajra recitation is done in order to accomplish the four achievements of pacification, increase, power or wrath by using the 4 main winds (root winds).  Then later you will use the 5 secondary winds to establish the 5 clairvoyances: eyes, ears, nose, tongue and so forth. 
Next is the explanation on the substance drop.
The substance drop
Meditation on the substance drop at the tip of the secret organ has two types: 
(1) retention of the drop of bodhicitta produced from the union of yourself and an action seal at the meeting point of both lower openings of the central channel, without releasing it,  and 
(2) meditation focusing on the drop at the meeting point of the two lower openings of the central channels of oneself and a wisdom seal.
It is necessary to meditate in this way because if the two former types of vitality exertion cannot gather the winds in the central channel at the heart, then it is achieved by meditation on the substance drop, since this promotes the gathering of the winds at the heart. 
Vitality exertion where you are conjoined with either seal occurs twice, namely before and after the completion of vajra recitation. The method of gathering the winds in the central channel should be understood from Illuminating Lamp.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay that is all. Now I am trying to summarize within 2 minutes.
There are 3 levels of meditation on the vitality exertion.
Meditation on the mantra drop at the tip of the heart.
Meditation on the light drop at the tip of the face. 
Meditation on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place.
In the first meditation, you meditate on the mantra drop at the tip of the heart. What you need to do is to visualize that there is a little AH in the center of the indestructible drop at the heart. By focusing your mind on that you are able to gather the winds. As the result of gathering the winds, the mind also gathers there. Then you are able to cause the winds to enter a little bit into the central channel at the heart.
In the second meditation, you meditate on the light drop at the tip of the face. This is a meditation in which you meditate by regarding the tones of the winds arising, entering and abiding as being indivisible entity from the tones of the 3 letters. Through such a meditation, you are able to loosen the channel knots at the heart. This has a special extraordinary ability in gathering the winds at the heart. This is mainly what is called verbal isolation. It is this meditation in which you meditate on the tones of the 3 winds as being indivisible from the tones of the 3 letters.
When we look at this expression “isolation of speech”, what we are doing is that usually we do not meditate on the tones of our inhalation, the winds abiding and exhalation as being indivisible from the tones of the 3 letters. 
In the isolation of speech we meditate on those tones of the winds as being indivisible from those 3 tones without allowing ourselves to adhere to the tones of our winds as ordinary. We meditate on tones of our winds as indivisible from the tones of the 3 letters without any distraction.
In reality, the tones of the winds arising, entering, abiding are the tones of the 3 syllables. It is just that we do not recognize it. We do not know it. So, during this meditation on the isolation of speech, we have to recognize this. We have to understand this and to meditate on that. For us, usually we are able to observe inhalation and exhalation but for the winds abiding, that part is difficult for us.
Khen Rinpoche: How long you abide? Immediately come out? No time to abide. Any abide there? Very short moment maybe. I don’t know how long you abide there. Continuously breathing in and out almost we don’t notice about abiding. When you practice then the whole point is that you learn to abide. When you abide there then your breathing get shorter.  Breathing in and out get shorter, abiding becomes longer with the practice. Now our this long, in and out long, abiding is…. That is why so distractive. Abide inside then no distraction. No? I don’t know.
In the third meditation, you are meditating on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place. There you are either use an action seal or a wisdom seal. Then you meditate that at the meeting point of the lower opening of the central channel is a drop and you focus your mind on that. At the lower end of the central channel at the secret place, you have to meditate on this bodhicitta drop. The bodhicitta drop descends and it abides at this meeting place of the two lower ends of the central channel. Then you have to hold or retain this bodhicitta drop - very subtle drop and not allow it to be released. 
During this third kind of meditation, you meditate on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place. Previously through your meditation on the light drop at the tip of the face of vajra recitation, you have already loosened the channels knots at the heart. Therefore, the winds have entered the central channel at the heart. Now with this the third meditation then you promotes the gathering of the winds at the heart even more. This is stated at the following passage:
It is necessary to meditate in this way because if the two former types of vitality exertion cannot gather the winds in the central channel at the heart, then it is achieved by meditation on the substance drop, since this promotes the gathering of the winds at the heart.
Then the root of a speech is the winds. These winds have their tones. So during vajra recitation (verbal isolation) you are meditating on the natural tones of these winds. 
In the next session, we will read the remaining parts of verbal isolation and we will begin the next chapter which is mental isolation. If you have questions on the isolation of speech, please prepare your questions and then ask them next week.
Extracted from Part 6: An Overview of Tantric Paths and Grounds by Geshe Tashi Tsering