Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L7.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:14.767097
================================================================================

Perhaps there could be some confusion of what I had brought up before. When we talk about the inopportune states, as illustrated in the Lamrim Chenmo, an inopportune state is to be born in one of lands in the form realm which is called The Place of Non-Discrimination. Another illustration of an inopportune state is to be born as an ordinary being in the formless realm. If we look at what it is being said in the Lamrim Chenmo, it seems to be saying that as long as we are an ordinary being who is born in the formless realm then it is necessary to be in an inopportune state. As such, what I have mentioned in one of the earlier classes perhaps needs to be corrected. I think I did say that one can enter the path on any basis in the three realms. If you think about of what is being mentioned in Lamrim Chenmo the fact as an ordinary being in the formless realm, then it is necessary to be in an inopportune state. This means it is better to say that besides not be able to generate the Path of Seeing in the formless realm, then it is not possible to generate a path on the basis of formless realm. Then it is better to say that it is possible to newly generate a path on the basis of desire realm and form realm. 
Who are the people who can generate the mind of enlightenment? As said in the sutra, all the six types of migratory beings. I guess we can say that a person of form realm basis can generates the mind of enlightenment. 
Khen Rinpoche: When I said something that you are not clear of, ask immediately. If I said something you don’t get it, ask immediately. 
Student 1: Does it means that it is necessary the case that there are no bodhisattvas abiding in the formless realm support? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah.
Student 1: What about the arahat who newly generates the mind of enlightenment due to his past habit of abiding in the absorption? Even if he has generated the mind of enlightenment, he may go back to abiding in the formless realm absorption without losing bodhicitta. Is it possible?  
Khen Rinpoche:  No, I don’t think so. 
It is clear in the Lamrim Chenmo that all ordinary being in the formless realm are considered to be in an inopportune state.
It is clearly stated in many sutras that bodhisattva superiors do not take rebirth in the formless realm and they do not seek an existence in the formless realm. 
It is stated that the six types of migratory beings can generate the mind of enlightenment. Can beings in the form realm generate the mind of enlightenment? I think it might be better to say that they can.
If we say yes, what are the reasons that we can posit for stating beings in the form realm can newly generate a path?
Student 2: Inaudible
Khen Rinpoche: Why not in formless realm? Your reason goes to the formless realm. Your logic keeps to the formless realm.
Student 2: In form realm, due to the strong imprints of accumulating merits in the past lives, the person who took rebirth in form realm can newly generate the mind of enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche: So therefore the beings in formless realm can be generated mind of enlightenment because of past strong imprint. 
Student 2: A person who has strong imprint of bodhicitta can take rebirth in formless realm. However, he cannot generate the mind of enlightenment due to the condition in formless realm.
Khen Rinpoche: Not so much to do in imprint, isn’t it?
Student 2: Because the imprint need external conditions to ripen. So in formless realm, the external condition is not a place suitable for the imprint of the mind of enlightenment to be ripened. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why condition is not there? 
Student 2: Form realm has aggregates so there is suffering of …. Maybe in formless realm do not have physical aggregate so…In form realm there is form aggregates that might induce some kind of renunciation that enable the person to carry on to accumulate merit.
Khen Rinpoche: Ok.
Student 3: I would think that the formless realm beings sort of deactivated their discrimination mental factor as compare to the form realm beings. Although the formless realm beings are also in meditative absorption but they did not reject the happy feelings whereas in the form realm they reject whatever feelings that arises from single-pointedness but abide in the feelings of equanimity. But these feelings of equanimity are without wisdom realizing emptiness. As such, I would think it is difficult for the formless realm beings to newly generate the mind of enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t get what you are saying. What is the reason? Just give in one sentence.
Student 3: I think formless realm beings sort of deactivated their discrimination mental factor.
Venerable Gyurme: Can you deactivate something that is omnipresent? Maybe you should say that they have very subtle discrimination.
Student 3: Yeah very subtle. They do not engage in analysis. They just abide in the meditative absorption, so there is no analytical meditation in the formless realm.
Student 4: Just now we say that the ordinary beings in the formless realm lack the freedom to practice dharma. That means they are still beings who are not ordinary beings that can generate the path. It is only ordinary beings cannot generate the path, and for those who are not ordinary beings can still generate the path, then who are they? It is mentioned not all beings, but it is said ordinary beings. So there are beings who are not ordinary beings can still generate the path, then who are they?
Khen Rinpoche: The answer is given long time ago, please go back and read transcript. I remember very clearly.
In the Ornament of Essential, Gyaltsab Je stated very clearly that one can generate the heat and peak levels of the Path of Preparation with the form realm basis. If that is possible, we can say that one can generate the Path of Accumulation with the form realm basis. If we say one can generate the Path of Accumulation with a form realm basis then we can say that one can newly attains a path with a form realm basis. That is the reason.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you following on what I am saying? 
Student 5: Just now you mentioned something about ordinary beings of the formless realm in an inopportune state and therefore can’t generate a path. Then beings of the hell and hungry ghosts are also in an inopportune state. In that sense why would the reason for them to generate a path?
Ven Gyurme: Since they can generate bodhicitta, right?
Student 5: If that is the only reason given, then it should work the other way for hungry ghosts and hell beings?
Khen Rinpoche: You people can get what she is asking? 
Student 6: I remembered in Lamrim Chenmo Lama Tsongkhapa did elaborate the reason for being in the inopportune state for them. It is because these beings lack discrimination.
Khen Rinpoche: The discrimination applying to the hell beings?
Student 6: No. Lama Tsongkhapa did elaborate the reason why the 4th level form realm gods and all the formless realm gods are in an inopportune state. It is because these beings lack discrimination that makes them an inopportune state. Why they are in an inopportune state? It is because, specifically, they lack of discrimination; whereas for the other beings that are in an inopportune state manifest sufferings but they don’t lack discrimination.
Khen Rinpoche: The lacks of discrimination characterize one particular kind of god in of the form realm. Did it say that is the reason that characterizes the ordinary being in the formless realm?
Student 6: I remembered it also applies to the formless realm.
Khen Rinpoche: So go back and read.
Student 6: I also have another question. In the case of the formless realm, let’s say they do lack discrimination, how do they go from the 1st to the 2nd to the 3rd and then to the peak? If they lack discrimination, how do they progress? 
Khen Rinpoche: No more tantra, we are still at sutra. 
Khen Rinpoche: We have to think about it. The hell beings are in inopportune state, but you have to say that as hell being it is possible to generate the mind of enlightenment.
The Lamrim Chenmo stated that all ordinary beings in the formless realm are said to be in inopportune state. That statement is made by Lama Tsongkhapa in his Lamrim Chenmo. Implicitly he is saying that there are superiors in the formless realm. That means implicitly superiors in the formless realm are not posited to be in an inopportune state. Having said that, this is not to say it is possible to newly generate a superior path with a formless realm basis.
While there are superiors in the formless realm, this is not the same as saying that one can newly generate a superior path in the formless realm. These are two different things. It is clear that the basis for newly generate the superior path is desire realm basis. One cannot newly generate a superior path with a form and formless realm basis. Not only that one cannot newly generate the Path of Seeing with a form and formless basis, one also cannot attain the Path of Meditation with a form and formless realm basis. Based on the philosophical treatises, we have to say that one cannot newly generate the Path of Meditation with a form and formless realm basis.
Then how do we account for there being superior beings with form and formless realm basis? Where did they come from?
A superior is either a Hinayana superior or a Mahayana superior. It is cleared that there are no Mahayana superior. So what is left is Hinayana superior. There are Hinayana superior with form and formless realm basis.
There is a presentation of how one move on a Hinayana path after actualizing the Path of Seeing and then newly attains the Path of Meditation. On that basis, there is still an explanation of how many lifetimes they have to take with how many rebirths they have to go. On those rebirths, how they take on a basis of the form realm and a formless realm? It is said that one can achieves the state of an arhat at the Hinayana Path of No-more-learning on the basis of desire realm and form realm.
We talked about the Hinayana superiors after obtaining the Path of Meditation. It is not as if they have overcome their karma and afflictions. Although they don’t freshly accumulate projecting karma, but they still have to take rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions. 
Anyway there is a clear presentation of how there are Hinayana superiors after achieving the Path of Meditation take rebirth in the form realm. With that form realm basis, they manifest the state of arhatship and achieve liberation. There are others who after newly achieved the Path of Meditation take rebirth and obtain formless realm basis and on that basis they become arhat.
This is something we can think about: 
Is it possible to newly generate a path with a formless realm basis? 
Is it possible to generate the mind of enlightenment with a formless realm basis?
So far, I haven’t seen any indication in the treatises that says the possibility of one newly generate path with a formless realm basis. And I don’t remember any mention of the possibility of newly generating the mind of enlightenment with a formless realm basis.
The hell being, preta and animal are considered as inopportune state and yet it is stated clearly that the six types of migrators can generate bodhicitta. That means all the hell beings, hungry ghosts, animals, humans, demi-gods and gods can newly generate bodhicitta.
In the section on mind generation, the commentaries cited many sutras, words of the Buddha himself, that it is possible to generate bodhicitta as a hell being and so forth.
This is something for discussion and something to think about. It is not sufficient just to say “You cannot newly generate the path with a formless realm basis.” The more important thing is “Why? What is the reason?” If we say that as long as the all beings in the form and formless realm have much discrimination, then are we going to say that the superior in the form and formless realm also lack discrimination? 
Back to the newly generating the Path of Seeing, it is said that the basis for doing that is the desire realm. Desire realm basis is the basis for newly generating the Path of Seeing. As such, based on this assertion, there is a school of thought which says that it is not possible to achieve enlightenment in Amitabha Buddha Pure Land because one cannot newly generate the Path of Seeing there. However there is another school of thought which says that one can achieve enlightenment in Amitabha Buddha Pure Land.
These are important points. When these points are brought up, you really have to pay attention. You have to try to understand what is being said. If you just sit there, don’t really pay attention and space out, then you are not going to get anything.
Back to the Mahayana path and ground, we look at the uninterrupted path of the Path of Seeing. The uninterrupted path of the Path of Seeing is essentially the mind directly realizing emptiness and it is referring to its meditative equipoise. Meditative stabilization in meditative equipoise directly seeing the emptiness is the very first direct antidote to the obscuration. What is it direct antidote to? It is the direct antidote to the acquired afflictions.
You should at least be able to say the uninterrupted path of the Mahayana Path of Seeing is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. 
What is it direct antidote to? What does it harm? What is it damage? 
It is a direct antidote to the acquired afflictive obscuration. 
This is the minimum that you must be able to say this. 
The uninterrupted path of the Mahayana Path of Seeing is a wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise directly observing emptiness. This is in the continuum of the person who possesses this wisdom. No other mind manifests. Only this mind manifest - the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. As such only emptiness appears, and nothing else appears to this wisdom. 
After the uninterrupted path is the path of release (also translated as liberated path). 
The uninterrupted path in the Mahayana Path of Seeing acts as a direct antidote to the acquired afflictive obscuration. 
The path of release is essentially that same wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise. It is just that the path of release is the name given to the phase in whereby that very same mind has abandoned or is freed of the acquired afflictive obscuration, such as the artificial conception of true existent. 
When the path of release the Mahayana Path of Seeing is attained, all the acquired afflictive obscurations together with the seeds that are posited are removed by the force of antidote.
When that bodhisattva arises from that meditative equipoise, he enters the post-meditative state (the subsequent attainment). 
What does he do in the period of subsequent attainment? He focuses on the accumulating the collection of merit. Here, he focuses primary on the practice of the Perfection of Generosity.
Why does the bodhisattva accumulates the collection of merit in post-meditative equipoise. Although he has abandoned the acquired afflictive obscuration but he hasn’t abandoned the innate afflictive obscuration and the knowledge obscuration. He is accumulating merit in order to be able to abandon these obscurations. He has to start with abandoning the innate afflictive obscuration before he can starts on abandoning the knowledge obscuration. 
Abandon acquired afflictive obscuration  abandon innate afflictive obscuration  abandon knowledge obscuration 
Abandoning the innate afflictive obscuration itself is not easy. The innate afflictive obscuration cannot be abandoned just through the force of one antidote. Why? Because the innate afflictive obscurations are multi-layered. 
We have talked about the nine layers of innate afflictive obscuration - the three big, the three middling and the three small. What is normally stated are those nine layers of innate afflictive obscuration? If we follow the assertion of the Sera Je College, i.e. if we follow the Sera Je’s textbook position, then the big of the big innate afflictive obscuration are divided into coarse and subtle. As such, we end up with ten layers of innate obscuration that have to be abandoned.
Let’s follow the chart, it is easier. We just stick to the nine layers of innate afflictive obscuration - the 3 big, 3 middling and 3 small first. 
In post-meditative equipoise, the bodhisattva accumulates the collection of merit to empower his wisdom directly realizing emptiness to be powerful enough to act as an antidote to the next obscuration to be abandoned. Come the time, when his wisdom directly realizing emptiness becomes powerful enough to act as an antidote, that is when the uninterrupted path at the end of the 1st ground is attained. That uninterrupted path at the end of the 1st ground is the Path of Meditation. This uninterrupted path at the end of the 1st ground acts as direct antidote to the big of the big innate afflictive obscuration.
When the uninterrupted path at the end of the 1st ground (which is part of the Path of Meditation) is attained then that wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise acts as the direct antidote to the big of the big innate afflictive obscuration. That very same mind continues. When the time comes the big of the big innate afflictive obscuration are abandoned, i.e. when the bodhisattva achieved the abandonment of big of the big innate afflictive obscuration, he achieves the path of release. Simultaneously he enters into the 2nd ground. So he moves from the 1st ground to the 2nd ground. When is the movement posited? When the path of release, which is the abandonment of the big of the big innate afflictive obscuration, is attained.  
That bodhisattva will arise from that meditative equipoise and enters the post-meditative equipoise state (subsequent attainment). During that post-meditative equipoise, that bodhisattva again focuses on the accumulation of collection of merit. Here he primarily focuses on the practice of the Perfection Of Ethical Discipline. 
With sufficient accumulation of merits, come a time when he is able to generate that wisdom directly realizing emptiness which acts as an antidote to the middling of the big innate obscurations. Come that time he attains an uninterrupted path which is generated at the end of the 2nd ground. 
So the uninterrupted path at the end of the 2nd ground acts as a direct antidote to the middling of the big innate obscurations.
Come a time when that wisdom in meditative equipoise has abandoned the middling of the big innate obscurations that is when he achieves the path of release. Simultaneous with that, he moves from the 2nd to the 3rd Ground.
The manner of progress is similar. He arises from meditative equipoise and then accumulates merits. In this case he focuses primarily on the Perfection of Patience. With sufficient merits he has accumulated, then come the time when his wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise can act as a direct antidote to the small of the big innate apprehension of true existence and that is when he achieves the uninterrupted path that comes at the end of the 3rd ground. 
So at the end of the 3rd ground he achieves the uninterrupted path that acts as the direct antidote to the small of the big innate obscurations (conception of apprehension of true existence). 
In that same meditative equipoise his mind is freed of the small of the big innate obscurations, simultaneously he achieves the path of release of the 4th ground. 
That Path of Release is an abandonment of the three levels of the big innate obscurations: big of the big, middling of the big and small of the big. 
Again he arises from the meditative equipoise into the subsequent attainment and focuses on the accumulation of merits. Here he primarily focuses on the Perfection of Joyous Perseverance. When he has accumulated sufficient merits which empower his wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the meditative equipoise to act as a direct antidote to the big of the middling innate afflictive obscurations, and that is when he achieves the uninterrupted path at the end of the 4th ground. 
He has to start abandoning those three levels of the middling innate afflictive obscurations. The uninterrupted path at the end of the 4th ground is the direct antidote to the big of the middling innate afflictive obscurations.
When the bodhisattva in meditative equipoise abandons the big of the middling innate afflictive obscurations, he achieves the path of release of the 5th ground. So simultaneous with the abandonment of the big of the middling innate afflictive obscurations he moves from the 4th to the 5th ground.
Then he arises from post-meditative equipoise into subsequent attainment and focusing on the accumulation of merit. Here he primarily focuses on the Perfection on Meditative Stabilization. With the sufficient accumulation of merit, his wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise become powerful enough to act as a direct antidote to the Middling of the middling innate afflictive obscurations and then he achieves the uninterrupted path at the end of the 5th ground. 
In the same meditative equipoise, the bodhisattva abandons the middling of the middling innate afflictive obscurations he achieves the path of release. That is when he moves from the 5th to the 6th ground.
If you get the manner of progressing right from the beginning i.e. from the 1st and 2nd ground, then you should be able to understand the manner of progressing through the rest of the grounds up to the 7th ground. They are pretty much the same. Perhaps there are people who may not understand. As I go through this step by step, you still have to focus on what is being said.
Again the bodhisattva arises from post-meditative equipoise into subsequent attainment focusing on the accumulation of merit. When sufficient merit has been accumulated to the point his wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise can act as a direct antidote to the small of the middling innate afflictive obscurations. That mind is given the name the uninterrupted path at the end the 6th ground. During the 6th ground in post meditative equipoise he focuses primarily on the practice of the Perfection of Wisdom. 
 In the same meditative equipoise when he abandons the small of the middling innate afflictive obscurations, he moves from the 6th to the 7th ground. 
We usually talk about the six Perfections. When the Perfection of Wisdom itself is divided, the last four are:
Perfection of Method, 
Perfection of Prayer, 
Perfection of Power, 
Perfection of Exalted Wisdom
When the path of release of the 7th ground is obtained, the bodhisattva has abandoned all the three big innate afflictive obscurations and three middling innate afflictive obscurations. He arises from meditative equipoise and leads to subsequent attainment, then focusing on the accumulation of merit and the main practice there is the Perfection of Method. 
When sufficient merit is accumulated, and when his wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise is powerful enough to act as an antidote to the next level of obscurations. 
The wisdom directly realizing emptiness is given the name the uninterrupted path at the end of the 7th ground, which acts as a direct antidote to all three levels of the small innate afflictive obscurations. These three small innate afflictive obscurations are not abandoned serially. Rather they are all abandoned by one antidote and this antidote is the uninterrupted path at the end of the 7th ground.
In the same meditative equipoise when he achieves the path of release on the 8th ground, he becomes a destroyer of the foe of the afflictions. The “foe” here means the afflictions - both acquired and innate obscurations. As such, he becomes the destroyer or the foe of afflictions. 
The 1st to the 7th grounds are called impure grounds. Why are they called impure grounds? Those grounds are yet to be purified of the afflictive obscurations. 
The 8th, 9th and 10th bodhisattva grounds are called the pure grounds because those grounds are purified of afflictive obscurations. We have to know these terms. 
After having achieved the path of release of the 8th ground, what is there left to be abandoned? Although at stage all afflictive obscurations are abandoned, but nevertheless the knowledge obscurations are still there. 
Again that bodhisattva arises from meditative equipoise. In the post-meditative equipoise, he focuses on the accumulation of merit mainly on the practice of the Perfection of Prayer. When he has accumulated sufficient merits, his wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise can act as a direct antidote to the knowledge obscuration. That mind acquires the name uninterrupted path at the end of the 8th ground, and it is an antidote to the knowledge obscuration. 
The knowledge obscurations are divided into three:
Big 
Middling 
Small 
Of the three, the uninterrupted path at the end of the 8th ground acts a direct antidote to the big knowledge obscuration. 
When the big knowledge obscuration is abandoned, he attains the path of release on the 9th ground. Then he arises from the meditative equipoise. In post-meditative equipoise, he accumulates merit through the practice of Perfection of Power.
When this bodhisattva wisdom directly realizing emptiness is powerful enough to act as an antidote to the middling knowledge obscuration that mind acquires a name uninterrupted path. Here is the uninterrupted path on the 9th ground. When this bodhisattva abandons the middling knowledge simultaneously he moves to the 10th ground. 
Then he enters into post meditative equipoise and accumulates merit primarily through the practice of Perfection of Exalted Wisdom. With accumulating merit it will come a time when he obtains the antidote at the last uninterrupted path at the end of the 10th ground which can act as a direct antidote to the small knowledge obscuration. This last uninterrupted path is also called the Vajra-like meditative stabilization of the Path of Meditation. 
The small knowledge obscuration is the most subtle obscuration that has to be abandoned. The uninterrupted path at the end of the 10th ground acts as an antidote to the small knowledge obscuration. When that small the most subtle obscuration is abandoned, he achieves the Path of No-more-learning which is simultaneous with achieving enlightenment. 
It is important that you get to grasp this sutra Mahayana path and grounds. You really have to be familiar with it and be able to say this is this, that is that, and this is what happens. 
One needs to accumulate the collections over the three great countless eons:
The 1st great countless eons is spent on the 1st two paths: Mahayana Path of Accumulation and Path of Preparation. 
The 2nd great countless eon is spent on the 7 impure grounds (1st to 7th grounds). 
The 3rd great countless eon is spent on the 3 pure grounds (8th to 10th grounds)
There are the Mahayana paths of the ordinary beings and Mahayana paths of the superiors. 
Mahayana paths of the ordinary beings are at the Mahayana Path of Accumulation and the Mahayana Path of Preparation
Mahayana paths of the Mahayana superiors are at the Mahayana Path of Seeing, Path of Meditation and Path of No-more-learning
If you have understood what we have discussed over these lessons then you can see that achieving enlightenment is not something that happens so easily. It requires a lot of effort and hard work moving alternately between familiarizing the mind (meditation) and accumulating the collections over a long period of time.
From this, we can see that there is no such thing as achieving enlightenment quickly. It takes a long time, and within that long stipulated time, hard work is required from the beginning to the end. From this, we can see what types of effort we now need to make knowing all these relative to where we are and what we need to do.
Even from this short exercise, we can see how extremely important the wisdom directly realizing emptiness is. Whatever obscurations we are talking about, whether it is the afflictive obscurations or the knowledge obscurations we need the wisdom directly realizing emptiness to abandon the obscurations. In fact only from the Path of Preparation onwards, the bodhisattva gains an ability to suppress the manifest ignorance (apprehension of true existence). It only able to suppress them and is not able to destroy them. The real ability only starts on the Path of Preparation. Although he has realized emptiness it is not the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. But nevertheless his realization of emptiness can enable him to start suppressing the apprehension of true existence. In order to be able to start damaging the afflictive obscurations we need the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. Without which we cannot even touch or hurt the obscurations. When the wisdom directly realizing emptiness is first attained, we can only be able to counteract the acquired afflictive obscuration. After that, we have to work at the innate obscuration. After abandoning all the innate obscurations there is still the knowledge obscuration. What is it that can act as an antidote to all the obscurations? It is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. From this we can see that without the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, there is no possibility at all.
But just having the wisdom directly realizing emptiness is not enough. That is why the mind of enlightenment, the method, is extremely important. If the wisdom directly realizing emptiness is not conjoined with the special method of mind generation (bodhicitta), there is no way anybody can even touch the knowledge obscuration. That is why bodhicitta is so important. Without bodhicitta, the wisdom directly realizing emptiness cannot act as an antidote to the knowledge obscuration. 
Having said this, we need to know what exactly the afflictive obscurations are and what exactly the knowledge obscurations are. We talked about the abandonment of these two obscurations. But before we can abandon them, what on earth are we supposed to abandon? We have to know what exactly the afflictive obscurations are and what exactly constitute the knowledge obscurations?
The afflictive obscurations consist of:
- The grasping at true existence or apprehension of true existence 
- The afflictions that are induced by that grasping such as anger and attachment 
The anger and attachment that are induced by the grasping at true existence are also posited as afflictive obscurations. 
The seeds that are deposited on the mental continuum by the grasping at true existence are also afflictive obscurations. Likewise, the seeds that are deposited by afflictions such as attachment are also considered as afflictive obscurations. 
As example, let’s take the seeds of attachments. What are the seeds of attachments? The seeds of attachment are deposited by attachments and manifest by attachments. 
What does the seed of attachments do? What is its function?  
The seed refers to that cause which allows for a future manifestation of attachment. It is the potential that makes it possible for attachment to manifest again.
What about the imprints (predispositions) that are deposited by the grasping at true existence? 
The imprints (predispositions) that are deposited by the grasping at true existence are knowledge obscurations. They are also imprints (predispositions) deposited by attachments. Those predispositions (proclivities or imprints) are also classed under knowledge obscurations. 
What do these predispositions of apprehension of true existence do? What do the imprints deposited by attachment on the mind do? For example, the imprints deposited by attachment or the imprints deposited by apprehension of true existence, are not capable of producing another manifest at true existence or manifest attachment in the future. But they produce mistaken dualistic appearance. All these are considered to be knowledge obscurations. 
There are two parts of knowledge obscuration:
The predispositions (imprints) of the grasping at true existent 
The mistaken dualistic appearances that are produced by those imprints (predispositions) 
There is a debate amongst the learned ones, the wise of the past, as to whether there are knowledge obscurations which are consciousnesses. There are two schools of thought. Our school of thought and our textbook position is that there are no knowledge obscurations which are consciousnesses.
Khen Rinpoche: I think that is it about the grounds and paths. We complete. We will start Tantra in the next lesson. No more sutra.
Student 1: About the 3 countless great eons, in the case of Shakyamuni Buddha, it is said he accumulated the merit over 3 countless great eons. In term of what we are hearing in terms of going through meditative equipoise and the uninterrupted path and path of release, is it possible to say it is a bodhisattva accomplishing all these in a single lifetime? Or is that just a simplified model and actually it takes many lifetimes and the bodhisattva is taking different rebirths in order to achieve all of this. Is it a single rebirth or many?
Khen Rinpoche: I think many. Single rebirth, I don’t think it is not possible
Student 1: In the next lifetime the Buddha has a perfect recollection that they were on the previous paths.
Khen Rinpoche: Of course. It has to be. He has to recall, otherwise no point.
Student 2: For the bodhisattva on the wisdom of subsequent attainment of the Path of Seeing, do CMWS assert that this subsequent attainment of the Path of Seeing to be long enough for them to have separate rebirths or would it be the same as asserted by the AMWS where they assert that the subsequent attainment on the Path of Seeing is very short. 
Is the wisdom of subsequent attainment on the Path of Seeing according to the CMWS long enough for someone to take several rebirths?
Khen Rinpoche: No
Student 2: So it is as short as what it is asserted in the CMWS.
Khen Rinpoche: I think all the same.
Student 2: In that case there is also the teaching of bodhisattvas manifesting hundred bodies to benefit sentient beings to accumulate merit, and they do it within that short period. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student 3: In the Path of Seeing there are 8 forbearances that is the antidote to the Path of Seeing abandonments that is included in the three realms. This antidote which is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, is this wisdom also included in the three realms? Actually I am not sure what it means to be included in the three realms. I am just wondering if there is abandonment as included in the three realms, will there be corresponding antidotes that is included in the three realms?
Ven Gyurme: That uninterrupted path belongs to which realm of the mind?
Student 3: It actually says it is the antidote of Path of Seeing abandonments that is included in the three realms. That is only talking about the mind. When we talk about what basis, we are referring to the body. The body can be the desire realm but the mind can be of a different realms. Is that correct?
Khen Rinpoche: If we are talking about the uninterrupted Path of Seeing, the newly attained the Path of Seeing needs the desire realm basis, for example, a human being. By that time that bodhisattva has achieved all the actual different concentrations, his basis is of the desire realm but his mind is of the higher realms. 
Probably we have to say that the person might have a desire realm basis but his mind including the uninterrupted path of the Path of Seeing, the wisdom directly realizing emptiness is the mind of a higher realm, probably the four levels of the form realm. We have to say the mind of the 4th level of actual concentration. 
Student 4: In the knowledge obscuration, are the terms imprints, latencies, and predispositions referring to the same thing?
Ven Gyurme: Yes 
Student 5: Just now you mentioned that Gyaltsab Je said that the form realm basis can newly attain the heat and peak of the Path of Preparation. Can I know what are the reasons he posited that to be the case?
Khen Rinpoche: He didn’t give the reasons. That is the sentence he gave. Possible to achieve that but he didn’t give the reasons. If he gave the reasons I will tell you. He didn’t give the reason.
In the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge, Vasubandhu said that you cannot attain the Path of Seeing in the higher realms because the disenchantment is small. He only said this. So you just have to take what he said and think about it and discuss about it. 
As I said this before, you all shouldn’t be looking for answers right away and be satisfied with the answers. That is not the way. The point is you have to think about it. Why? What? How? You have to think about it, search for it and come to a position of your own. 
Having said that I am not saying “You can think about it and come out with your own philosophy”. The point is that your position that you take has to be supported by scriptural authority and/or reasoning. 
Student 6: If we were fortunate and we work hard enough with uncontrived renunciation and uncontrived bodhicitta in this lifetime and entered the path, as the path is generated in our mind, is that entry into the path irreversible? That means that from life to life, I would just pick up where I left off. I am just thinking like I enter the path today and I die tomorrow, does that mean in my next life, I have to start generating uncontrived renunciation and bodhicitta again? So I am just wondering if entry into the path is irreversible, that means once you enter the path from life to life, you are on the path you just go on each of the five paths.
Khen Rinpoche: It is clear that once the path is generated (we are talking about renunciation), it will never ever be degenerate. But if you talk about mind generation, then that is a different question.
It is said once a path is generated, it never degenerates, but the bodhicitta can degenerate. As for mind generation on the Path of Accumulation, there is a possibility that the mind generation can degenerate. Once you reached the middling Path of Accumulation, one’s mind generation will never degenerate. 
Extracted from Heart Sutra module:
Contrived and uncontrived bodhicitta 
Contrived bodhicitta arises when one puts effort into thinking about bodhicitta. The fully qualified bodhicitta arises but it requires effort. Having contrived bodhicitta does not make one a bodhisattva. Only when one generates uncontrived bodhicitta, the bodhicitta that, due to familiarity, arises spontaneously without effort, does one becomes a bodhisattva. When a person generates effortless or uncontrived bodhicitta, that person becomes a bodhisattva, is suitable to be called a bodhisattva and enters the Mahayana path as an ordinary bodhisattva. 
Bodhisattvas of dull and sharp faculties
There are two types of individuals who generate bodhicitta and enter the path:
those of dull faculties who are followers of faith
those of sharp faculties who are followers of Dharma
Those who are of sharp faculties are said to be followers of Dharma, i.e., they are followers of reasoning. Before they generate bodhicitta, they investigate, analyze and think about emptiness. Those of sharp faculties are said to realize emptiness first. On the basis of having developed a correct understanding of emptiness, only then do they go on to generate uncontrived bodhicitta and become bodhisattvas. 