Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L70.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:14.834932
================================================================================

Please focus your mind and try to make yourself to understand what verbal isolation is as I have mentioned in the previous session. The definition of verbal isolation is: 
Verbal isolation that is concentration producing the vajra speech
The nature of the second stage in the sixfold division of the completion stage of the Ārya system is “the completion- stage practice that begins from the generation of the pristine wisdom of [white] appearance derived from causing the upper and lower winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel at the heart due to a yogi of this system meditating on a mantra drop at the point of the heart. It extends up to but not including the generation of the pristine wisdom of [white] appearance derived from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the indestructible drop at the heart due to meditation that completely releases the channel knots at the heart.”
When the stages of verbal isolation are explained, you should know that there are three types of vitality exertion:
Meditation on the mantra drop at the heart
Meditation on the light drop at the tip of the face 
Meditation on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place. 
As explained previously, the meditation called the meditation on the mantra drop at the heart involves meditation on a short AH in the center of the indestructible drop at the heart.  By focusing on this short AH, you meditate and in that way, you cause the winds to enter the central channel. Eventually you will be able to cause the winds to enter the central channel at the heart.  So the winds enter, abide and dissolve and then will cause the pristine wisdom of white appearance to arise.  As soon as this pristine wisdom of white appearance is produced then you are transferred from physical isolation to verbal isolation.
We also said that from among the three types of vitality exertion, indeed all three are imputed the name verbal isolation. However, only the 2nd vitality exertion - the meditation on the light drop at the tip of the face - is the actual verbal isolation. The other two are not the actual verbal isolation but they are still called by the name verbal isolation.
When you actually meditate on this verbal isolation, the actual verbal isolation is also called vajra recitation. What you need to do is to meditate on the three tones of the wind arising, entering and abiding as being indivisible from the tones of the three letters.  When you inhale, there is actually a natural tone OM. So what you need to do is to recognize that this tone is there and then you focus on that.  When the winds abide, there is a natural tone AH which you need to recognize and focus on. Similarly, when you exhale, when you breathe out, there is a natural tone HUM. This you need to recognize and meditate on.
Regarding the etymology of this expression verbal isolation (isolation of speech), usually we adhere to the speech as being ordinary in the sense that we see these winds arising, entering, abiding as they appear as ordinary and we adhere to them as ordinary.  In isolation of speech, you isolate yourself from this ordinary appearance and ordinary conception.  By seeing these winds arising, entering, abiding has a tone that is indivisible from the tone of the three letters, and in that way, you are able to overcome the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness.  
At the center of the indestructible drop is this very subtle wind that is called life bearing wind.  This life bearing wind is in fact the source of the other winds.  Our speech arises from winds.  
We have to know the existence of this very subtle wind called the life bearing wind at the center of our indestructible drop at the heart. We focus on this wind.  
Through such meditation, all the winds will gather, enter, abide and absorb in this very subtle wind. 
Through the force of this occurrence, then the clear light mind will manifest.  
Through manifesting the clear light, we will be able to attain the illusory body. 
Through attaining the illusory body, then we will be able to attain learner’s union.  
From learner’s union we can move on to attain Buddhahood. 
You should know that in verbal isolation, when you first attain it, the winds enter, abide and absorb at the central channel at the heart.
During verbal isolation, you perform this vajra recitation. There are total of 4 types of root winds and 5 types of secondary winds that you meditate on.  From among the root winds, on the occasion of vajra recitation, you exclude the pervading wind. During vajra recitation, you are not able to use the pervading wind to perform vajra recitation.  
In the 3rd vitality exertion - meditation of the substance drop at the tip of the secret place - you basically utilize either an action seal or a wisdom seal. Through the union you meditate on this subtle drop at the lower opening at the central channel.  So you meditate on this subtle drop and focus your mind on it.
As said in the text, due to two types of vitality exertion, which are the meditation on mantra drop at the heart and meditation on the light drop at the tip of the face, you cause the winds to gather at the central channel at the heart. Therefore, when you meditate on this 3rd type of vitality exertion, meditation on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place, it is not for the purpose of gathering the winds in the central channel at the heart.  As mentioned in the text, it promotes and enhances the gathering of the winds at the heart.
Student 1: As for the entire boundary of the level of verbal isolation, is it just meditating equipoise and there is no post-meditative equipoise during these three levels?  
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, it does not have to be all meditative equipoise during this period. You can have post-equipoise (subsequent attainment).  
Student 1: At the time of the meditation on the light drop where the winds absorb or abide at the heart of the central channel, when it is abiding in the movement of the wind, the sign of that is the movement of the wind stops. At that point in time the person become a person of the completion stage.  Would the person not be a person at the completion stage since physical isolation?
Khen Rinpoche: He would have become a person of the completion stage prior to this.
Student 1: Is there any particular significance to say that at that point in time, this person become a person of completion stage as it was mentioned during the last class.  Is there any significance of saying that at that point in time this person becomes a person of completion stage?
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t have to say that word.
Student 1: But it was mentioned in the last class. 
Khen Rinpoche: Can say but don’t have to say.
Student 1: So there is no particular significance?
Khen Rinpoche: No, nothing much.  Say no problem, but don’t have to say that.
Student 2:  In the isolation of speech, is said that as soon as the wind are abide, enter the central channel at the heart then you generate pristine wisdom of white appearance.   As soon as that occur, you are said to have transferred to the level of isolation of speech.  However, white appearance…
Khen Rinpoche: Just one, need to correct one word there.  Just to make one point. It is important for you to differentiate between transferring to verbal isolation and transferring to the stages of verbal isolation.  Just remember that part.
Student 2:  Is that the white appearance would be generated as soon as the winds dissolved in the central channel as in the case of isolation of the body. Hence it need not wait until the winds reach the heart or the indestructible drop at the heart to have the white appearance appearing.  How one distinguishes whether the 4 empties generated by isolation of body or generation by the isolation of speech?  Is that due to distinguish the way to differentiate is the point of the meditation.  For instance, isolation of the body, you meditate on the subtle drop in the lower opening, whereas verbal isolation, although it is 3 places, say for instance at the mantra drop at the point of the heart.  These are the different places of meditation.  When they meditate in different places, they cause the wind to enter the central channel and generate the 4 empties. Is that because of that reason?  
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what you are really asking.  I didn’t get exactly.
Translator: You are saying that for body isolation (physical isolation) and verbal isolation, the boundary for each of this are both the generation of this pristine wisdom of white appearance. So you are basically asking, “If I am meditating and then I get this pristine wisdom of white appearance, how do I know whether this is physical isolation or verbal isolation?  
Student 2: Yes, exactly.  
Khen Rinpoche: The first thing you have to be certain about is this: on the generation stage, you are not able to cause the winds to enter, abide and absorb at the central channel through the force of meditation. When you are able to do that, i.e. when you are able to cause the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel through the force of meditation, you become a person of the completion stage.  
Through the force of meditating on the substance drop at the secret place, then you are able to cause the winds to enter the central channel.  When this process of the winds entering, abiding and absorbing occur, then you will have the clear light happening.  There are many stages but these winds will only enter below the heart level.  During the level of physical isolation (isolation of body) you can have these exalted wisdom or pristine wisdom white appearance, red increase and so on occurring but all of them are included within the levels of physical isolation.  
During verbal isolation (isolation of speech), the winds are able to enter the central channel at the heart. Then whatever pristine wisdom of white appearance, red increase and so on that you have attained, they are all included within the verbal isolation.  So basically you will determine whether it is physical isolation, verbal isolation or mental isolation based on where the winds are able to enter into the central channel.  
Khen Rinpoche: Must ask questions you know.  If you don’t understand you must ask question. Anything doesn’t matter.  
Student 2:  In other words, whether it was due to the different places of meditation, like physical isolation, you meditating on the lower part and the winds can only get up to below the heart.  In that physical isolation, I meditate in that point of the lower part, whereas, say for an instance, verbal isolation of the first one, the mantra drop in the heart of the AH, you cause the winds to go into the central channel right through to the heart.  That is the distinction in the way the point that I meditate would cause the winds differently and that would arise the 4 empties in such a manner.  Thank you.  
Khen Rinpoche: OK. Come come.  Questions must come.  Must ask otherwise you don’t learn.  
Student 3:  I have question regarding the light drop meditation.  It involves inhalation, exhalation and abiding. These are all coarse consciousness because it is about are breathing in and breathing out.  Does it mean that when the person inhale the winds actually go to the central channel?  There is a transition from gross consciousness to subtle. When the person breathe out the winds leave the central and out from the nostril, then there is another transition from subtle consciousness to gross consciousness, is it like that?  Is it like transition from gross to subtle and subtle to gross like that continuously?  I have this qualm. It doesn’t seem possible right from subtle to gross and gross to subtle.  
Khen Rinpoche: From among the 5 root winds, usually only the 4 root winds are able to pass through our nostril.  The pervading wind (pervasive wind) does not pass through our nostrils. We have to meditate on the 4 roots winds passing through our nostril.  As these winds pass through our nostril, we have to think that the tones that are produced are indivisible entities from the tone of the 3 letters.  For us it will be difficult to observe this abiding part.  We can inhale, we can exhale but the abiding part is more difficult for us.  It has to be done by thinking that there is this abiding part and you meditate on these 3 phases as having equal duration. You focus and recognize that they are tones indivisible from the tones of the 3 letters.  Through the force of such meditation, gradually the phase of abiding will become lengthen while the phases of inhalation and exhalation will become shorter.  Eventually the winds will enter the central channel. The sign of the winds absorbing into the central channel is that the breath will stop.  At that point in time, the coarse mind will also stop and thus the mind becomes subtler. Due to the wind absorbing or dissolving in the central channel then the coarse mind will stop. Then the subtle mind will arise. The first of these subtle minds is the mind of white appearance. These subtle minds are called white appearance or the mind of empty. 
Student 4:  You emphasized a few times that we have to distinguish between the two terms, verbal isolation and stages or levels of verbal isolation. Is there a way to distinguish the two through understanding their differences in terms of definition and pervasion?
Khen Rinpoche: You have to understand that there are 3 vitality exertions and such that all 3 are levels or stages of verbal isolation.  However, only vitality exertion in which you meditate on the light drop at the tip of the face is verbal isolation. The other two are just levels of verbal isolation; they are not verbal isolation.   
Student 5: May I check how to so call move the wind? Just like one person who cross the road concentrate on the handphone and all his concentration is fully on the handphone and he lost the surrounding. All his energy of his mind is concentrated on his handphone. By putting in the breath, by focusing on inhale and the tone of the OM, do we have to focus all our energy on the OM and the tone of the OM and then when we abide, we also focus all the energy on the AH and the tone of the AH so that we focus on an object so called in the heart?  Is it something like that?
Student 6: I can’t visualize and I can’t see how one meditates at the light drop at the tip of the face and at the same time having the mind following the inhale, abide and exhale.  Where do I place my mind?  It supposed to be at the light drop at the tip of the face here, however when we inhale, abide and exhale, our mind got to follow and be indivisible with the tone of the 3 syllabuses. How does one do that?
Khen Rinpoche: Previously we spoke about how to achieve calm abiding on the subtle generation stage.  There you basically meditate on this light drop and then you think that there is, for example, a small implement or some kind of a tiny drop. Then you focus your mind on that in a stable way.  If you are already at this stage where you meditate on the light drop at the tip of the face, you would already have attained calm abiding. This means that you have already attained stability of the mind. When we say light drop what you really should understand is a drop of wind. That is the object of observation. Therefore, when you inhale, you have to follow this inhalation. When the winds go into the central channel when you inhale, basically your mind has to accompany the winds. So you have to meditate along with the movement in the central channel.
You should not think that you are meditating on some kind of separate object, but rather you should think that your mind has entered the winds. Your mind has to go along with these winds. As you inhale, then there is this tone OM and your mind focuses on that. When the winds abide, then your mind has to focus on the tone AH.  You hold the winds without releasing while you are meditating on the breath abiding and focus on AH. After that you will release the winds in the form of exhalation. You exhale. At that time, you have to think there is this tone HUM. In that way you have to follow the winds with your mind as though your mind has entered the winds. 
Khen Rinpoche: Any more? No more, I read and finish the mental isolation. Are you getting some idea what we talking or no? Do you get some idea?
If you are an actual meditator on these stages, then you need to know clearly where the central channel is, where the positions of the left channel and right channel are and so on. Here we are not actually meditating on these channels, but we are roughly studying the presentation in order to leave imprints on our mind. 
When we talk about these winds arising, entering and abiding, it is stated in the text that one has to inhale, exhale and so on through the nose and not the mouth. This is an important point.
Khen Rinpoche: I saw some meditation teachers say breathe from mouth.
When you are performing this vajra recitation of verbal isolation you must breathe through your nose because this has a significance to do with the central channel, left and right channels. 
One says: To dissolve the winds at the heart you must loosen the channel knots at the heart.
Reply: That is unacceptable because there are cases of dissolution of the winds at the heart occurs without dissolution of the winds in the central channel at the heart, for when the winds dissolve internally, it is not logically necessary that they dissolve in the central channel.
For as it says in Illuminating Lamp: 
As explained earlier, when there are definite signs of the winds entering the central channel, and the winds abide internally for a long time by their own force, and if there is dissolution where the four empties appear as explained, then this occurs through dissolution of the winds in the central channel.
Though internal dissolution occurs at other times, on such occasions the empties do not arise as explained, since they do not involve dissolution in the central channel.
Khen Rinpoche: Question for you: To dissolve the winds at the heart you must loosen the channel knots at the heart. What does these people talking about?
The essence of this point is that somebody says in order to dissolve (absorb) the winds at the heart, you must loosen the channel knots at the heart. Our system replies that it is not necessary. 
Since we say it is unnecessary we have to give a reason. The reason is: There are cases of dissolution of the winds at the heart occurring without dissolution of the winds in the central channel at the heart. For when the winds dissolve internally or absorbed inwards, it is not logically necessary or there is no pervasion that they dissolve in the central channel. 
Basically this is saying that when the winds dissolve at the heart or absorb at the heart, it is not necessary that they absorb in the central channel at the heart. Therefore, you have to think about what it means to say that the winds absorb at the heart. Basically we are saying that in order for the winds to absorb at the heart, it is not necessary that the winds absorb in the central channel at the heart. When the winds do absorb in the central channel at the heart, then white appearance, red increase, black attainment arise as explained earlier. 
Dissolution of winds in the central channel at the heart
One says: To dissolve the winds in the central channel at the heart you must loosen the channel knots at the heart because the winds cannot penetrate the central channel at the heart without the channel knots at the heart being loosened.
Reply: The reason is not established . . .
Our system reply that the reason is not established, Basically we are saying in order for these winds to absorb in the central channel, it is not necessary for you to loosen the channel knots at the heart. 
. . because Illuminating Lamp states:
To dissolve the winds in the actual indestructible drop at the heart, you must loosen the channel knots at the heart. Prior to that, dissolution of winds in the central channel by means of gathering them at the heart is dissolution near to the indestructible drop the central channel but not dissolution in it. Similarly, though you may insert the winds into the central channel, the winds cannot move from the central channel at the site of the channel knots.
Basically what we are saying here is this: To dissolve the winds in the central channel at the heart, you do not need to loosen the channel knots at the heart. But if you want to dissolve the winds in the indestructible drop at the heart, then you must loosen the channel knots at the heart. Simply to dissolve the winds in the central channel at the heart, it is not necessary to loosen the channel knots at the heart. 
Dissolution of winds in the indestructible drop at the heart
One says: This method of explanation is unacceptable, because the explanation that “to dissolve the winds into the indestructible drop at the heart you must loosen the channel knots, and to dissolve the winds in the central channel at the heart you do not need to loosen the channel knots” is given from the perspective of the channel knot at the center of the heart, but to dissolve the winds in the central channel at the heart, you must loosen the channel knots above and below the heart . . .
It seems that the author of this text, Ngawang Palden, is saying that in order to dissolve the winds in the central channel at the heart, you do not need to loosen the channel knots. But according to Yangchen Galo, he says to dissolve the winds in the central channel at the heart you need to loosen the channel knots at the heart.  
. . . because the Grounds and Paths of Yangchen Galo states:
The channel knots above and below the heart are loosened in dependence on performing vajra recitation, where the individual tones of the three phases of the winds arising, entering, and abiding manifest as the tones of the three syllables, and when you generate the pristine wisdom of appearance from the dissolution of the upper and lower winds in the central channel at the heart, you shift from physical to verbal isolation.
According to Yangchen Galo, he says that in order for the winds to dissolve into the central channel at the heart, you have to loosen the channel knots above and below the heart. He says “You have to perform vajra recitation and through performing vajra recitation then the channel knots above and below the heart are loosened. When that occurs then the winds are able to enter the central channel at the heart. Then you are able to cause the pristine wisdom of white appearance to arise and that is when you transfer from physical isolation to verbal isolation”. 
According to the author Ngawang Palden, he has a different explanation. As we have seen earlier on from among the 3 vitality exertions when you meditate on the 1st - meditation on the mantra drop at the tip of the heart - then you can cause the winds to enter the central channel at the heart. Due to that occurring then the pristine wisdom of white appearance will arise. This can occur without you having to loosen the channel knots near the heart. Even if you do not loosen these channel knots you can still cause the winds to enter the central channel at the heart. For example, the meditation on the mantra drops at the tip of the heart.
The author of the text continues to provide two reasons. Before that he said that: 
Reply: This should be analyzed . . .
Shifting from physical to verbal isolation
. . . because when shifting from physical isolation to the level of verbal isolation, you do not need to meditate on vajra recitation. This is because
(1) vitality exertion meditating on the mantra drop must precede vajra recitation, and
(2) you shift from physical isolation to the level of verbal isolation [when meditating on the mantra drop].
(1) The first part of the reason is established because the Third Chapter states:
Through stabilizing the precious state, there is progress. Through not stabilizing it, there is no progress.
“The first part of the reason is established …” - the first part of the reason is the first part we saw earlier “(1) vitality exertion meditating on the mantra drop must precede vajra recitation.’ So he is explaining why this reason why is established. 
Bright Lamp states this when explaining the meaning of “final” in the text. 
Here vajra recitation is explained to be “final” because Analysis of the Four Interrelated Commentaries on Guhyasamāja states:
This vajra recitation is vajra recitation generating union, and therefore it is said to be final by means of function. Alternately, it is explained as final by considering just the performance of vajra recitation, which at the time of union is similar to that at the time of verbal isolation.
(2) The second part of the reason is established because the pristine wisdom of the four empties derived from penetrating the vital point at the heart at the time of physical isolation does not exist.
This is sufficient detail.
“The second part of the reason” refers to the second part of the reason given earlier “(2) you shift from physical isolation to the level of verbal isolation [when meditating on the mantra drop”
Khen Rinpoche: That is it. This is challenging at least you are interested to read the root text, each by each word what he said, what is the conclusion, you really want to focus then interesting. Otherwise boring. No use, leave some imprint. 
This is difficult stuffs. I don’t know how much benefit in going through every single word. If you want to focus your mind then you find this interesting. 
Just kind of summary: “(1) The first part of the reason is established because the Third Chapter…” – here the author is trying to prove why this vitality exertion meditating on the mantra drop must precede vajra recitation. To prove that, he quotes from a few texts. First of all, he quotes from Third Chapter of the root tantra. After that he quotes from the text called Analysis of the Four Interrelated Commentaries on Guhyasamaja. 
When you read these citations the meaning may not be so clear. Even after you read these citations they are supposed to prove the reason and you still have to think why these citations prove that vitality exertion meditating on the mantra drop must precede vajra recitation. If you read few texts you still have to think about why it is so and what the reasons are. 
Therefore, in verbal isolation (isolation of speech) you have to understand that the root of speech is the winds. Usually we do not recognize that the winds have the tones of the 3 syllables. We take these winds to be ordinary - they appear ordinary to us and we adhere to them as ordinary. In the practice of verbal isolation (isolation of speech), we try to recognize that these winds have a natural tone. These natural tones of the winds exist. We try to be constantly mindful that these tones are indivisible from the tones of the 3 syllables. Therefore, we train in recognizing that these tones of the winds are actually the tones of the 3 syllables.  If we are able to overcome the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness with respect to these winds, then we will be able to see that these winds have the natural tones of the 3 syllables. With that, let us move on to the 3rd stage of mental isolation.
Mental Isolation
Mental isolation that is concentration producing the vajra mind 
The nature of the level of mental isolation is “a completion-stage practice that begins from the generation of the pristine wisdom of appearance derived from dissolving the winds in the indestructible drop at the heart. It arises through completely loosening the channel knots at the heart in dependence on the internal condition of serially contracting the winds through both vajra recitation and absorption and the external condition of vitality exertion utilizing a seal.
It extends up to but not including the attainment of the impure illusory body.”
To attain the level of mental isolation you need two conditions: 
The internal condition 
The external condition
The internal condition is that of serially contracting the winds through both vajra recitation and absorption
The external condition is that of vitality exertion utilizing a seal. 
In dependence on these two conditions you cause the channel knots at the heart to become completely loosened. As a result of that the winds enter, abide and absorb in the indestructible drop at the heart. Because of that then the pristine wisdom of white appearance arises. As soon as that pristine wisdom of white appearance arises you transfer from verbal isolation to the levels of mental isolation. 
In essence, you have to depend on these two conditions: the internal condition and external condition. In dependence on these conditions you cause the winds to absorb in the indestructible drop at the heart. When that happens then the pristine wisdom of white appearance is generated. When that occurs you are posited to have transferred to mental isolation. 
Seems that there is no difference between saying you transfer to mental isolation and you transfer to the level of mental isolation. So let’s check this point. 
Where this does extends to? 
It extends up to but not including the attainment of the impure illusory body. So after that you have attained like the pristine wisdom of white appearance but before you attain the impure illusory body, you are included in the level of mental isolation. You are included in mental isolation.  
During mental isolation, the four root winds and the five secondary winds all are absorbed into the indestructible drop.
During verbal isolation, the four root winds and five secondary winds are not able to absorb into the indestructible drop. However, during mental isolation, they are able to absorb in the indestructible drop.
The internal condition as mentioned here:
First of all, it involves vajra recitation. So that vajra recitation basically refers to the meditation on the light drop at the tip of the face. 
Secondly, this internal condition is actually called the serial contraction of absorption. 
This has two parts:
Apprehension of the entirety
Subsequent destruction. 
What is meant by this serial contraction of subsequent destruction? 
You first absorb the external celestial mansion of the inestimable mansion that you have meditated on. So you first absorb that inestimable mansion. 
After that, what left is you yourself generated as the deity. 
Then you also absorb yourself as the deity. So you absorbed into light. 
Finally, there is only HUM left. This letter HUM dissolves upward starting from the SHABKYU - this U vowel at the end and then moves up to the HA and at the head of the HA. 
Then the moon
Then the drop
Then the nada squiggle
Then everything dissolves into emptiness
So if you first absorb the inestimable mansion in the mandala and then absorb you yourself as the deity and in such stages is called subsequent destruction.
This significant of the word ‘subsequent’ there means after you absorb this celestial mansion and so forth, then you absorb yourself as the deity. 
The other kind of serial contraction involves what is called the apprehension in the entirety. This probably then involve just absorbing oneself and one does not absorb the inestimable mansion in the mandala.
Perhaps this apprehension in its entirety can refer to the celestial mansion and oneself generated as the deity absorbing at the same time. So then there is no sequence as in the case of subsequent destruction. So all at the same time; the celestial mansion and oneself as deity absorb into the letter HUM and then the letter HUM is also absorbed. But this is not very clear in the text. 
Khen Rinpoche: I haven’t remembered seeing this word. I don’t know.
There are two types of serial contraction or two types of stages of absorption:
Subsequent destruction where you first absorb in the inestimable mansion. Then you absorb oneself as the deity.
Apprehension in the entirety probably involves everything absorbing at the same time. 
I will check the text and let you know.
One of the conditions of attaining this mental isolation is vajra recitation and the serial contraction (stages of absorption). In this way you are able to meditate again and again and then create the condition for attaining mental isolation.
Seems like in Yangchen Galo’s text, he said that there is the utilization of the pervasive wind (pervading wind) in vajra recitation.
Seems like in Panchen Lobsang Chogyen’s text he also talks about the utilization of the pervasive wind in vajra recitation. 
Perhaps there are two types of pervasive wind:
Coarse 
Subtle
You are able to use the coarse one in vajra recitation whereas the subtle one cannot be used in the vajra recitation. This is something for us to think about. 
Both of these conditions have to be present. 
The external condition is that of vitality exertion utilizing a seal. When we see this word ‘seal’ (mudra in Sanskrit), we think of the action seal or the wisdom seal. 
Action seal (karma mudra) refers to an actual woman; a fully qualified woman, whereas the wisdom seal is not like that. 
Wisdom seal is a woman that is meditated upon. It can be like an emanated woman; something that you meditated upon.
Due to these two conditions being present then you are able to cause the winds to absorb into the indestructible drop at the heart. Due to this the pristine wisdom of white appearance is generated and that is the attainment of mental isolation.
Although Sun Illuminating the Profound Meaning states that you perform vajra recitation focusing on the pervading wind in order to newly generate mental isolation, that is not stated clearly in Illuminating Lamp and so on. Therefore seek the origin of that statement.
This text Sun Illuminating the Profound Meaning is probably by Panchen Lobsang Chogyen. In this text he says that in order to newly generate mental isolation you perform vajra recitation focusing on the pervading wind (pervasive wind), but this is not stated in the other texts.
In Lama Tsongkhapa’s Illuminating Lamp on the Five Stages, there is no such explanation saying that in order to newly generate mental isolation you perform vajra recitation focusing on the pervasive wind. Here the author is expressing this doubt: What is the origin? What is the source of Panchen Lobsang Chogyen’s assertion? 
According to The Grounds and Paths composedby Yangchen Galo, by meditating on the vajra recitation focusing on the pervasive wind then you can cause the winds to absorb into the indestructible drop. However, you are not able to absorb all of the pervasive wind in the indestructible drop when you first attain mental isolation. You are only able to absorb a portion of the pervading wind into the indestructible drop.
There are actually two levels of mental isolation:
Mere mental isolation 
Final mental isolation
When you first attained mental isolation, you attained mere mental isolation. So by practicing vajra recitation you are able to cause a portion of the pervasive wind to absorb in the indestructible drop and then cause the pristine wisdom of white appearance, red increase, and black near attainment to arise and finally you have clear light.
Therefore, when the internal and external conditions are complete then you are able to cause the four root winds plus a portion the pervasive wind, plus the five secondary winds to absorb in the indestructible drop.
You may wonder when the final mental isolation is attained.
In order to attain the final mental isolation, you also need the internal and external condition to be completed. Through these conditions, you cause all the winds, without exception, so not just a portion of the pervasive wind but all of the pervasive wind to also absorb in the indestructible drop as in the actual death process. So, all five root winds and all five secondary winds absorb into the indestructible drop as in the death process. This then will cause the pristine wisdom of white appearance to be generated. This will then lead to the example clear light. (The text translates it as semblance clear light).
Once you are able to attain this example clear light that is the final mental isolation, then immediately after that then you are able to arise as the impure illusory body. It is said once you have attained the impure illusory body, then definitely you will attain Buddhahood in this very life.
The action seal (karmamudrā)
The first debate: Relying on an action seal in order to generate the three types of pristine wisdom
A scholar asserts: To generate the three types of pristine wisdom of mental isolation, you must depend on an action seal, for this is the intention of The Five Stages, which states:
From among all illusory bodies, the female is the best illusory body.
The classification of the three types of pristine wisdom is clearly illustrated from that.
Khedrup Jé’s Notes states:
The three internal conditions are the three vitality exertions and especially vajra recitation, and the external condition is stated in The Five Stages from “From among all illusory bodies” up to “is clearly illustrated from that.” Thus you can generate the pristine wisdom of mental isolation in dependence on those external and internal conditions through vitality exertion utilizing a seal.
And:
Verbal isolation begins from first meditating on verbal isolation and extends up to but not including any appearance of the four empties through releasing all of the remaining channel knots at the heart without exception. To release all the remaining knots at the heart without exception, you must apply both the external and internal methods explained previously
Different scholars have different assertions. In this first debate we see a scholar who claims that in order to generate the three types of pristine wisdom of mental isolation you must depends on an action seal.
In order to support his assertion, he cites from two sources:
Arya Nagarjuna’s The Five Stages 
Khedrub Je’s Notes.
The first scholar says that in order to attain mental isolation you need to rely on an action seal. Now let’s see what the second scholar.
The second debate: Relying on an action seal during final mental isolation
A scholar asserts: It is the intention of The Five Stages that you must rely on an action seal to generate the three types of pristine wisdom of final mental isolation; but this does not apply to ordinary mental isolation, 
So according to this scholar, the intention of Nagarjuna’s The Five Stages is that:
If you want to attain final mental isolation you need to rely an action seal. 
If you want to attain mere mental isolation, you don’t need to rely on an action seal.
To support his assertion he cites several texts.
because Illuminating Lamp states:
To fully generate the three types of pristine wisdom of mental isolation that are the basis for accomplishing establish the basis of the illusory body, you need an external seal.
Jé Rinpoché states in his Notes on the Difficult Points of Guhyasamāja:
He who trains his mental continuum in the common paths, properly matures it through empowerment and fully purifies it by protecting the vows, then completes the yoga of single recall and attains the concentrations producing the three vajras, and finally enters the path of the two truths of the illusory body and clear light that are the proximate causes of manifesting both the dharma and form bodies in this life, he will discover great bliss due to a pure seal.
This is logically necessary because the name of the three isolations is applied to concentrations producing the three vajras of the completion stage and not to concentrations producing the three vajras of the generation stage. This is because they (alone) are said to be the cause of buddhahood in this life.
This scholar cited Je Rinpoche Lama Tsongkhapa’s text to prove his point that to attain final mental isolation you need an action seal and you don’t need action seal to attain mere mental isolation.
“This is logically necessary (meaning there is pervasion) because the name of the three isolations (namely physical isolation, verbal isolation and mental isolation) is applied to concentration producing the three vajras of the completion stage” - What is the meaning here? It is basically saying that if you want to attain Buddhahood in this life, you need to rely on an action seal.
This is basically saying that if you want to attain Buddhahood in this life, you have to train in these concentrations producing the three vajras. Those actually refer to the three isolations because the name of those three isolations is applied to use concentrations producing the three vajras. So then you have to train in physical isolation, verbal isolation and mental isolation. Where is this threshold where you need to rely on an action seal? That threshold or that boundary is the final mental isolation.
This scholar claims that if you want to attain final mental isolation, you would have to rely on an action seal. If you just want to attain mere mental isolation, you don’t need to. He cites these various texts to support his position. But as we saw, the first scholar claims that even if you just want to attain mere mental isolation, you need to rely on an action seal and he quotes text such as Nagarjuna’s The Five Stages.
Then a third scholar gives his assertions.
The third debate: Relying on an action seal in order to expedite the remaining phases of the completion stage
A scholar asserts: This text* does not teach the minimum threshold where reliance on an action seal becomes indispensable for attaining buddhahood in this life; rather it teaches the threshold where it becomes appropriate to engage in activities that enhance the completion stage. To utilize a seal, you must have obtained mental isolation, for Illuminating Lamp states just that.
* “This text” refers to Nagarjuna’s The Five Stages 
The fourth debate: Relying on an action seal to attain enlightenment in this life
A scholar asserts: The minimum threshold where you must definitely rely on an action seal to attain enlightenment in this life is attainment of the mental isolations, because Commentary to the Compendium of Vajra Pristine Wisdom states:
In this context the statement that the action seal and the three empties are certainly indispensable is made with the intention that fully generating the three empties of mental isolation capable of establishing the illusory body definitely relies on an action seal. Without it, though you may generate the three pristine wisdoms complete in some characteristics of mental isolation, you will be unable to generate them complete in all characteristics
I wonder whether these assertions reflect Jé Rinpoché’s intention. I raise them merely to stimulate analysis, since their resolution is difficult.
Basically, these debates arise from these explanations of the definitions of mental isolation that we have seen previously. So it says that to attain mental isolation you have to depend on internal conditions and external conditions. 
Now within the external conditions, we talked about vitality exertion utilizing a seal. This seal can be an action seal or a wisdom seal. So we are trying to pin-down what exactly is involved in this action seal.
According to one scholar, this action seal is necessary for the attainment of mental isolation; even for mere mental isolation. Another scholar says, “No” an action seal is not necessary for attaining mere mental isolation but it is necessary for attaining final mental isolation.
Most scholars think that Je Rinpoche Lama Tsongkhapa’s intention is that if you want to attain final mental isolation, you need to rely on an action seal. But there are different opinions. For example, Khedrup Norsang Gyatso says that in order to attain final mental isolation there is no need to rely on an action seal. You can just rely on a wisdom seal to attain final mental isolation. 
We have one more scholar assertion to go through. Let’s save that for next week.
Khen Rinpoche: See what he says