Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L71.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:16.133477
================================================================================

Today we are going to continue to discuss the levels of mental isolation, which is the 3rd stage. It is important for you to adjust your motivation. The minimum motivation you should have is that of wanting to make yourself understand what mental isolation is. You should be able to tell mental isolation is this and that and so on. So focus your mind and listen well. 
It is very important for you to have courage when you are engaging in studies. Therefore, you have this mental strength that thinks “I am going to understand this topic”. If you lack that kind of mental strength or courage, then it will be difficult for you to understand the material. 
As I have mentioned previously, the passages in the text are all related. If you have not understood the previous passages, then it will be difficult for you to understand the later passages. Therefore, you have to make sure that you follow the passages as we go along. 
From among the 6 stages of the completion stage:
we have completed the 1st which is physical isolation, 
we have completed the 2nd which is verbal isolation, 
today we are going to discuss the 3rd which is mental isolation. 
In order to know what mental isolation is or what is not mental isolation, you need to look at this definition. The definition says:
The nature of the level of mental isolation is “a completion-stage practice that begins from the generation of the pristine wisdom of appearance derived from dissolving the winds in the indestructible drop at the heart. It arises through completely loosening the channel knots at the heart in dependence on the internal condition of serially contracting the winds through both vajra recitation and absorption and the external condition of vitality exertion utilizing a seal.
It extends up to but not including the attainment of the impure illusory body.”
As we have gone through previously:
On the occasion of physical isolation (isolation of the body) through the force of meditation, you are able to cause the winds to enter the central channel from the secret place and it will go up to below the heart level. 
During the occasion of verbal isolation (isolation of the speech), the winds through the force of meditating on the three types of vitality exertion, the winds will be able to enter the central channel at the heart. 
During the occasion of mental isolation, one is able to cause the winds to enter in the indestructible drop at the heart. 
In order for all the winds, all the root winds and secondary winds, to enter the indestructible drop at the heart, one needs to have the internal conditions and external conditions. 
By internal conditions, we refer to two kinds of conditions:
Vajra recitation 
Serial contraction of absorption. There are two parts
Apprehension in its entirety
Subsequent destruction
So these are the internal conditions. 
What do we mean by serial contraction or the gradual withdrawal of the subsequent destruction? 
When we meditate on the mandala, we generate the celestial mansion (inestimable mansion). Then we generate the deities inside this mansion. Therefore, when we absorb the mandala, first we absorb the inestimable mansion and subsequent to that, as we have been generated as a deity, so which absorb ourselves as the deity. So the word subsequent refers to the fact that we absorb ourselves as the deity after or subsequent to absorbing the celestial mansion. 
What about the serial contraction of apprehension in its entirety? It seems like this mainly refers to absorbing oneself that has been generated as a deity. 
In the Illuminating Lamp of the Five Stages, there is no mention of absorbing the celestial mansion. So mainly refers to generating oneself as the deity previously and then absorbing that deity. Those are the two internal conditions. 
What are the external conditions? 
As stated in the definition, external condition is that of vitality exertion utilizing a seal.
There are two types of seals (mudras):
Action seal (karma mudra)
Wisdom seal. 
In terms of the action mudra (action seal), there are three types:
Field born action seal, 
Mantra born seal 
Innate seal. 
What do we mean by the innate action seal? (also translated as the simultaneously born action seal). The innate action seals are the seals that have attained meaning clear light (actual clear light).  
The field born action seals are those who have attained the three isolations – physical isolation, verbal isolation and mental isolation. If they abide in any of these three isolations, then the seal is a field born action seal (also called a field born messenger).
The mantra born action seals are those who abide on either the coarse or subtle generation stage. 
In the context of guru puja, when we make the secret offering, there is a stanza that talks about offering the innate seals, the field born seals and the mantra born seals. 
So through such meditations, eventually one will completely loosen the channel knots at the heart. So through such repeated meditations, the channel knots at the heart will be completely loosened and the winds will be able to enter the indestructible drop at the heart.
After the winds enter the indestructible drop at the heart, they will abide there and eventually they will absorb there or dissolve there. This will cause the pristine wisdom of white appearance to be produced. At that point, it is said that one has found the realization of mental isolation. 
When we say the winds absorb into the indestructible drop, this means that all the four root winds and the five secondary winds absorb into the indestructible drop. The remaining root winds called the pervading wind (pervasive wind), some scholars say that it absorbs while some scholars say that it does not absorb into the indestructible drop at the heart. 
Among the five root winds, the pervasive wind is the most difficult to gather into the indestructible drop because this is the wind that pervades all the joints. It is said this wind is very difficult to gather. In the beginning when one attains mental isolation, one is not able to absorb this wind. 
Scholars such as Yangchen Gawai Lodro says that during mental isolation, one is not able to cause all of the pervasive wind to absorb, but one is able to cause one part or one portion of the pervasive wind to absorb. 
To where does the level of mental isolation extend?  It extends up to but not including the attainment of the impure illusory body. So as soon as one attains the impure illusory body, one is no longer on the level of mental isolation. 
When one attains the impure illusory body, one is said to have transferred to the level of the illusory body from among the four levels of the completion stage. 
There are two types of mental isolation:
Mere mental isolation 
Final mental isolation. 
What is the difference between mere mental isolation and final mental isolation? This actually pertains to what we have just discussed. When you are able to absorb the five secondary winds, the four root winds and part of the pervasive wind into the indestructible drop at the heart, and the pristine wisdom of white appearance arise then at that point you have attained mere mental isolation. 
When do you attain final mental isolation? 
Through practising the internal condition of serially contracting the winds through vajra recitation and absorption and the external condition of vitality exertion utilizing a seal, you will eventually be able to cause all the five root winds and the five secondary winds without any remaining to enter into the indestructible drop at the heart. When that occurs, first there will be white appearance, follow by the red increase, follow by black near attainment, follow by clear light. That clear light is the metaphoric clear light (example of clear light) of mental isolation. That is when you attain final mental isolation. 
Khen Rinpoche: What you don’t understand must ask immediately. Based on definition, you look there, which part you don’t understand. Which part is not clear? If there is anything that is not clear, anything that you don’t understand, then just say it because that provides an opportunity for clarification. 
Student 1:  Do you practice both internal practice of vajra recitation and absorption simultaneously? Because when you absorb, you are completely dissolved into emptiness, and how do you do vajra recitation? Focusing on which part? 
Khen Rinpoche: When you first meditate on the supported and supporting mandala, you have to generate yourself as the deity. So you will be generated as this father and mother in union. You have to do the vajra recitation first between the two because if you do absorption then there is no more vajra recitation to do. Maybe it is like that. I’m not absolutely sure. 
Student 1: How do you do vajra recitation with respect to the different winds?
Khen Rinpoche: Previously we had this explanation of the different kinds of functions when we do this verbal isolation. When you are trying to establish these four actions: the feats of pacification, increase, power and wrath, you utilize the four main winds or the four root winds, you are not able to utilize the root winds called pervasive wind during verbal isolation. It is mentioned that during this time you are able to utilize the five secondary winds. It is said that you first utilize the four root winds and then after you are able to utilize them well then you can utilize the five secondary winds. 
To perform vajra repetition (vajra recitation), recall that you basically need to meditate on the light drop at the tip of the face. So that is the actual vajra recitation. At the time of the basis, our winds pass through the nostrils. During vajra recitation, you have to focus your attention on these winds. 
(Page 186 of the text) There are three occasions when completion stage practitioners perform vajra recitation, for it is said that
(1) they perform vajra recitation to establish the feats of pacification, increase, power, or wrath, through utilizing the four main winds, 
(2) they perform vajra recitation to establish the five higher perceptions of the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and body, through serially utilizing the five secondary winds—the moving wind and so forth,
(3) they perform vajra recitation to establish the empties of mental isolation after first establishing physical isolation, through initially using the four main winds and then having attained mastery over them, using the five secondary winds.
There is information on where each of the five root winds is located, what colors they are and which buddha of the five lineages they are related to and so on. These details are available. 
First of all, you have to understand the various states of these winds and then as you inhale, abide, and exhale, then you have to meditate on the tones of these winds as being indistinguishable entity from the tones of the three letters. 
Student 2: There are coarse and subtle pervasive winds. When you mentioned about the mere mental isolation, a portion of the pervasive wind will be absorbed during this stage. Can I simplify it as this portion is just the coarse pervasive wind or portion of both the coarse and subtle pervasive winds?
Khen Rinpoche: Perhaps it is simpler if we think of the pervasive wind as being of two types. One type is easier to absorb and the other type is more difficult to absorb. This difference arises because of the location of the winds. So the winds at certain locations are easier to absorb, the pervasive wind at certain locations are harder to absorb. The easier ones can be absorbed and one attains the mere mental isolation. When the harder ones are also absorbed, then one attains the final mental isolation that is the example of clear light (semblant clear light).
I haven’t seen explicitly this explanation of coarse and subtle pervasive winds in the text. It is not clear whether or not you can say that there are these two winds and one is absorb first and then the other one is absorb later. Perhaps you can just think in terms of one part which is easier to absorb and one part that is more difficult to absorb. 
Student 2:  With reference to the definition of mental isolation, there are internal conditions and external conditions. The internal conditions is vajra recitation and then the serially contraction of absorption. You just mentioned that in vajra recitation, there is no pervasive wind to be absorbed. Or am I mixing it up.
Translator: Basically you are asking if there is a vajra recitation of verbal isolation which is able to absorb just four root winds but not the pervasive wind and then there is another vajra recitation of mental isolation that is able to absorb all five root winds.

Student 2: Yes. Because it is included in the internal condition and I understand that you have to perform both the internal and external to achieve the result but nevertheless the vajra recitation is utilized in mental isolation. 
Khen Rinpoche: As we have mentioned previously, on the occasion of verbal isolation, which is the 2nd of the 6 stages of the completion stage, you practice the three types of vitality exertions. Among these, the actual verbal isolation is the meditation on the light drop at the tip of the face. That is the actual vajra recitation. When you are practicing vajra recitation, you utilize four root winds and five secondary winds. Panchen Losang Chogyen made it clear that the pervasive wind is not utilized during vajra recitation. 
A doubt can arise from the way the definition has been posited by Ngawang Palden in our text. When he states this definition, he talks about the pristine wisdom of appearance derived from dissolving the winds in the indestructible drop at the heart. He says dissolving the winds but he makes no mention of what kinds of winds these are. Are they the root winds, secondary winds or what winds? He does not mention. However, it is very clear in Yangchen Gawai Lodro’s text that the winds that are mentioned in this context are the four root winds plus the five secondary winds plus a portion of the pervasive wind. 
So here what we have to ask is during mental isolation, if it is indeed a case that a portion of the pervasive wind absorbs into the indestructible drop at the heart, does this arise through the force of vajra recitation? If there is such a vajra recitation observing a part or a portion of the pervasive wind and causing it to absorb into the indestructible drop, then this contradicts the statement by Panchen Losang Chogyen who says that there is no utilization of the pervasive wind at all during vajra recitation.
Khen Rinpoche: Oh sorry. I said different way. Oh wait, sorry. 
Correction - Panchen Losang Chogyen actually says that there is vajra recitation observing a portion of the pervasive wind. However, it is not clearly stated in Illuminating Lamp by Lama Tsongkhapa (see below). 
Although Sun Illuminating the Profound Meaning states that you perform vajra recitation focusing on the pervading wind in order to newly generate mental isolation, that is not stated clearly in Illuminating Lamp and so on. Therefore seek the origin of that statement.
According to Panchen Losang Chogyen, one performs vajra recitation focusing on all the winds - the 5 root winds and the 5 secondary winds. There is vajra recitation focusing on the pervasive wind in order to newly generate mental isolation. Whether or not it is actually like that, we don’t have all the details. If we try to examine this in great detail, it can actually cause some confusion. 
Khen Rinpoche: What I’m saying is that everybody so much interest then you discuss then it is best. Otherwise, you totally lost yourself what I’m talking. So sometimes what you need is just to point this, this, this, this this this don’t mix inside. Otherwise, you lost you don’t know how to go inside. I don't know which one is better. Of course, a lot you know every detail then it’s good, asking, go more deeper, why, what, why he said that, why he said that. There is a lot of detail inside. That’s important, very important to go deeply if possible. Of course, in order to do that you must have a lot, don’t forget what I said early. You forgot everything then you just one point, then I say something again totally lost. So like that. Whether you lost? Or no? After question answer you lost or you get more clear? I think you are lost more. That’s what I see. I don't know. First thing you get little bit, then after people ask question answer you totally lost yourself. That what I’m saying here. But that shouldn’t be lost. I mean of course that should go more deeper and more understanding but what I see you lost more. But again saying that, of course when I explain roughly you think “oh, I understand” but somebody asks this way question you finish, you don’t know. So that means you are not into deep understanding, just surface like that. 
In essence, what is mental isolation? By depending on outer and inner methods, you cause the winds to absorb in the indestructible drop at the heart. When that happens, then white appearance occurs. That is when you attain mental isolation. During mental isolation, we can probably say that one is pervaded by having realized emptiness. When the pristine wisdom of white appearance is produced, then one puts a stop to all the appearances of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness and one meditates by causing this bliss and emptiness to be indivisible. 
In terms of the etymology of this expression mental isolation (isolation of mind), you basically isolating the mind from ordinary appearances and ordinary adherences. By stopping those appearances of ordinariness and adherence to ordinariness, you transform the mind into the entity of the pristine wisdom of bliss and emptiness. I think we can say that that is the etymology of mental isolation. 
In the definition it is mentioned that one relies on the condition of vitality exertion utilizing a seal. Since there are two types of seal - action seal and wisdom seal - then the question comes, is it necessary to rely on an action seal? Then we have various debates that explore this point of whether or not an action seal is necessary. 
The first debate involves this scholar who asserts that in order to generate the pristine wisdom of mental isolation, you must rely on an action seal, and he cites Nagarjuna’s The Five Stages and uses that as proof that action seal is necessary. 
The action seal (karmamudrā)
The first debate: Relying on an action seal in order to generate the three types of pristine wisdom
A scholar asserts: To generate the three types of pristine wisdom of mental isolation, you must depend on an action seal, for this is the intention of The Five Stages, which states:
From among all illusory bodies, the female is the best illusory body.
The classification of the three types of pristine wisdom is clearly illustrated from that.
Another scholar asserts that in order to just attain mere mental isolation, you don’t need an action seal. But if you want to attain final mental isolation, you need an action seal. To support his assertion, he cites from Illuminating Lamp. 
The second debate: Relying on an action seal during final mental isolation
A scholar asserts: It is the intention of The Five Stages that you must rely on an action seal to generate the three types of pristine wisdom of final mental isolation; but this does not apply to ordinary mental isolation, because Illuminating Lamp states:
To fully generate the three types of pristine wisdom of mental isolation that are the basis for accomplishing establish the basis of the illusory body, you need an external seal.
There is also another assertion in which it is said that in order to attain this mental isolation, you just need to rely on the wisdom seal. You do not need to rely on the action seal at all. 
Most scholars seem to assert that in order to just attain mere mental isolation you do not need to rely on an action seal. However, if you want to attain the metaphoric clear light of final mental isolation, then you need to rely on an action seal. 
The fifth debate: Relying on an action seal from the early stages
A scholar asserts: It is unacceptable to state that the threshold where you must rely on an action seal is from the obtainment of mental isolation because 
(1) there are fully qualified persons who receive the actual third empowerment before they meditate on the two stages and 
(2) Secret Attainment states that if a beginner were to abandon the method of an external seal, he could not accomplish the innate bliss of the four joys by any other method.
Reply: That is not logically necessary* because the first reason is merely a possibility and not definite, 
*not logically necessary means no pervasion 
“the first reason” as stated earlier that “there are fully qualified persons who receive the actual third empowerment before they meditate on the two stages” is just a possibility and it is not definite to happen. 
We know that there are four initiations in Highest Yoga Tantra initiations:
vase initiation, 
secret initiation,  
wisdom initiation 
word initiation
During the 3rd initiation, it is possible for one to rely on an action seal but it is not definite. It is not absolutely necessary to rely on an action seal. 
and the second reason explains that you must rely on an action seal to insert the winds into the central channel at the time of the generation stage.
This refers to this text called Secret Attainment which says that you have to rely on the action seal at the time of the generation stage. 
This is a point that we have discussed previously. It is stated that on the generation stage it is possible to have the winds enter the central channel. However, this does not occur through the force of meditation. Rather, it occurs through the force of relying on a seal. 
The advantages and disadvantages of an external seal
A seal addresses multiple needs*, such as the need* for a special maturing agent of the roots of virtue that generate comprehension** of the completion stage by cultivating the bliss and emptiness of the generation stage, and the need* to easily facilitate the gathering of winds and so forth when meditating on the means to penetrate the vital points of the body of the generation completion stage. But it is stated that a seal and a yogi complete in all qualities is extremely rare. 
*needs also translated as purposes
** generate comprehension also translated produces realization 
The seal and yogi refers to the action seal and the meditator. 
It is said that if you do not practice properly, there is the great fault of falling to evil migrations. Therefore, it is best to complete the coarse and subtle levels of the generation stage with a pristine wisdom consort alone and then penetrate vital points of the body during the completion stage because such a path is capable of generating mental isolation, and these faults do not occur if you rely on an action seal after attaining mental isolation. 
[Since it is difficult to find fully qualified practitioners and consorts, engaging in consort practice can be dangerous and result in falling to lower rebirths. But such potential dangers do not detract fromthe general benefits of consort practice. There are three types of seal, namely (1) the action seal, (2) the pristine wisdom seal, and (3) the great seal. Since there is potential danger in relying on an action seal, you may utilize a pristine wisdom seal—that is, a visualized consort rather than actual, physical consort—during the coarse and subtle generation stages. When you attain mental isolation in reliance on a pristine wisdom seal, the dangers and disadvantages involved in utilizing an actual seal do not arise. Thus, this is a much safer practice.] This portion is part of commentary and not part of the text.
The passage is saying that it is risky to rely on an action seal (action consort) while on the generation stage. If the seal and the meditator (yogi) are not complete in all qualities, then there is this danger of creating the cause of falling into the lower realms. It is better to rely on wisdom seal (pristine wisdom consort) while one is on the generation stage. This means that you simply emanate this consort with your mind. Having gone through the coarse and subtle generation stage using a wisdom seal, then you move on to the completion stage. You practice physical isolation, verbal isolation and then mental isolation. When you have achieved final mental isolation, that is this metaphoric clear light, and you rely on an action seal at that point, then there is no danger. This is because on the occasion of mental isolation, you are able to absorb all the winds into the indestructible drop. At that point, if you were to rely on an action seal, then there is no danger that the white bodhicitta will be emitted. 
Lama Tsongkhapa then asserts that in order to attain this final mental isolation that is this metaphoric clear light (example clear light) you need to rely on an action seal. If you want to actualize that in this life, then you have to rely on an action seal. 
Lama Tsongkhapa did not rely on an action seal while he was alive. He showed this appearance of passing away and then during the bardo (intermediate state) then he actualizes this enjoyment body. In the biography of Lama Tsongkhapa, it is stated that he did not rely on an action seal before he passed away. There is a special purpose for him not relying on an action seal because he would contradict the rules of the vinaya. 
Entry, abidance, and dissolution of winds in the central channel
The sign of the winds entering the central channel due to meditating on gathering the winds is when the movement of breath from each nostril attains equal strength.
The sign of the winds abiding is that the movement from the nostrils ceases.
Although the movement from the nostrils is stopped and the winds abide internally, if they do not dissolve, it is said that the body may also deteriorate.
What are the signs of the winds having entered the central channel?
It is stated here that the movement of the breath from the nostrils become equal strength. Occasionally, we can have equal strength in the winds of our two nostrils. But to have it in a constant way, then it is the sign that the winds have entered the central channel. 
What is the sign of the winds abiding? 
As mentioned “Although the movement from the nostrils is stopped” means the movement from the nostrils ceases so the movement at the nostrils is severed; it is cut. I might have given a different explanation previously. But this explanation seems to be accurate here. 
“if they do not dissolve, it is said that the body may also deteriorate” - the word in Tibetan can be spelled slightly differently and it gives a completely different meaning. The word then would mean “full”. This means that if the winds abide but they do not dissolve or absorb, it is said that the body may become full. This means that, for example, your belly will become filled with winds and then give you hardship. 
Khen Rinpoche: Bloated. Become bloated. 
This really underscores the importance of relying on a fully qualified teacher. This is because if you were to do this practice, the winds enter, abide but they do not absorb, then you will run into difficulties. If there isn’t an experience teacher who has gone through the process to guide you, then you would meet obstacles in your practice. 
We have gone through the signs of the winds entering and abiding. 
What is the sign of the winds dissolving? 
This part we will read quickly because we have gone through these signs when I discussed how to bring death, intermediate state and rebirth into the path as the three Buddha bodies previously. 
Signs of the dissolution of the elements
The sign of dissolution* of the four elements of earth, water, fire, and wind as the former dissolves into the latter is the serial dawning of the appearance of a mirage, smoke, and fireflies in space. When wind begins to dissolve into appearance, an appearance like a burning butter lamp dawns.
* Dissolution or absorption 
The method of applying the dissolution of the twenty-five coarse phenomena to those should be understood from Explanation of the Graded Presentation and Final Resolution of the Four Interrelated Commentaries.
There are three assertions regarding these signs, namely that 
(1) they illustrate an increase in clarity from the former to the latter, 
(2) they measure the stability of the awareness possessing those signs, or 
(3) they arise with an appearance similar to a mirage and so on. 
From among them the latter is best.
Visions of appearance, increase, and near-attainment
When the natural conceptions along with their winds dissolve into white appearance, an appearance like moonlight pervading a vacuous autumn sky dawns. When white appearance with its winds dissolves into the red increase, an appearance like sunlight pervading the sky dawns. When red increase with its winds dissolves into near-attainment, an appearance like thick darkness pervading the sky dawns. When near-attainment with its winds dissolves into clear light, it is said that an appearance like the natural color of the sky free from the three polluting conditions dawns.
Terminology
Terms such as earth dissolving into water and so on or earth subsiding, water subsiding, and so forth are used. However, the meaning of earth dissolving into water is said to be that the potency of the earth element in your body to act as the support of consciousness subsides and then that potency transfers to water. This explanation should be similarly applied up to fire dissolving into wind.
Wind dissolving is said to be that the potency of the wind that directly moves the natural conceptions and acts as the mount of consciousness subsides, and its potency transfers to the wind of appearance. But it is impossible that all winds dissolve.
Also the natural conceptions dissolving into appearance indicates the decay of the power of the natural conceptions to hold their objects. Further you should understand that the four empties dissolve through the former dissolving into the latter.
The essential points of this section are that our body is made up of the aggregation of the four elements. What do we mean when we say that the earth element absorbs into the water element? 
The karmic potency of the earth element to support consciousness becomes exhausted so that the earth element is no longer able to support the consciousness. So the potency of the water element to support consciousness then becomes stronger. That is what we mean when we say the earth element absorbs into the water element. 
Similarly, when we say that the water element absorbs into the fire element, what we are saying here is that the karmic potency of the water element to support consciousness becomes consumed; become exhausted. So then the water element is no longer able to support consciousness; so the potency of the fire element to support consciousness then becomes stronger. This is the meaning of the water element absorbing into the fire element. 
Basically, when these elements absorb or dissolve, the consciousness loses its ability to hold the object, to apprehend the object, so that they are not able to experience the object. Eventually when wind absorbs into the consciousness, then the coarse consciousnesses no longer have the ability to apprehend the objects and they come to abide in the form of latency or some kind of imprints. 
The 80 natural conceptions are already subtler minds. As the consciousnesses becoming more subtle, then you have this natural conceptions which are probably mental consciousnesses. Their ability to hold their objects also deteriorate so that they are not able to apprehend their objects and then the 80 natural conceptions are said to absorb into white appearance. 
This means that when objects appear to us, they appear to our consciousnesses and our consciousness apprehends those objects, this is possible due to the karmic potency. When that karmic potency deteriorates and vanishes, then the consciousnesses lose their ability to apprehend objects. Then gradually we have the white appearance dawning, later the red increase and then after that the black near attainment and then after that the clear light of death. When we arise from the clear light of death, we arrive at the intermediate state.
States similar to actual dissolution
Explanation of the Stages of Actual Enlightenment states:
Indeed states similar to the earth dissolving into water and so on occur at the time of the basis during sexual union, when going to sleep, when fainting, and so on. 
We get these 8 signs also, for example, when we go to sleep but these are not the actual sign. These are the similitude of the signs.
They occur at the time of the path when first taking the third empowerment up to vajra recitation.
When do these states of similitude occur at the time of the path? When taking the 3rd initiation up to vajra recitation.
The actual states occur at the time of the basis during death, and they occur at the time of the path from the commencement of mental isolation.
Signs indicating the beginning of the process
Also the signs that arise from penetrating the vital points in the body are the signs of 
(1) the winds beginning to move inwardly after reversing their strong external movement from the doors of the sense faculties, 
(2) the winds subsiding to some extent, and 
(3) the winds entering the central channel to some extent, and so on. 
Illuminating Lamp states that there are many levels of specific signs of reversal and subsiding after establishing higher levels of the path.
Points of debate
Are the three states commencing from mental isolation actual states?
One says: It follows that any of the three states of white appearance, red increase, or near-attainment during mental isolation must be actual states, because their actual states commence from mental isolation.
Our reply is no pervasion.  This debate actually ensues from our assertion (on page 211) because our system says that these actual signs occur at the time of path from the commencement of mental isolation. That is our system. 
This person is saying that it follows that any of these 3 states: white appearance, red increase or near-attainment during mental isolation must be actual states. So, he is saying that there is pervasion but we are replying there is no pervasion. 
Reply: That is not logically necessary, because even though it is said that actual states commence from mental isolation, it is not said that any of the three types of pristine wisdom of mental isolation must be actual states. For although Ornament of Realization states that the signs of irreversibility occur from the Mahāyāna path of preparation on, it is not necessary that a practitioner of the Mahāyāna path of preparation attains the signs of irreversibility.
Also your assertion is unacceptable because, at the time of the path, all the karmic winds must dissolve in the indestructible drop at the heart as they do during the stages of death when actual white appearance, red increase, and near-attainment arise. In addition, many who are incapable of fully gathering the pervading winds to the heart nonetheless obtain mental isolation.
The essence of this debate is “When do you get the actual signs at the time of the basis?”
At the time of the basis, apart from during death, you will not get the actual signs. 
How about at the time of the path? During mental isolation, all the 5 root winds and 5 secondary winds absorb into the indestructible drop and then you can obtain the actual signs. But this does not mean that all the signs you obtain during mental isolation are the actual signs. Only the signs that you obtain during the final mental isolation will be the actual signs.
What you need to get out of this discussion is that to get the actual signs at the time of basis, this has to occur during death; not during other times. For these actual signs at the time of the path, they occur during final mental isolation.  
If you ask “What is the reason for the actual signs occurring only during final mental isolation; not prior to that?”
It is because it is only at final mental isolation that you are able to absorb all the winds into the indestructible drop as at the time of death. At the time of path, prior to this stage, you are not able to absorb all the winds into the indestructible drop as at the time of death.  This is the reason for saying that the actual signs occur at the time of basis only during death, and the actual signs at the time of path only at final mental isolation. 
This is what you need to hold in your mind as our own system’s position. Because if you don’t have even our own system’s position to hold on to, when we go through the debate, you will become completely confused.  
So you have to come to decisive conclusion in your mind “The actual signs occur at the time of basis only during death.  They occur at the time of the path only at the example clear light of final mental isolation.  They do not occur at other time”. 
You have to understand that, in order for this actual stage to occur, all the winds have to absorb.  If not all the winds absorb completely, then the signs that occur will not be the actual signs. 
Are the three derived from dissolution actual states?
One says: Any of the three states of white appearance, red increase, or near-attainment occurring during mental isolation must be actual states because any of the three states of white appearance, red increase, or near-attainment derived from the dissolution of the winds in the central channel at the heart must be actual states. For it says in Illuminating Lamp:
At the time of death they fully appear. At the time of sleep only semblant states appear, since the movement of winds from the nostrils is not reversed. At the time of the path, the winds dissolve through entering the central channel at the heart, and the actual states fully appear. When dissolution occurs at other sites, the full measure does not appear
Our system replies “You should investigate this matter”.
It is very clear in this citation from Lama Tsongkhapa’s Illuminating Lamp that says: At the time of the path, the winds dissolve through entering the central channel at the heart, and the actual states fully appear.”
Our system points out that this passage from Panchen Losang Chogyen that explains the intent of Lama Tsongkhapa when he explains these points. 
Reply: You should investigate this matter because Sun Illuminating the Profound Meaning states:
The three empties associated with such states at the time of the basis appear as actual states at the time of death and as semblant* states at the time of sleep. The actual states appear at the time of the path when you have attained final mental isolation, but prior to that similar states appear.
*Similitude
If you look at this explanation from Panchen Losang Chogyen, you can see that he points out that the actual states appear at the time of the path when you have attained final mental isolation and not just mere mental isolation. 
Then there is an explanation slight different from Khedrup Je
And it appears that it is commenting on the meaning of the text of Illuminating Lamp. Khedrup Jé’s Notes states that those occurring at the time of physical isolation and so on:
are the four actual empties, but they are not the four empties of mental isolation.
According to Khedrup Je’s explanation, when you meditate and through the force of your meditation cause the winds to enter, abide and absorb in the central channel, the signs will appear. According to Khedrup Je these are the actual signs. 
Different scholars have different assertions:
According to Khedup Je, those are the actual signs but 
According to Panchen Losang Chogyen, those are not the actual signs.
Do these pristine wisdoms combine bliss and emptiness?
One says: The three types of pristine wisdom at the time of the path must be pristine wisdoms of bliss and emptiness.
Reply: This is unacceptable because if the three types of pristine wisdom do not combine bliss and emptiness, it is said that the three states of white, red, and black appearance alone will dawn. Also meditation on uncommon bliss alone is praised as an amazing concentration, and it is said that bliss and emptiness cannot be applied in the unconscious state of near-attainment. These should be understood in detail from Illuminating Lamp.
This person says that there are 3 types of pristine wisdom at the time of the path and so on. The 3 types of pristine wisdom mentioned here are:
the pristine wisdom of white appearance, 
the pristine wisdom of red increase 
the pristine wisdom of black near attainment
Even though the pristine wisdom of clear light is not explicitly mentioned, it is included within these 3 types of pristine wisdom. 
Basically, this person is saying that any of these 3 types of pristine wisdom is pervaded by being the pristine wisdom of bliss and emptiness. 
Our system replies that there is no pervasion. If it is any of these 3 types of pristine wisdom, it is not has to be the pristine wisdom of bliss and emptiness.
When the winds absorb into the central channel, the pristine wisdom of white appearance is produced. This pristine wisdom of white appearance is not different in entity from bliss. When the pristine wisdom of white appearance is generated, it is not necessary i.e. there is no pervasion that it is generated in the nature of bliss. If it is not combined with bliss then it is simply white appearance.
There is like an occasion where we correlate the various sets. For example, when we talk about white appearance, we also talk about empty, we also talk about the joy among the 4 joys. So there are certain contexts in which these all are combined together and spoken about. Similarly, in terms of practice when the red increase arises then we talk about also great empty occurring and then supreme joy occurring. But it is not necessary that they arise together in such a neat way. For example, it is possible for white appearance to arise first, follow by joy. It is also possible for joy to arise first, follow by white appearance.
For example, in someone it is possible that due to the winds gathering in the central channel, the white appearance arises. Then it is possible that due to the melting of bodhicitta, joy arises. It is possible that in the person that this bodhicitta melts first giving rise to joy and then afterwards the winds gather and give rise to white appearance. It is not definite that white appearance arises first or joy arises first. The sequence is not definite.
There is one other debate remaining in the middle of page 216. That debate is quite complicated. You should go back and read it. Next week, I will explain it. We would able to conclude mental isolation soon and then next week we can start on the illusory body.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, now we will achieve the illusory body very soon. Mental isolation complete. 
Questions and Answers:
Student3: The correct time to rely on the action seal where one will not incur any fault is the time where one attain the final mental isolation or just a mere mental isolation?
Khen Rinpoche: Final mental isolation
Student 4: How do we understand consciousness and wind is one entity not two?
Khen Rinpoche: Can you rephrase?
Translator: Are you asking why is the example clear light indivisible with bliss?
Student 4: Not really saying that.  Maybe the meaning clear light itself. Not the example clear light because the yogi still has not realized it directly…
Khen Rinpoche: Tell your point.
Student 4: The forward processes there are not single entity. Mind of increase, appearance of increase, near attainment are not one entity yet when it comes to clear light, they are supposed to be one entity.
Khen Rinpoche: What do you mean one entity? Which and which?
Student 4: Clear light
Khen Rinpoche: Clear light and who?
Student 4: Clear light and the winds. Means most subtle wind and most subtle mind, they are indivisibly one entity by nature. How does one understand that? Because consciousness and form are mutually exclusive, yet consciousness and form at the most subtle level are not a dichotomy. That is my point. Not mutually exclusive.
Khen Rinpoche: Wind and mind are mutually exclusive yet they are one entity. Like in the Sutra system, we talk about the two truths: ultimate truth and conventional truth. They are mutually exclusive but they are one entity.
Student 4: Therefore the purpose of mental isolation is to isolate the way from this being separate? I am not very sure. To isolate from the ordinary mind and wind as separate? Is that the purpose of mental isolation? Eventually the yogi realizes that it is one entity, so the purpose of mental isolation is to isolate from seeing them as not? As ordinary and not one entity, is that the purpose?
Khen Rinpoche: What?
Translator: Are you saying that the purpose of mental isolation…?
Khen Rinpoche: Your question is not rephrase, I don’t know what you really want to know. So, I don’t know.
Translator: I think you are wondering about the purpose of mental isolation - is it through stop the kind of conception thinking that the clear light mind and the wind of the clear light mind are not one entity?
Student 4: Ya, maybe.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the essential purpose of mental isolation? We must understand that the very subtle wind is responsible for us circling in samsara. It is also responsible for us attaining nirvana. What do we want to do in mental isolation? Basically, we want to generate this very subtle mind in the nature of bliss and then use that to realize emptiness. In order to attain this union of no more learning, you need to generate its main cause. The main cause is to generate the very subtle mind in the nature of bliss and use that very subtle mind to realize emptiness. Without doing that, it is not possible for you to unify body and mind to attain union. Therefore, you have to cultivate this main cause of union which is generating the very subtle mind into the nature of bliss and then using that to realize emptiness.
You want to attain the state of union in which the body and mind are unified. In order to attain such an indivisible union of body and mind at the time of the result, you have to also cause this indivisible body and mind to arise during the time when you are practicing the path. With this example clear light of final mental isolation, you create the cause of the dharma body – dharmakaya. The wind that is the mount of this mind –the example clear light of final mental isolation - then becomes the cause of the form body –rupakaya. So, it is through such a practice at the time of the path then you are able to attain the indivisible union of the dharmakaya and rupakaya at the time of the Buddhahood. The essential purpose of cultivating mental isolation is to generate the very subtle mind into the entity of bliss and using that to meditate on emptiness. Because that will lead to the attainment of the example clear light of final mental isolation. Then when we talk about pristine wisdom of indivisible bliss and emptiness, you should understand that it refers to this cultivation.
Student 5: What is Khedrup Je’s explanation to qualify what are the 4 actual empties and what are not the 4 actual empties?
Khen Rinpoche: So, what do want to know now? Why Khedrup Je said that? Your main question is that why Khedrup Je said that isn’t it? Ask like that. When you ask question, first you prepare then ask here. One sentence you can ask what you want to know. Why Khedrup Je said that, there is no reason? That is why I mean, question sometimes make short. Then after that, simple then no clear then you come more. First your question so long, I don’t know what you people asking also.
According to Khedrup Je, when the winds enter, abide and absorb in the central channel, the signs appear. These are the actual signs according to Khedrup Je. But when the winds enter the central channel during physical isolation and cause these signs to appear. These signs are not exactly like the signs that appear during mental isolation due to the winds absorbing into the indestructible drop. This is because the winds are absorbed at different locations. Khedrup Je is saying that as long as winds absorb into the central channel and the signs appear, those signs are actual signs. But according to Panchen Losang Choygen that is not sufficient because the winds need to absorb in the indestructible drop in order for the signs that appear to qualify as the actual signs. That is all due to this point and so if you are able to hold on to that, you should understand what this is all about.
That is just a little bit left to mental isolation. So please read the remaining part of that text and then when I give explanation next week, the meaning will become clear.