Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L72.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:16.953282
================================================================================

We are in the middle of the section that discusses the cultivation of mental isolation. In that context there is also explanation of the practise of the three vitality exertions. Those three vitality exertions are:
Meditation on the mantra drop at the tip of the heart, 
Meditation on the light drop at the tip of the face
Meditation on the substance drop at the tip of the secret place.  
In the 1st of the vitality exertions, you meditate on the mantra drop at the tip of the heart. 
You visual a syllable such HUM or AH in the center of the indestructible drop at your heart
Then you focus on that
Through such meditation you are able to cause the winds to gather and enter the central channel at the heart. 
You have to cause the winds to enter, abide and absorb in the central channel. Mainly, you need to cause the winds to absorb into the central channel. When that happens, you generate the exalted wisdom of white appearance. Then you are said to have generated the realization of verbal isolation.
Having first done the practices of the vitality exertion, then you can later engage in meditating on the mental isolation. That actually involves:
the internal condition of vajra recitation and the stages of absorption 
the external condition of vitality exertion of utilization a seal.  
Through such condition you are able to cause most of the winds to enter into the indestructible drop at the heart.  When that occurs, the exalted wisdom of white appearance is produced. Then you are said to have realized mental isolation.
In the beginning you are able to absorb most of the wind into the indestructible drop. That means you are able to absorb the four root winds (the 5 root winds minus the pervasive wind) and also the 5 secondary winds into the indestructible drop and then cause the exalted wisdom of white appearance to arise.
Accordingly to Yangchen Gawai Lodro:
When you first attained mental isolation, you are able to cause a portion of the pervasive winds to absorb into the indestructible drop. When you are able to do that, then you have attained a mere mental isolation.  
When you are able to absorb all the 5 root winds as well as the secondary winds into the indestructible drop at the heart and cause the exalted wisdom of white appearance to arise then you have attained final mental isolation. That is also referred to as special mental isolation.
After the initial discussion, there is a kind of discussion of whether the action mudra is needed.  This is because it is stated that the external condition of mental isolation is vitality exertion of utilizing a seal.  The seals are of 2 types: 
Action seal 
Wisdom seal.  
Different scholars then present their assertions on whether or not an action seal is necessary in order to attain mental isolation. 
There is one explanation that says: “Yes, you need an action seal. You need to rely on an action seal in order to attain mental isolation”. 
Another scholar then says: “If you are just aiming to achieve mere mental isolation, you don’t need to rely on an action seal.  But if you want to attain final mental isolation in this life then you must rely on an action seal”.  
A third kind of opinion says: “Well, in order to attain mental isolation, whether mere mental isolation or final mental isolation, you don’t need to rely on an action seal as just a wisdom seal is sufficient for you to attain the example clear light of mental isolation”.  
Most scholars asserted the 2nd position that we have mentioned earlier meaning that if you want to attain the example clear light of final mental isolation in this life, you need to rely on an action seal.  
It is said that if you want to attain this realization of mental isolation, in which most of the winds absorb into the central channel, and if you were to rely on action seal at that point, there will not be many drawbacks. Prior to attaining mental isolation, if you were to try to rely on an action seal while you are on the generation stage, then it is risky because if you are not fully qualified or the action seal is not full qualified then there is danger of falling into the lower realms.
We have went through some points of debate. One of these debates has to do with the three states of white appearance, red increase and near black attainment.  
On page 213 (Points of debate - Are the three states commencing from mental isolation actual states?): 
For example, during physical isolation, these three states arise. Similarly, during verbal isolation, the three states of white appearance, red increase and near black attainment also arise.  
Then question arises: Are these the actual state?
The reply from our system is basically not necessarily.
What we need to think about here is the criteria for the three states being the actual state. In order for these three states to be the actual state, they must occur as a result of all the winds - all the 5 root winds and the 5 secondary winds - absorbing into the indestructible drop as they occur at the time of death.  In order for these three states to be the actual state, you must satisfy the conditions that all the winds absorb into the indestructible drop at the time of the path in the same way it occur at the time of death and thus causing white appearance, red increase and near black attainment to arise.
Accordingly to the author of this text Ngawang Palden, the three states that occur:
at the time of physical isolation, 
at the time of verbal isolation and 
at the time of mere mental isolation 
are NOT the actual state. They are merely similitudes.
During body isolation (physical isolation), during verbal isolation, we also use the terminology such as the three empties, the three exalted wisdoms and so on.  Why is it that we do not say the four empties, for example, by including clear light?  Why do we just say three empties?  This is because on this occasion, clear light is included within the near black attainment. 
This means that during physical isolation, verbal isolation and mental isolation, we include clear light within near black attainment. There are two reasons for doing so:
One reason is that the clear light during such stages is conceptual.  
Second reason is that clear light can be taken to mean meaning clear light or the actual clear light.  
According to Khedrup Je’s assertion, when the winds enter, abide and absorb into the central channel and the three exalted wisdoms as well as the clear light arise, these are the actual state; they are not just similitudes.  
Different scholars have different assertions. There are assertions contain points for us to reflect on.  So be good to be aware of their various assertions.  
Are the four joys the four empties of mental isolation?
One says: None of the four descending and ascending joys are the four empties of mental isolation because Sun Illuminating the Profound Meaning states:
During mental isolation, the four joys of the reverse order that are by nature clear light are not posited as distinct from the four joys of the forward order drawing in the that gather winds and bodhicitta from the upper and lower parts of the body are posited, because if they were posited in that way, then bodhicitta must be posited in separate stages from the heart, and if that were so, the winds would move whereas the four joys of the reverse order that are by nature clear light are not posited. If one posits the reverse order in that ways of positing the four joys then it must be posited that bodhicitta expands out in stages from the heart. If that were so, the winds will moves. 
What is this point all about? Basically during mental isolation you have the ascending joys and the descending joys. 
Regarding the descending joys, are these the four empties or not?  
As for the ascending joys are these the four empties?   These are the questions.  
Regarding the joys of the reverse forward order, we would say “Yes, they are the four empties”.
But the question is: We have no doubt with the forward order but when you have the four joys of the reverse order, are these the four empties? 
The question is: Do these ascending joys, descending joys, empties exist during mental isolation?  
According to this answer here it seems to be saying that you do not have the ascending joys i.e. the joys of the reverse order.
Reply: This should be examined because Illuminating Lamp states:
If you are capable of generating the empties from the stages of dissolution that gather the winds and bodhicitta at the heart, then you are capable of both activating the descending and ascending joys and inducing the special empties through gathering them at the heart and expanding them outward in stages from separate external stages, having gathered them at the heart.
In the Illuminating Lamp, Lama Tsongkhapa seems to be saying that they actually exist.  
According to Lama Tsongkhapa, he is saying that “you are capable of both whether it is the descending joys or ascending joys”. 
There is another text called the Cluster of Siddhis of Attainment of the Completion Stage.  
Can the three appearances be posited as innate joy?
And Cluster of Siddhis states:
It is explained that white appearance, red increase, and black near-attainment of the reverse order cannot be pristine wisdom of clear light, but the other three joys of the reverse order are posited as innate. So, too, the three states of white appearance, red increase, and black near-attainment of the forward order are posited as the three joys, but they are not posited as innate joy. However, it is clear that there are times when the three descending joys of the forward order are posited as innate joy.
But these statements alone do not appear to clarify the issue.
The abbreviated advice recorded in Jé Rinpoché’s Collected Works states:
Without the winds arising, the four ascending joys occur at the conclusion of the four descending joys, and the four descending joys occur at the conclusion of the four ascending joys, following in succession.
And:
The four descending joys that occur without arising from the ascending joys are greater in bliss than the former ascending joys, and these four must be posited as innate joy. The four descending joys generated after arising from the ascending joys are greater than the former, but there is no certainty that these four are innate joy.
And:
Through the strength of meditation joining bliss and emptiness at the time of innate ascending joy, the former winds do not arise, and some of the coarse pervading winds, not previously gathered, gather. Through that they enter, abide, and dissolve, inducing the four descending and ascending joys.
Since Jé Rinpoché stated that these points are extremely difficult to comprehend, those with intelligence should analyze them in detail. 
When the winds absorb into the central channel, then white appearance, red increase, black near attainment and clear light will arise. 
We say that there are these four minds:
White appearance, 
Red increase, 
Black near attainment 
Clear light.  
We also use the terminology the minds of:
Empty, 
Great empty, 
Very empty 
Clear light. 
These minds of white appearance, red increase and so on, are mainly posited due to these winds absorbing in the central channel. Due to the stages of the wind absorbing, we have these minds white appearance, red increase and so on.  When you have these four minds of white appearance, red increase and so on occurring, we also have the minds of empty, great empty and so on occurring.  At the same time there are also the four joys:
Joy, 
Supreme joy, 
Special joy 
Innate joy. 
While these minds of white appearance and so on and the four empties and the four joys maybe generated at the same time, there is no necessity that they must be produced at the same time.
The four joys are produced as a result of bodhicitta melting.  Due to bodhicitta melting, you have the feeling of physical bliss (bliss of the body) and using that as a condition, you get this mental bliss which is the feeling of bliss directing you in the retinue of the mental consciousness.
This depends on the person. This is because in certain person, it is easier for the winds to enter than for the bodhicitta to melt.  In such person where it is easier for the wind to absorb in the central channel, then they will attain the empties first. Because the bodhicitta is difficult to melt, they will obtain the joy later.  But you can have another type of person in which it is easier for the bodhicitta to melt than for the wind to absorb.  In such person where it is easier for the bodhicitta to melt, then they will obtain the four joys first and then obtain the four empties later because it is more difficult for the winds to absorb in them. So then there is no definite sequence. They can occur at the same time, and they occur at different time. 
These four joys can occur in different sequence. You can have the four joys of the forward order and four joys of the reverse order.
What we mean by these joys of the forward order and reverse order? 
The four joys of the forward order occurs when the bodhicitta descends
When the winds enter the central channel and the bodhicitta melts,
From the crown to the throat, joy is generated.  
From the throat to the heart, supreme joy is generated
From the heart to the navel, special joy is generated 
From the navel to the secret place, innate joy is generated
The four joys of the reverse order occur when the bodhicitta ascends:
From the secret place to the navel, joy is generated 
From the navel to the heart, supreme joy is generated 
From the heart to the throat, special joy is generated 
From the throat to the crown, innate joy is generated
Let me first repeat what we have said. 
The forward order refers to the descending joys. 
When the bodhicitta descends from the crown to the throat, we generate joy. 
When the bodhicitta descends from the throat to the heart, we generate supreme joy. 
When the bodhicitta descends from the heart to the navel, we generate special joy.
When the bodhicitta descends from the navel to the secret place, we generate innate joy.
You have to understand and think about these joys in terms of the reverse order and the forward order. The forward order is actually descending, the reverse order is ascending. 
We can also talk about the four empties in a forward order and reverse order. 
Forward order means white appearance to red increase, red increase to black near-attainment and then black near-attainment to clear light. 
Reverse order means from clear light to black near-attainment, from black near attainment to red increase, from red increase to white appearance. 
Forward order: White appearance  red increase  black near-attainment  clear light
Reverse order: Clear light  black near-attainment  red increase  white appearance 
First of all you have to understand what is meant by forward order and reverse order. 
When we say the four empties of the forward order you should know what that means. 
When we say four empties of the reverse order again you have to know what that means.
According to Panchen Losang Chogyen (page 216), he seems to be saying that during mental isolation there are the four joys of the forward order but there are no four joys of the reverse order. According to his explanation, if the four joys of the reverse order were to exist then the bodhicitta would expand out in stages from the heart, and in that case the winds should move. According to him explicitly literally it seems to be saying that there are no four joys of the reverse order. 
However if you look at Lama Tsongkhapa’s Illuminating Lamp (page 217), he clearly says that it is possible to have both the joys of the forward order and the joys of the reverse order. From his statement (page 217) it seems that he is saying that there are the four joys of the forward order as well as the four joys of the reverse order during mental isolation. 
Then in the other text, the Cluster of Siddhis, maybe this is Chakrasamvara text and maybe Heruka commentary by Lama Tsongkhapa, there it is said very clearly: “It is explained that white appearance, red increase, and black near-attainment of the reverse order cannot be pristine wisdom of clear light” 
So it is clearly stated that the mind of white appearance, red increase and black near attainment are not the exalted wisdom of clear light. 
This same citation stated “…but the other three joys of the reverse order are posited as innate”.
What are the three joys? If we take out innate joy then we are left with joy, supreme joy and special joy. So this is saying that these three joys - joy, supreme joy and special joy - are posited as innate joy. 
The last bit that we have just read is saying that the three joys - joy, supreme joy and special joy - can be innate joy. 
How about the ones of the forward order? The same citation stated “So, too, the three states of white appearance, red increase, and black near-attainment of the forward order are posited as the three joys, but they are not posited as innate joy”. Basically it is saying that the three joys - joy, supreme joy and special joy - of the forward order are not posited as innate joy but those three joys of the reverse order can be posited as innate joy. Having said that, in general, that these three joys of the forward order are not posited as innate joy, and there are times when the three descending joys of the forward order are posited as innate joy. 
This is saying when we first generate mental isolation the four joys are produced in the forward order. So it is said that the first three joys of the forward order cannot be innate joys. 
After one produces these four joys of the forward order, then one generates innate joy. 
So immediately after that then one will generate the four joys of the reverse order. So it is said that all four joys of the reverse order are innate joys. 
Then the joys that are produced after that are then all innate joys as well. 
This is why at the end of the same citation says: “However, there are times when the three descending joys of the forward order are posited as innate joy”. 
This last part is saying that it is clear and it is obvious there are such times. This is because first you have the forward order follows by the reverse order. After the reverse order then you have another forward order. During this third phase, you have the four joys of the forward order again. This time round the four joys can be posited as innate joy. 
On page 218 the author is pointing out that these statements alone do not appear to clarify the issue. So what you need to look at to clarify the issue is to look at the abbreviated advice recorded in Je Rinpoche’s Collected Works. If you look at the explanation there, you will have a clear idea which of the joys - ascending or descending - is innate. 
Let’s go through what is stated in Lama Tsongkhapa’s text. He says: “Without the winds arising, the four ascending joys occur at the conclusion of the four descending joys, and the four descending joys occur at the conclusion of the four ascending joys, following in succession.
And:
The four descending joys that occur without arising from the ascending joys are greater in bliss than the former ascending joys, and these four must be posited as innate joy.
This last part is saying that if you compare the four descending joys and the four ascending joys, the four descending joys are greater in bliss than the former ascending joys. 
After that the citation says: The four descending joys generated after arising from the ascending joys are greater than the former, but there is no certainty that these four are innate joy.
The citation goes on to say: Through the strength of meditation joining bliss and emptiness at the time of innate ascending joy, the former winds do not arise, and some of the coarse pervading winds, not previously gathered, gather. Through that they enter, abide, and dissolve, inducing the four descending and ascending joys.
This is saying that when the four joys of the forward order occur, you will obtain the 4th joy which is innate joy, and there you have to meditate single-pointedly on emptiness. You join bliss and emptiness then you meditate. Without arising from that you can cause some of the coarse pervading winds that have not previously gathered, gather.  
The point is that through these joys being produced when you have this 4th joy, innate joy, you have to place yourself in meditative equipoise on bliss and emptiness. As a result of that the former winds will not arise and the coarse pervading winds will gather. Because of that, eventually you will be able to generate the four descending joys and the four ascending joys. 
To summarize, what you have to do is to initially produce the four joys. At the 4th joy you place yourself in meditative equipoise of bliss and emptiness. This 4th joy is innate joy. Within that meditative equipoise you are able to cause some of the coarse pervading winds to gather. Within that state of meditative equipoise all the joys that are produced, whether ascending or descending, are all innate joys. 
However, if you have a different situation, say:
you generate the four joys and
at the 4th joy you meditate on emptiness,
Then you get out of your meditation session and
you re-enter your meditation and you generate the joys again. 
When you do that there is no necessity that the joys you have generated are all innate joys. However, if you were to stay within that state of meditative equipoise without arising, meaning after you generate the four joys and when you reach the innate joy, you meditate on emptiness, and within that same meditative equipoise you generate the joys again. So all of them will be innate joy, and you will generate greater and greater bliss. The bliss will not become reduce. 
However, if you were to get out of that session, you arise from that meditative equipoise and then afterwards you return to it, you may generate the ascending joys again. Then it is not necessary that those joys are of a greater bliss than the joys in the previous meditative equipoise session.
The last part of the citation states: Since Jé Rinpoché stated that these points are extremely difficult to comprehend, those with intelligence should analyze them in detail. 
From our reading this seems to be what it is saying but these points are very difficult. You have to pay attention to these phrases that occur in the explanation. For example, in the beginning in the abbreviated advice from Lama Tsongkhapa’s Collected Works which mentioned “Without the winds arising’ and then subsequently in the next paragraph “The four descending joys that occur without arising from the ascending joys…” Again the qualification is significant. It doesn’t just say the four descending joys, it says “The four descending joys that occur without arising from the ascending joys…”. In the third passage, it talks about the “meditation joining bliss and emptiness at the time of innate ascending joy” so these phrases have significance that you need to reflect on. 
Student 1: When we have the first forward order, white appearance, red increase, black near-attainment, clear light and then when we have the reverses order and so on, all said to be innate joys. So would the appearance when the innate joy is reversing and then subsequently forward again, and then reverse, would that be always clear light? 
Khen Rinpoche: There was a passage that says that you cannot posit all these winds as clear light mind. On page 217, there is citation from the Cluster of Siddhis of Completion Stage which says: 
It is explained that white appearance, red increase, and black near-attainment of the reverse order cannot be pristine wisdom of clear light…
So the pristine wisdom of clear light is subtle mind so it will not become coarser in the sense of becoming the mind of black near-attainment, mind of red increase and so on. That sentence goes on to say: … but the other three joys of the reverse order are posited as innate. 
On page 218, we saw “If you have already generated the innate joy and you do not arise from the meditate equipoise, then all the joys you have subsequently produced will all be innate joys.
Student 1: The appearance would be all the way not necessarily clear light? 
Khen Rinpoche: It is clear that the minds of white appearance, red increase, and black near-attainment of the reverse order are not clear light mind. As mentioned earlier the mind of joy and the minds of white appearance, red increase, and so on do not necessarily pair up and occur at the same time.
Student 1: When the white bodhicitta melts down and giving rise to the four empties or four joys, should I be thinking white bodhicitta when it melts down to clear light innate joy clear light all empty stage would be stay at the point at the lower end of the opening of the channel? Or when it ascending it goes up again, would that bodhicitta stay in the heart or goes up again to the crown? 
Khen Rinpoche: During the generation stage, you imagine generating the four joys. Now, in this context of mental isolation, you are able to actually cause most of the winds to absorb into the indestructible drop at the heart. You then draw this bodhicitta upwards, for example, from the secret place to the navel, the navel to the heart and so on, all the way up to the crown.
Your question can be answered by the relevant passage on page 217 with the citation from Lama Tsongkhapa’s Illuminating Lamp where it says: If you are capable of generating the empties from the stages of dissolution that gather the winds and bodhicitta at the heart, then you are capable of both activating the descending and ascending joys and inducing the four special empties through gathering them at the heart and expanding them outward in stages. 
I remember seeing somewhere an explanation that talks about how it is not necessary to generate the four joys through the procedure that we have explained, namely drawing the bodhicitta from the secret place to the navel, and from the navel to the heart and so on. This other method involves moving the winds in the petals at the heart chakra. The heart chakra or the heart channel wheel has 3 levels. Then emanating from this heart chakra are many petals, what we call channel petals. By expanding this bodhicitta outwards and then withdrawing them inwards, one can also cause the four joys to arise. 
I saw an explanation that explains that at your heart chakra called the wheel of phenomenon there are 8 petals and you can emanate the bodhicitta outwards, you can withdraw the bodhicitta inwards and generate the joys. 
Student 2: In what ways are the channel knots at the heart different from the heart channel wheel? Is there a common locus between the channel knots at the heart and the heart channel wheel? 
Khen Rinpoche: The channel knots and the channel wheels at the heart are different. That is because what we mean by channel knots at the heart are actually the left channel and the right channel encircling the central channel. If we consider the left channel and right channel together, they encircling the central channel, then we can call them three knots. But if we consider the left channel and the right channel separately, then we would say that there are six knots at the heart. 
When we say that there are 8 channels petals at the heart, what is the structure of these eight petals? Basically emanating from the heart wheel, the channel wheel at the heart, there are four petals in the four cardinal directions. Then you have the north, south, east, and west. From each of these, a channel splits out into the intermediate direction. So this is how you get eight petals at the heart.
Student 2:  Then is there a common locus between the channel knots at the heart and the heart channel wheel?
Khen Rinpoche: No.
Student 2:  To loosen the channel knots at the heart, is it sufficient for the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel at the heart?  Must the winds also enter, abide and dissolve in the left central channel and the right central channel that intertwined at the central channel at the heart in order to loosen the channel knots at the heart.
Khen Rinpoche: Make short of your question.
Student 2:  To loosen the channel knots at the heart, is it sufficient for the winds to only enter, abide and dissolved in the central channel at the heart? Does it involve the left and right channel also?
Khen Rinpoche: Actually, the winds always flow in the left and right channel. So don’t need effort for that.
Student 2:  Thank you. Why do the wisdom of the empty arise when the wind enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel?
Khen Rinpoche: You meditate on that. You can meditate why it arise.
Khen Rinpoche: When you have many coarse winds flowing in the left and right channels then many conceptualization arise. Through meditation we are able to direct winds into the central channels. As a result of that, you are able to reduce the amount of conceptualization and cause the appearance of voidness to arise.
Student 2:  Then what are the names imputed on the minds that are mounted on the winds that enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. Because the minds are actually mounted on the wind, so what are the names that are imputed to the minds that are mounted on the winds that enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel? 
Khen Rinpoche: The winds that enter, abide and absorb in the central channel have certain minds that are mounted on them. So these minds are basically the minds that we have been talking about. The mind of white appearance, the mind of red increase, the mind of black attainment and so on.
Student 2:  As the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel, the winds get progressively subtle. Since the wind is the mount of the mind, does the individual wisdom of the empties correspond to the individual winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel?
Translator: You are asking whether the mind of four empties corresponds to winds that enter, abide and absorb in the central channel.
Student 2:  It is more on the wisdom of the three empties corresponds to the wind entering, abiding and dissolving.
Translator: You are saying that when the winds enter then this corresponds to the mind of empty. When the winds abide this corresponds to the wind of the great empty. When the wind absorb, this corresponds to the mind of very empty. 
Student: Something like that.
Khen Rinpoche: No.
Student 2: No? Then what is the reason for that?
Translator: Rinpoche is saying that he had already explained this. He says that if you are asking about this, then it is a sign that you did not listen.
Student 2: Can I ask question regarding verbal isolation? 
Khen Rinpoche: We are at mental isolation now.
Student 2: After the wisdom of the empty are generated, does the person immediately arise into the post meditative equipoise?
Khen Rinpoche: There is no need to arise immediately you can sit there and meditate for a while.
In fact on page 218 in Lama Tsongkhapa’s abbreviated advice, he talks about how without arising then you continues to meditate and then the joys will all be innate joys. So there is no need to arise after you have generated the four emptiness or four joys.
Student 3: What are the difference between the two sets of the respective four empties and the respective four signs? Four stages or four signs - white appearance, red increase, black near attainment, clear light. 
Khen Rinpoche: The four empties and the white appearance, red increase, black near attainment and clear light are the same. They are just different names for the same thing.
Student 3: At the time of the path yes, do the four empties exist at the time of the basis?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes at the time of death.
Student 3: So that means there are only these two sets - the four joys and four empties (four signs). Two sets. It was mentioned that the four joys are associated with the physical bliss and as a result of that there are mental bliss. What is this mental bliss?
Khen Rinpoche: They are mental bliss?
Student 3: The four empties?
Khen Rinpoche: Four mental joys.
Student 3: Four physical joys.
Khen Rinpoche: Which physical joy? We are talking mental joy here. Mental isolation means mental joy.
Student 3: Do the four physical joys have a name?
Khen Rinpoche: They are called physical joys.
Student 3:  The empties have different names.
Khen Rinpoche: Four different joys. You said that. You can label the name. Same thing.
Just as you can talk about varying levels of mental joys as in joy, supreme joy, special joy and so on, there are also different levels of physical joy. However, in this context, we are concern with the mental joys. There are scholars that talked about the physical joys as well. But Lama Tsongkhapa’s emphasis is not on physical joys. His emphasis is on the mental joys.
Student 4: Just now there was mentioned on the generation of the four joys of the forward order and then reverse order and then forward order like that in succession. So that means regarding the generation of the four empties are they also generated in the same sequence in succession where there is forward order, reverse forward, reverse like during meditative equipoise? Just now there was a mention of generation of the four joys of the forward order then follow by the reverse order and then forward order again in succession, then they go forward reverse like that in succession in meditative equipoise? Whether it is a descending joy, ascending joy, descending and ascending again? So does it means that the four empties are generated in the same manner whether it is a forward empty of ascending, descending, ascending and descending like that in succession? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes it is possible.
Student 4: It was also mentioned that in the time of innate ascending joy some of the coarse pervasive wind that not previously gathered, they gather. So I have a qualm here. How the other pervasive wind does not gather, gather? Because here says only coarse ones. So that means that there are others that are not coarse maybe subtle. So how does this other pervasive wind gather? Here it only mentioned that the coarse pervasive wind can be gathered during the time of innate ascending joy. Then how about the other pervasive wind? Because they have all dissolved in the indestructible drop. So I am just wondering how are the other pervasive wind gather? 
Translator: On page 218 it actually mentioned. You mentioned some of the coarse pervading wind not previously gather gathered. Your question is how about the rest of the pervading winds. So when do they gather and how they gather.
Khen Rinpoche: This pervasive wind is a wind that exists in all our joints. This is a wind that is hardest to gather from among the five root winds. Within this wind itself, the pervasive wind, there are also different levels. Meaning there are some levels that are harder to gather and there are some levels that are easier to gather. During mental isolation, we are able to cause the coarse ones, the ones that are easier to gather to absorb into the indestructible drop at the heart.
As mentioned earlier through vajra recitation and the stages of withdrawal or absorption, you are able to cause come of these pervasive winds to absorb into this indestructible drop. If you want to gather all of the pervasive wind into the indestructible drop, then you need to attain the example clear light of final mental isolation. How do you attain that? The supreme method for attaining the example clear light of final mental isolation is reliance of an action seal.
How do you gather the pervasive wind which is most difficult to gather? In the teachings it is said that the marvelous method for achieving that is relying on the vitality exertion of an action seal.
Student 5:  Isn’t the final clear light you see only at the time of death? Is the example clear light that you see when you are alive? 
Khen Rinpoche: Basically your question has to do with the actual clear light; what we call the full- fledged clear light. Now this full-fledged clear light can be experienced both at the time of the basis and as well as at the time of the path. At the time of the basis, you experience clear light only at the time of death. To experience this full-fledged clear light at the time of path, as we have been explaining, you have to generate the example clear light of final mental isolation.
Student 6: At which stage of the completion stage are the channel knots at the crown, the throat, the heart, the navel and the secret place completely loosened?
Khen Rinpoche: All of these channels knots at the other places, not at the heart, have been loosened prior to loosening the central knots at the heart. Prior to loosening the channel knots at the heart one has already gone through physical isolation, verbal isolation and so on. So during those stages, the knots at the other places have been loosened.
Student 7:  In the last BP, you asked this question “During mental isolation, if it is clear light in mental isolation is it necessary example clear light”? The answer to this question seems to be the clear light at the mere mental isolation. But the clear light at the mere mental isolation during this BP is being mentioned as the similitude of clear light. So I am quite confused.
Translator: The question is if it the clear light of mental isolation is it clear light? That is the question.
Student 6: If it is a clear light of mere mental isolation is it clear light? 
Khen Rinpoche: You can answer in whatever way you want. It is fine
A similar question is this: Clear light can be divided into:
Clear light that is the object and 
Clear light that is the object possessor.
If you are asked: Are these clear light? What would you answer?
By clear light that is the object, we are referring to emptiness. 
By clear light that is the object possessor (subject) we are referring to the exalted wisdom of bliss realizing emptiness.
Similarly, there is clear light that is generated during physical isolation. So you can ask: Is this clear light? You can say “Yes” and you can say “No” depending on what is being referred to by the clear light of physical isolation.
One way of answering this question is to say “No, the clear light of physical isolation is not clear light. Then you can give this reason saying that in order for it to be clear light it has to be, for example, the example clear light of final mental isolation. You can answer this question also by saying clear light is not necessarily full-fledged clear light. In which case, you can say that clear light of physical isolation is clear light. So depending on how you think. You can answer the question accordingly. So it is not like some pertinent points there. You can answer according to how you think.
Student 7: It is about the winds entering the central channel and therefore the white appearance, red increase and so on and that does not corresponds necessary that the four joys will follows. Is it possible for that person the four joys don’t happen at all? But just the four empties without the corresponding joy because it doesn’t occur simultaneous and it is of different timing. Vice versa, can it be that the four joys happen but the four empty totally doesn’t happen?
Khen Rinpoche: There is this point of debate at the bottom of page 215:
One says: The three types of pristine wisdom at the time of the path must be pristine wisdoms of bliss and emptiness. 
Reply: This is unacceptable because if the three types of pristine wisdom do not combine bliss and emptiness, it is said that the three states of white, red, and black appearance alone will dawn. Also meditation on uncommon bliss alone is praised as an amazing concentration, and it is said that bliss and emptiness cannot be applied in the unconscious state of near-attainment. These should be understood in detail from Illuminating Lamp.
Khen Rinpoche: This answer to your question or no?
Student 7: In another words when the three empties happen technically we don’t use the bliss to realize emptiness as well because of joys are not there.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah.
Student 7: So we actually do not use bliss to understand emptiness at all? 
Khen Rinpoche: If you look at the reply at the bottom of page 215 it says “There is no pervasion. It is not necessary because if the three types of wisdom do not combine bliss and emptiness and so on”. This is basically saying that you can have these three types of pristine wisdom - white appearance, red increase, black near attainment without meditating on emptiness. So it is possible that there is meditation on emptiness going on when these three types of pristine wisdom arise. 
At the top of page 216, it is said “Also meditation on uncommon bliss alone is praised as an amazing concentration - this seems to be saying that if you can meditate on bliss alone without combining it with emptiness then you are developing an amazing concentration.
Student 7: How is this bliss of concentration different from bliss from calm-abiding? Is it the same? 
Khen Rinpoche: Calm abiding has been attained way back. Remember that we said that when you are on the subtle generation stage you attained calm abiding. So this is something that was attained some time ago.
Student 7: So this bliss from the concentration is further than calm abiding? 
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t know. I don’t know.
Student 7: About the stage whereby the descending and then the ascending, actually this person can continue to have this descending and ascending for however long this person is meditating. So what is this significant of this descending and ascending? What is this person wants to achieve? Is he trying to merge the joy and the emptiness together such that the bliss itself is the one that is meditating on emptiness or some kind of mental exercise? Why doesn’t this person just have it descend and then just stay put at the last empty. Why does he want to arise, ascend and descend? 
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s take a look at this passage on page 218. If you look at the citation where there are three parts to the citation. The last part which says: Through the strength of meditation joining bliss and emptiness at the time of innate ascending joy, the former winds do not arise…So there is this emphasis on the winds that have already been absorbed; not arising. These would be the four root winds and the five secondary winds and a portion of the pervasive winds that has already been absorbed. With these winds not arising and then you cause some of the coarse pervasive winds that have not previously been gathered to gather. Then you are able to induce these various kinds of joys. It is significant to have these former winds not arising and then some of the coarse pervading wind that has not been previously gathered gathering. Perhaps the purpose of meditating on these joys - descending then ascending and descending again is to gather the pervasive winds that had not been previously been gathered. Maybe.
At the bottom of page 218: Since Jé Rinpoché stated that these points are extremely difficult to comprehend, those with intelligence should analyze them in detail.
If we direct our question at someone who is actually practicing the mental isolation, then we probably can get some accurate answer. Here our basing our discussion on textbook what is stated in the text then trying to answer question and doing discussion and so on. So whether or not we can have accurate conclusion, this is unsure. If we have a practitioner here, then we can ask him and get accurate answer.
Next week we are going to start to look at the illusory body which is the fourth stage. If you can read the explanation in the coming days before you come to the next class then things will be easier.
Khen Rinpoche: You have more time. Two weeks.
You will have plenty of time to read the text because this section on the illusory body isn’t very long and you can read it twice, three times, four times, five times, six times or more. Just reading it once is not going to be very beneficial. You have to read once and then think about it and read it again and think about it and so on. If you come to class without reading through the text beforehand then it will not be very beneficial for you to sit through the class. Don’t read it as though you are reciting some kind of sutra. You have to read it and think about the meaning. In that way read and don’t just read once but read twice, three times, four times, five times upto ten times. There is a difference between coming to class without any preparation and coming to class with preparation. This is because if you read it and think about it then you will form some kind of understanding of what the text is supposed to be saying. Then when you come to class you can check whether your understanding is correct. If you come to class and then you hear explanation and you find that your previous understanding is correct then this reinforces your understanding and make your understanding very stable. In case you find your understanding is not correct, the explanation causes you to understand then “Oh, when I read the text, my understanding was actually wrong”. Then this dispels that misconception and causes the correct understanding of the text. This then causes a very deep imprint on your mind and a deep impression on your mind. In this way, when you come to class with preparation, you are able deposit extraordinary imprints or latencies on your mind. So that will be very beneficial.  Also when you read and read many times, then you will not forget what was being said and when you come to class and hear the teacher’s explanation that reinforces what you have read. In that way when you hear the teacher’s explanation then it will also cause special joy in your mind.
Khen Rinpoche: For us is like this. In the monastery, one of my teacher, there are so many students go to his class. Of course some students who go this class don’t understand what he is talking about. In order to understand his teaching, you must read yourself. Many times then you think a lot on the subject. Only that kind of student go this class understand what he is talking about. Then those who don’t read, who don’t think, go to class, is zero. They don’t understand it. So like that. One of my teacher don’t read book. He doesn’t read like that. He just gives the essence. So we think for ourselves. Sometimes we think like ten times, twenty times, we debate. We think. Some subject I want to know so much. We think, discuss. There is no answer sometime. Then we go to teacher, he explains one time, one sentence and you really enlighten. Then that time you have such a close feeling to the teacher for so much clearing the doubt and understanding. Then it makes a huge difference in connection to the teacher. Something like that of my own example. Of course you need to put a lot of effort. Some teachers teach like read the book one by one like that. Some teachers just teach the point. There are different ways. The teachers teach different ways. My point is that it is good if you can read that and come here and compare. Then you will have better understanding.  All the subjects are like that, if you think deeply, it makes a huge difference not to forget. Otherwise, I explain and you listen and after one week there is nothing. Then nothing after one year forget and nothing left. So this is important not to forget. For me is like that. So you need a lot of effort. Also you need the interest. Then you listen carefully then of course you discuss and ask questions, answer. Then this way then will able to leave deeper imprints in your mind so that not easy to forget. 