Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L8.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:18.762581
================================================================================

Khen Rinpoche: Any question on grounds and paths that is related to the last topic? Are you getting some idea after 2-3 classes on grounds and paths? Are you totally lost or what? Something you think, you listen, and you don’t understand about something related to the grounds and paths, ask!
Student 1: Are sense consciousness of someone who has entered the path a path? When we look at the definition that was covered in the last module, the definition of all the applications and all the knowers are all related to mental consciousness. I’m just wondering how about sense consciousness. 
Ven Gyurme: No.
Khen Rinpoche: All the sense consciousness is not path. Path has to be mental consciousness. 
Student 2:  There have been discussion of how long it actually takes to actualize the paths and grounds but it seems to me that the hardest part of the dharma practice is where we are at right now when we are trying to actualize realization of death and impermanence and trying to give up attachment to the happiness of this life. It seems to me that once you generated a renunciation, once you have generated the mind generation, you have the determination and courage and are very clear minded about your goal. There is a lot of work to be done but it is not difficult for the sincere practitioner. Would that be a fair observation?
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. Any question related to grounds and paths that you don’t really understand. 
Student 3: Why one get enlighten only in Akanishta pureland? Why can’t get enlighten in other pureland like Amitabha pureland or Tushita pureland? 
Khen Rinpoche: I think you have to think along the lines of the place to actualize the complete enjoyment body. It was said that Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment at the end of the 10th ground while in Akanishta. When you achieved enlightenment, all four bodies are actualized simultaneously. One of which is to actualize the complete enjoyment body. In order to actualize the complete enjoyment body, what other place could it be than a pureland of the complete enjoyment body? 
When you become Buddha, you have to actualize the four bodies simultaneously. One of which is the complete enjoyment body. As you have to achieve enlightenment in the complete enjoyment body, where can you find the complete enjoyment body? Only in Akanishta  
Khen Rinpoche: Ya that is it. The answer is that. I’m just wondering you really understand If you don’t understand then must ask. Don’t sit there, or pretend to understand. If you don’t understand must ask.
Student 4: When Amitabha Buddha attained enlightenment, his complete enjoyment body is in Akanishta first before in his Amitabha pureland? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, you can say that. 
It is clear in the text that you need to achieve enlightenment on the basis with Akanishta, while in Akanishta. Then we have to come out with an answer that fits with that. What is the answer that fits with that? The answer which I gave you earlier is my own opinion. When you achieve enlightenment, you have to actualize the four simultaneously. One of which is the enjoyment body. So when you achieved enlightenment in the form of an enjoyment body, where would you be? 
Where are you going to find enjoyment bodies? In Akanishta. If you remember from one of the earlier discussions, the complete enjoyment body possesses five certainties, and one of which is the certainty of abode. Where is complete enjoyment bodies found? Akanishta! 
The complete enjoyment body is the basis of emanation of the emanation bodies. From the complete enjoyment body, numberless emanation bodies are issued forth. Ii you talk about Amitabha Buddha in the emanation body aspect, the nirmanakaya, what if we say that this emanation aspect Amitabha is emanated from the complete enjoyment body which is its basis of emanation? Once emanated, then that Amitabha in emanation body aspect shows the pureland and so on and so forth. Would it be alright if we posit this?
One of the five certainties of the complete enjoyment body is the certainty of the entourage. They are only surrounded by bodhisattva superiors. This means ordinary beings can never ever see the complete enjoyment body. Yet the buddhas have to work for the welfare of all sentient beings. How do the buddhas work for ordinary beings? With the complete enjoyment body as the basis of emanation, then numberless emanation bodies are issued forth. With those emanation body aspects, then they work for sentient beings including manifesting in purelands. If we say that, do you accept?
Another certainty is the certainty of the teaching (doctrine). The complete enjoyment body only teaches the Mahayana doctrine (dharma). Since they have to work for all sentient beings and to teach the Hinayana path, the buddhas need to do that with an emanation body aspect.
As for the certainty of the existence of the time period, the complete enjoyment body will remain until the end of samsara. It doesn’t undergo birth and death whereas the emanation body aspects show the aspect of birth and death. 

That is why there is a difference when it comes to the practice of the seven branch worship in sutra and in tantra. In tantra, you will not find the branch of beseeching the Buddha to do not pass away into parinirvana. Why? Because in tantra, majority of the time we are dealing with the Buddha in the complete enjoyment aspect. Since the complete enjoyment body does not undergo birth and death so there is no need for that branch; whereas in the sutra, most of the time we are dealing with emanation body aspects. Since emanation body aspects show the aspect of passing away and being born, therefore there is the branch of beseeching them to do not pass away to parinirvnana.
Student 4: When we say that the emanation body is on the basis of the complete enjoyment body but on the other hand we say the four bodies are simultaneous. When it comes to simultaneous, the very first moment the emanation body is at Akanishta? When we say the emanation body is emanated on the basis of complete enjoyment body, it gives the impression that complete enjoyment body comes first before the emanation body. On the other hand, we say that the four bodies are simultaneous.
Khen Rinpoche: In general we have to say that the four bodies are manifested or actualized simultaneously. When we talk about Shakyamuni Buddha being a supreme emanation body, in the case of a supreme emanation body, we have to say that comes after the complete enjoyment body.
In general, we have to say that the four bodies are achieved simultaneously. But when it comes to the supreme emanation body, the supreme emanation body comes after the complete enjoyment body, in that the complete enjoyment body is the basis of emanation of that supreme emanation body.
Student 5: At the continuum at the end of a sentient being, can it be on the basis of the desire realm and form realm support and when that continuum achieves the path of release of the buddha path, he spontaneously achieves the four bodies in Akanishta? That means as a sentient being, last moment he has a desire realm or form realm support..
Khen Rinpoche: As for support, you mean physical or mind? 
Student 5: Support is physical. 
Khen Rinpoche: Physical, I don’t think is possible.
Student 5: Then does it mean that there is a mind
Khen Rinpoche: Physical is not possible.  At the time when the vajra light meditative stabilization of the Path of Meditation (which is like the end of the continuum of sentient being), with that mind the bodhisattva is already born in Akanishta. He is already there in Akanishta and will achieve enlightenment there.
Student 6: As Amitabha Buddhist pureland practice is quite popular here, so for those who are born in Amitabha pureland, which they pray to, what is their basis? Are they considered desire realm, form realm, or formless realm? Can they newly enter the path if they have not already achieved in Amitabha pureland.
Khen Rinpoche:  Desire, form and formless realms are samsaric abodes but pureland cannot be in samsara. Many a times the text phrased like this: the three realms of cyclic existence are the desire, form and formless. You are not going to find pureland in any of these three realms. 
As regards to Akanishta that we have been talking about, this is how it is being said: Akanishta is the form realm but it is not the form realm that is part of the three realms.

Is it possible to newly generate a path in Amitabha buddha pureland? 
Yes. It shouldn’t be any difficulty in asserting the newly generating a path. 
You may accept the answer but do you know why it is possible to newly generate a path up there?
Student 6:  I was told that for those who are reborn in Amitabha pureland which is the only pureland where there still can have afflictions in the mind. So if you are born there with afflictions in your mind, then there will be suffering. Since there is suffering, you are able to generate the path.
Khen Rinpoche: Do you know why the name of Amitabha Buddha pureland is called Sukhavati?  Sukha means bliss. There is no suffering but only bliss. Amitabha pureland is like that. Once you reborn there, there is no suffering. 
Student 6: If no suffering then how to develop bodhicitta? How to enter the path?
Khen Rinpoche: That is why I’m asking back.
Student 6: You give me the wrong answer? 
Khen Rinpoche: I’m just checking how clever you are. I give wrong answer or right answer that I’m asking you. You think the answer is wrong? What did I say “possible”, and you think is wrong? 
Student 6: I think it would be very strange if you pray to be reborn there and after that you have to come back to the desire realm to enter the path. If you have to be able to enter the path over there. That is maybe one of the reasons.
Khen Rinpoche: So that means I’m giving  the correct answer?
Student 6: Possible, yes.
Khen Rinpoche: So that means I give you correct answer.
Of the people who go to purelands, there are those who have entered the path already and there are also who have not entered the path. So people who have not entered any paths can reach a pureland. Having said that,  and then yet at the same time you said that then once you go there, you cannot generate the path and you have to come back to desire realm. Then it is going to be difficult to hold to that position to justify. Therefore, perhaps it is better to say that you can newly generate the path in the pureland. 
As to whether you can achieve enlightenment in Amitabha Buddha pureland or not, as we have seen in last lessons that there are two schools of thought:
One school of thought that says “No, you cannot achieve enlightenment in Amitabha Buddha pureland because in order to newly generate the Path of Seeing, you need to do that with a desire realm basis. So for that school of thought, they use that as a reason to say “No, you cannot achieve enlightenment in Amitabha Buddha pureland.” 
Another school of thought which says that you can achieve enlightenment there.
As for ordinary beings who are born in Amitabha Buddha’s pureland do they freshly accumulate projecting karma for samsara or not? 
Do ordinary brings who are born in Amitabha Buddha’s pureland possess ignorance or not? 
So for those ordinary beings who reborn in Amitabha’s Buddha’s pureland possess the ignorance that is the ignorance of the 12 links of dependant origination or not?
If they possess the ignorance that is the ignorance of the 12 links of dependant origination, then they definitely will accumulate projecting karma, isn’t it? It follows that even though you are in Amitabha Buddha’s pureland, since you have ignorance that is the ignorance of the 12 links of dependant origination. Then you will definitely accumulate fresh projecting karma. If you have accumulated fresh projecting karma, it follows that you have to be reborn in cyclic existence again. 
I am not saying this is necessarily as a matter of fact or my opinion. This is part of the debate or discussion. So if you say this, then this and this will happen. That’s all. We are drawing out the implications. 
If we talk about the Hinayana path, when the person who is on the Hinayana path realizes emptiness directly, he enters the Hinayana Path of Seeing. With that Hinayana Path of Seeing, he abandons the afflictions which are Path of Seeing abandonments. After that, he enters the Hinayana Path of Meditation and there are the 9 levels of innate afflictions to be abandoned. Basically they are the Path of Meditation abandonments to be abandoned before he can achieve become an arhat.

The manner of progress of the Hinayana Path of Seeing till the achievement of becoming an arhat is similar in that the terminology of uninterrupted path, path of release and subsequent attainment are employed as well:
When the individual realizes emptiness directly, he achieves the uninterrupted path of the Path of Seeing, which is wisdom of meditative equipoise. 
Then he achieves the path of release which is a meditative equipoise. 
Then after he arises from post-meditative equipoise, he achieves the wisdom of subsequent attainment. 
Then he enters into meditative equipoise and generate uninterrupted path of the Path of Meditation and so on and so forth, progressing through the Path of Meditation, and through that eliminating the nine levels of the innate afflictions. 
If you are asked: How do these individuals on the Hinayana path accumulate merit during subsequent attainment? What do they do in the post meditative equipoise to accumulate merit? Do they make mandala offerings or prostrations?
Khen Rinpoche: Chanting? Or what they do? Since they don’t have the six perfections, what do they do? Do they accumulate merit or not? Are there 100,000 prostrations? Or what? Read sutra? Chanting?
With regards to the bodhisattvas we have a lot of things to say “they do this and that”. Then what do the superiors on the Hinayana path do during post meditative equipoise? 
There is an explanation on Path of Meditation abandonments which are being abandoned simultaneously and then being abandoned serially. 
When we talk about the objects of abandonment that are abandoned simultaneously, here we are talking about the innate conception of true existence of the three realms – desire, form and formless realm. When we expand on it, we have 9 and they have to generate 9 uninterrupted paths. 
On the 8th path of release, that is about to achieve liberation,
On the 9th path of release, it will be the Hinayana Path of No More Learning. 
The innate conception of true existence or the afflictions of the three realms (there are 9 of them) are abandoned simultaneously. 
There are afflictions of the three realms, and when we expand there are 9:
Desire realm  1, 
Form realm  4, 
Formless realm  4
These 9 are abandoned simultaneously. 
How are these 9 abandoned? 
They are abandoned by generating the 9 uninterrupted paths. 
The objects of abandonments that are abandoned simultaneously are abandoned by the 9 uninterrupted paths because there are 9 levels of the afflictions. 
When divided by the realms, there are:
Desire realm  1, 
Form realm  4, 
Formless realm  4
Within each of them, there are 9 levels of afflictions:
3 of the big of the big desire realm afflictions, 
3 of the middling of the big desire realm afflictions, 
3 of the small of the big desire realm afflictions
And likewise for the middling and small desire realm afflictions 
For the desire realm  1 x 9 = 9
For form realm  4 x 9 = 36
For formless realm  4 x 9 = 36
Total there are 81. In that sense, they are abandoned serially. 
All the big of the big of all the 9 levels are abandoned  then all the middling of the big of all the 9 levels are abandoned. Therefore, the objects of abandoned are abandoned serially. 
I have not seen any clear writings on this. You have to say that in the Hinayana path, there are also dull and sharp faculties. I wonder if there is a relationship between the dull and sharp faculties to abandoning the objects of abandonment simultaneously or serially. 
In the Hinayana path, the objects of abandonments are abandoned simultaneously. In the case of the objects of abandonments that are abandoned simultaneously, we are talking about the innate afflictions. How are they abandoned? They are abandoned by 9 uninterrupted paths. 
The number 9 path of release is the Path of No More Learning of the Hinayana path. 
For the objects of abandonments that are abandoned serially, then there are 81 uninterrupted paths.
Khen Rinpoche: If I’m not wrong, I think I did mention this once before. I don’t know whether this BP or the last BP. I don’t remember. 
To be an arhat (foe destroyer), you need to abandon the afflictive obscurations. According to the CMWS, the afflictive obscuration is related to grasping at true existence. According to CMWS, in order to become a foe destroyer, you have to abandon the innate grasping at true existence. 
Let’s say the arhat enter the Mahayana path somewhere along the line. In order to do that, they have to generate the mind of enlightenment. Once the superiors on the Hinayana path have abandoned the afflictive obscurations, the innate grasping at true existence and their seeds, then they become foe destroyer (arhat). It is said that they remain in meditative equipoise in nirvana for eons and eons. Along the line, the buddhas come and shine lights on them and tell them “Wake up. You are not going to become a Buddha just by doing that”.  The buddhas give them instructions.
In order for these arhats to enter the Mahayana path, they have to generate bodhichitta. When they enter the Mahayana path, they have to enter from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation and traverse through the Mahayana paths and grounds, similar to what we have discussed earlier on - Mahayana Path of Accumulation, Mahayana Path of Preparation, Mahayana Path of Seeing and Mahayana Path of Meditation. 
Question: What is the function of the uninterrupted path of the Mahayana Path of Seeing in the continuum of a person who has already become an arhat? 
Khen Rinpoche: What is the purpose? What does it abandon?
Student 7: One of the functions of the Path of Seeing is to overcome doubt. Can I say that for the arhat to overcome the doubt towards enlightenment? 
Khen Rinpoche: Doubt?
Ven Gyurme: Whose enlightenment?
Student 7: His own enlightenment because he has a very strong Hinayana imprint. During Path of Accumulation and Path of Preparation, he still has doubt about the possibility of enlightenment. So this is one of the functions.
Khen Rinpoche: What is there to doubt? When you have achieved the mind generation which is like gold, there is no turning back because you know for sure that it would happen. That is just the Mahayana Path of Accumulation. 
Then on the Mahayana Path of Preparation, it is more powerful. What is there to doubt? We are talking about an arhat who enters into the Mahayana path. Even right at the beginning of entering the Mahayana path, he already has wisdom directly realizing emptiness from the beginning of the Mahayana path. Why would he have doubt?
Student 8: Does that make him a sharp facultied bodhisattva in that sense because he directly realizes emptiness since it is more powerful then inferential realization of emptiness before entering the path? That was the reason why we say what is considered as sharp facultied, i.e. to have realize emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: When did he realize emptiness? On which path?
Student 8: Hinayana path 
Khen Rinpoche: In that case, what is there to talk about sharp facultied? Realize emptiness prior to entering Mahayana path and it follows that he fulfills the definition of sharp facultied. 
Ven Gyurme: So he is a sharp or not sharp.
Student 8: I may say he is sharp facultied because of the reason. In fact, it is pretty strange. For example, Shariputra, he actually abandoned bodhichitta as at that point in time, he hasn’t realized emptiness yet. Technically he should be considered as dull facultied bodhisattva. 
Ven Gyurme: How do you know Shariputra hasn’t realized emptiness?
Student 8: For Shariputra, he actually generated bodhichitta and gave up bodhichitta. In that sense at that point in time, he is technically called a dull facultied bodhisattva because he abandoned bodhichitta. 
Ven Gyurme: When you abandon you are not a bodhisattva anymore.
Student 8: Before he abandons, he haven’t realize emptiness. That’s the reason why.
Ven Gyurme: Who say?
Student 8: If you have realized emptiness before entering the path, it is not possible for you to abandon bodhichitta when you generate the path. The reason why he is able to abandon, he was a dull facultied bodhisattva at that point in time. He went into the Hinayana path and becomes an arhat and directly realizes emptiness. If he were to join the Mahayana path, then he will become sharp facultied. The reason is just pertaining to realizing emptiness per se. 
Khen Rinpoche: What you talking now? You asking question?
Ven Gyurme: Why don’t you go the other way? It is still possible to give up bodhichitta even after realizing emptiness. 
Student 8: Maybe that is the reason why he never ends up in hell. 
Ven Gyurme: He never goes to hell at all.
Khen Rinpoche: Why don’t you answer the original question. What is the uninterrupted path of the Mahayana Path of Seeing in the continuum of someone who has already become an arhat? 
Student 8: Self-cherishing is not obscuration, right? If it is obscuration which one will it come under? Afflictive obscuration or knowledge obscuration?
Khen Rinpoche: Is self-cherishing an object of abandonment or not? 
Student 9: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: Doesn’t it exist in the continuum of arhats? 
Student 9: Yes, it does exist in the arhats. 
Khen Rinpoche: If it is an object of abandonment, then which obscuration is it? Is it an afflictive obscuration or knowledge obscuration?
Student 9: It should be knowledge obscuration. 
Ven Gyurme: You have no choice, right. 
Student 9: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: So it is a mind, a knowledge obscuration which is a consciousness. 
Student 9: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: This means the self-cherishing is more subtle than self-grasping. That is just a rhetorical question anyway. Yes or no?
Student 9: Yes for them.
Khen Rinpoche: Once you have mind of enlightenment (bodhichitta), you probably can say that there is no self-cherishing in that person’s mind. If you remember the earlier discussion about the differences between the dull and sharp facultied trainees with respect to obtaining the signs of irreversibility, it is said that extremely dull facultied bodhisattvas obtain those signs only on the 8th ground. It is not to say that before the 8th ground. Let’s say we talk about self-cherishing. Self-cherishing will not manifest. If you relate this to the signs of irreversibility, you can say that maybe until the 8th ground for the extremely dull facultied, it’s only then they have this confidence that they have destroyed all opportunities for such a mind to arise. 
Student 10: In Mahayana sutra, why can’t the bodhisattva of sharp faculty achieve enlightenment faster than the bodhisattva of dull faculty given the fact that there are differences in their qualities? At the end of the day, it still takes three great countless eons to achieve enlightenment. Why can’t the bodhisattvas of sharp faculty achieve enlightenment faster from the perspective of Mahayana sutra? 
Khen Rinpoche: Somebody answer. You got the question? Answer. I want to listen to your answer. I think she is asking dull and sharp facultied bodhisattva and both have to accumulate three great countless eons, almost the same time, why the sharp facultied cannot be faster? 
Student 11: This is only in generally is true that it takes three great countless eons. But if you are really sharp facultied, you only take three years.
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, you don’t need tantra practice. In sutra three years can become enlightened why need tantra? That’s very interesting answer. You says sharp facultied can become enlightened in three years. What do you want to say? Three years. Not one year? 
Khen Rinpoche: Our founder Guru Shakyamuni Buddha entered the Mahayana Path onset. He didn’t go to the Hinayana Path first. Was he a sharp faculty when he was a bodhisattva? 
Student response inaudible
Khen Rinpoche: You have any example the sharp faculty bodhisattva who becomes enlightened within 3 years? Are they the same or they are different? 
Student 12: I am thinking actually the reason why still need the 3 great countless eons is mainly because accumulation of merits takes time. It cannot be the case that within 3 years you can actually make the same amount of merits as somebody who has been through a longer period of time. Is it because of that, why we need that time? It is a question actually. How many mandala can you do? 
Ven Gyurme: No, no that is not what you said. Basically you are saying, let’s say all of us here are given the same amount of time, we all necessarily accumulate the same amount of merits. Implication you are saying that you know?
Student 12: No, I actually saying that, let’s say if they put in the right effort. Time is actually the non-associated compositional factor.
Ven Gyurme: So people who have been around longer.
Student 12: We all have been around since beginingless time.
Ven Gyurme: On the path?
Student 12: No, I am not even enter into a path.
Ven Gyurme: We are talking about the path.
Student 12: I am talking about those people who have already entered the path.
Khen Rinpoche: The comment was that whether are sharp or dull faculties, you still take 3 countless great eons. So, it doesn’t matter you are fast or slow. The point is you achieve enlightenment the same time. So, all the sharp faculty is faster than the dull faculty?
Student 12: Probably they will achieve the realization of emptiness all that faster but the fact that the merit is actually still…
Khen Rinpoche: No, to achieve enlightenment, final result.
Khen Rinpoche: Faster or not? Student 11 said faster, it makes 3 years. Now you make 2 years is it?
Student 12: Ok, I will stick to the sutra path of saying that it actually takes 3 countless great eons.
Khen Rinpoche: So dull and sharp no difference in speed?
Student 12: They will achieve certain things faster on the path. He will catch up. 
Khen Rinpoche: That is not sharp faculty. It does faster but not clever.
Student 12: If you talk about the accumulation of merits, doesn’t it be the case like the time is actually a constraint? So, you will really need that long time to accumulate merits that you need to.
Ven Gyurme: At which point you catch up?
Student 12: It depends, the actually slow one at the 8th ground. The extremely dull one.
Ven Gyurme: You are saying the 8th, 9th and 10th takes more time to accumulate merits?
Student 12: The 8th, 9th and 10th is actually 1 countless great eons by itself already.
Ven Gyurme: The sharp faculty take longer time to accumulate merits on the 8th, 9th and 10th. Then when the fellows catch up on the 8th ground then the sharp one is still on the same point?
Student 12: No, 8th, 9th and 10th is still 1 countless great eon.
Ven Gyurme: Come on, it doesn’t make sense.
Student 13:  I am thinking the 3 countless great eons is the standard measure of time. If Guru Shakyamuni Buddha took 3 countless great eons to attain buddhahood and he is a sharp facultied bodhisattva, the implication is that maybe the dull facultied bodhisattva actually need more time than that. Maybe 5 countless great eons, I don’t know what the number might be. But they will get there eventually. The 3 countless great eons from the sutra presentation is Shakyamuni Buddha, sharp facultied bodhisattva who practice and took 3 countless great eons.
Ven Gyurme: All the sharp one equally sharp?
Student 13: No, that is variation but sharp faculty being motivated by reasoning. Unless you have another whole involve discussion about a sharp of the sharp, a small of the sharp, middling of the sharp…
Ven Gyurme: Exist or not?
Student 13: I don’t take the same amount of time
Khen Rinpoche: Your answer is clever one takes 3 great countless eons? Dull faculty takes 600 hundred great countless eons? 
Student 15: I think 1 or 2 or 3 great countless eons is referring to the amount of merits accumulated. Not so much of the time per say. So, that makes the sharp facultied bodhisattva who realize emptiness because with the realization of emptiness earlier makes the accumulation merits more powerful so they are able to accumulate one great countless eons of merits much more faster than the dull faculty.
Khen Rinpoche: So, the point is you are saying at the end of the day they are faster.
Student 15: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: Since, there is a difference in that capacity (faculty), therefore we have to say that those who are sharp faculty are more capable achieve enlightenment faster. I mean it is like there are some people who can complete 100,000 mantras in 1 week, 2 weeks. Some people take forever.
Khen Rinpoche: Student 15answer sound better. Something likes that.  The point is if we think we get some answer so that is what I want you to do. Always think with your own idea. It could be wrong, or could be right. It doesn’t matter. Come here and share is important.
Student 16: I would like to find out about the reason why when one generates a path, you will not lose it. I have been thinking about it. I think it will only apply to dull faculty trainees whether Hinayana or Mahayana. So for a dull facultied bodhisattva, the reason why he can lose bodhicitta even if after having  entered the path is because his self-grasping is very strong. So much so that he becomes discouraged upon working for sentient beings and his self-cherishing manifests thus losing his bodhicitta. Whereas for someone who enters the path, example a Hinayana path, that person has both self-grasping and self-cherishing for a dull faculty Hinayana trainee, he will not lose his path because of his strong self-cherishing after having meditated on true suffering and true origin, he cherishes that mere ‘I’ greatly and wishes the ‘I ‘ to be freed from suffering. Because of this strong cherishing, he would not let go of that thought to free himself from suffering and achieve liberation.
Khen Rinpoche: I didn’t catch up everything.
Student 16: We are talking about dull faculty trainee, how someone can lose bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: Mahayana or Hinayana
Student 16: Both. These are only applied to dull faculty trainees. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student 16: For someone who loses bodhicitta  …
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Bodhicitta, you are talking about Mahayana
Student 16: That person who is a Mahayanist, for him to lose his bodhicitta is because he has strong self-grasping. Seeing inherent sentient beings making difficulties for him so he gets discourage and his cherishing manifest therefore he loses his bodhicitta. That is due to strong self-grasping. 
Then for the dull facultied Hinayana trainees, it is said that one will not lose the path. I am thinking how? So, I was thinking he meditated in realizing true suffering and true origin, thinking about the ‘I’, even though you maybe positing the inherent ‘I’ for other schools but in reality cherishing the mere ‘I’ so that trainee cherishes the mere ‘I’ and wishes the mere ‘I’ to be freed from suffering. So my thinking why someone lose the path was because he cherishes his mere ‘I’ strongly and wishing the mere ‘I’ to achieve liberation. Therefore he will never give up his path.
Khen Rinpoche: Is it possible for dull faculty bodhisattva to degenerate the path or not?
Student 16: On the small Path of Accumulation before reaching the middle.
Khen Rinpoche: We are talking the path in the continuum of the dull faculty bodhisattva. 
Student 16: While he is on small Path of Accumulation
Khen Rinpoche: Is there possible to degenerate the path or not? 
Student 16: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: So, if the path degenerates in this person’s continuum then where does he go? So, he becomes the person who is not on the path right?
Student 16: He will fall to a lower path.
Khen Rinpoche: You said there is no path because the path has been degenerated.
Student 16: That path is a different path from the Hinayana.
Khen Rinpoche: The path exists, the path has degenerated? If the path exists, it is either Hinayana or Mahayana path right?
Student 16: I didn’t get the question. 
Khen Rinpoche: For a bodhisattva, this dull faculty bodhisattva, let’s say he gives up bodhicitta. Is all the paths in his continuum disappear or not?
Student 16: No, he loses the Mahayana path.
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore the path exists in his continuum right? Even though he has degenerated his bodhicitta, path still exists in his mind? 
Student 16: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: So, why is it there is still a path in that?
Student 16: Because of very strong self-cherishing, seeking individual liberation.
Khen Rinpoche: When this individual who has now degenerated, at the moment of generating the path, he didn’t generate the path looking for liberation for his own happiness. So, he doesn’t have a strong wish seeking his own liberation isn’t it?
Student 16: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: So, he doesn’t have the thought seeking to achieve personal liberation for himself. If that is the case, is it possible for him to lose the path or not?
Student 16: It has been said that it is not possible to lose the path. But he falls into a lower path and this will be seeking individual liberation. Therefore I think the strength of his renunciation in that sense is only for himself. 
Ven Gyurme: Does he have thought seeking liberation for himself or not when he loses bodhicitta?
Student 16: When he loses bodhicitta, of course he will not lose the thought for liberation for himself. After he loses bodhicitta, he falls to a lower path isn’t it?
Ven Gyurme: Yes, when did that thought arise? What is its cause? Seeking liberation for himself basically we have to account for that.
Student 16: Seriously that was my question also. Because you have uncontrived renunciation and bodhicitta join simultaneously, we did not generate uncontrived renunciation for personal liberation.
When Student: 8 asked “When you lose you go to a lower path and was thinking how that came about”. So, I thought maybe in uncontrived manner it is in a package. I am not sure. It is because that person before he enters the Mahayana path …
Ven Gyurme: He generated the path that is shared with the person of a medium capacity.
Student 16: Yes, that is not a fully qualified path but just a path that is shared with the person of a medium capacity. At that point in time he has not generated the uncontrived renunciation. Perhaps this was the cause for him to achieve the uncontrived renunciation for individual liberation, is it possible to say that? Even though at that point, he only meditated on true suffering, he has not reached the realization of true origin yet. When he has entered the path shared with person of medium capacity, he realized true suffering not yet true origin. So when he realized true origin, he simultaneously also generated renunciation seeking the non-abiding nirvana. Perhaps that could be the cause because there was realization of true origin.
Khen Rinpoche: Realization of true origin then?
Student 16: Then when he also meditated on other aspects for him to generate both his special renunciation and bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I didn’t get exactly what he is trying to …
Ven Gyurme: So realizing true origin and generating the wish for non-abiding nirvana.
Student 16: The realization occurs simultaneously.
Ven Gyurme: You are saying they occur simultaneously?
Student 16: Because you said renunciation and bodhicitta has to be simultaneous. So, the renunciation only comes when you realized true origin.
Khen Rinpoche: So, this is difficult and not so straightforward but we have to think about. So, we did say for an individual who is entering the Mahayana path from the onset, not entering the Hinayana path first. For that individual at the end of the day, we probably have to say in the continuum of that person, renunciation and bodhicitta generated together. What is the measure of renunciation? As we saw in the Three Principles of the Path:
If the thought seeking liberation arises day and night spontaneously, that is the measure of renunciation. In order for the thought seeking liberation to arise day and night, the person must have already thought well of true origin the manner in which how one enters into cyclic existence. For that how one gets out from cyclic existence? The person would have to think well of true origin, as the true origin which is cause of true suffering. In order to understand true origin well, the person has to see what is the principal of true origin – the root of cyclic existence. If you then think along this line then you kind of like approaching a point where you have to say that actually to realize bodhicitta. 
Basically to realize bodhicitta or renunciation you need to have seen that grasping at true existence is the root of samsara. If that is the case then you have to then say that the person would also need to see grasping at true existence is a wrong consciousness. Basically in order to have any hope of generating renunciation and/or bodhicitta, you need to realize emptiness. It is like moving towards the position that anybody who has entered the path has necessarily realized emptiness. So, because the measure of renunciation, having generated renunciation is that if day and night that thought arises. How does it arise day and night? What must be done for this thought to arise day and night? But yet, nobody says that in order to enter the path, you necessarily must have realized emptiness. It is difficult to say and nobody says. In the text it is said among the sharp faculty and the dull faculty, the sharp faculty are the one who realize emptiness prior to entering the path and the dull faculty can enter the path without wisdom realizing emptiness.
Announcement: No class for next 3 sessions as Khen Rinpoche has to make a short trip to Nepal to attend the long life puja for Kyabje Lama Zopa Rinpoche. Although we will not have class for those 3 sessions, please use the time to review on what we have covered on the paths and grounds. You need to get a good idea of the overview of the Mahayana sutra paths and grounds. You need to have a very good grasp on that and if you do have a question, please write it down.
You need to get a good overview of the mode of progress of the Mahayana paths and grounds according to sutra. The innate afflictions are divided into 9. There are the 9 levels of innate afflictions and there are abandoned by the respective uninterrupted paths. Having said that in one of the earlier module, we did look at the Sera Je College’s position and there is a bit different in that with regards to the innate afflictions like there are 10, instead of the usual 9. According to Sera Je College’s position then you have 10 uninterrupted paths before the afflictive afflictions are abandoned. As such, therefore at the 7th grounds there are 2 uninterrupted paths that are posited. 
Then with regards also to the knowledge obscurations according to the Sera Je College’s position, even the knowledge obscurations are further divided to more than 3. Therefore, Sera Je College’s position is that on the 8th grounds, there are also two uninterrupted paths instead of just 1 uninterrupted path. I think this will all explain and put into the materials that we distributed long ago. So, you should revisit that. 
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Anyway, look at the chart. We miss 3 classes. Make sure next time I ask, one question, answer ‘shirk’! Which grounds abandon which? You say this this this. Not like memorization but you must think a little bit. Have some ideas. Okay that is the homework for 3 classes. But this Tuesday we have class. This Tuesday is real tantra talk. Today we are not supposed to talk sutra again.