Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/L9.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:17.643096
================================================================================

Most of you must have come from work. You must be tired after a full day of work.  Anyway do try your best to focus whenever you are in class. In every session, you should at least aim to learn one or two new things and pick up some new concepts and terms. Here there is a mixture of different level of students: some are new and others have been around for a while.  Whatever it is, at the end of every class, you should be leave the class carries something home with you such as: “Today he is trying to talk about this or today he is making this point”.  Every session you really have to try to bring back something to learn.  You should not have this idea “Whatever happens, happen. It is ok if I get it, and if I don’t get it, I will try it next time”.  That is the reason why there are people who have been here for 5 to 6 years and end up receiving nothing even have been here for 5 to 6 years. Even if you can’t understand every single thing that is being said in any particular session, at least you should be able to say “Yes, this is the main point”.  You must have something to bring home.
Khen Rinpoche: You understand?  After the class you shouldn’t say “I don’t know what Geshela has taught.”  I am not talking about a particular person, but to everyone especially the old one.  I am not talking about the old age but the old one who has been learning the dharma for a long time.`
We should endeavor to become somebody who really sees from the heart that in order to achieve liberation i.e. permanent happiness, there is no other method besides entering the Buddhadharma.  You have to see this for yourself. You have to arrive at the point in time when you see liberation (permanent and everlasting happiness) is something that can only be achieved by relying on Buddhadharma and nothing else. You have to arrive at this point in your development.  
When we talk about the Buddhadharma, there is scriptural dharma and there is realization dharma.  By learning the scriptural dharma and gaining an understanding of it and then applying the understanding, one will gain the experience and realization of the path. With that the scriptural dharma is born in the mind.  So these are the two aspects of the dharma.
You have to see for yourself why is the case that one has to enter the Buddhadharma in order to achieve liberation.  There is no other way.  Then we talk about the Hinayana path and Mahayana path, we have to see how by depending on those paths one cans progresses towards liberation.  If you really understand that there is no other method except Buddhadharma to achieve liberation, and the mode or procedure of progressing on the path as it is being explained in the paths and grounds literature, a real understanding of all these points is said to bring great joy in the mind. In order for such joy and enthusiasm to come about, you have to know the mode of progress or the procedure as going about achieving liberation and enlightenment.  That is whole point of knowing the paths and grounds.  If you understand the paths and grounds and what it entails and what it involves, and if you gain a conviction and understanding that it is so and the ways it is presented,  then joy and interest will arise. That would be follows by enthusiasm. In order for joy and enthusiasm to arise, there is no way other than to start by studying and learning. So, there is no way out, other than first to learn the mode of progress and procedure on the paths that leads to liberation and enlightenment.
There will be no class coming Thursday and the whole of next week. But this doesn’t mean that you are free because we have home work and it is compulsory.   If you considered yourself as a student and as someone who want to learn, then you have to commit to learn. As such, it is compulsory for you to do the homework.  
We have talked about the paths and grounds many times; recently and in the past. There are many materials around.  You have to revise and review what were covered. You must gain at least an understanding in your mind what are all the paths constitute; what is the Path of Accumulation, what is Path of Preparation, what does it involves and what is the Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation? You must revise and review to have all these points clear in your mind.
This is a written homework. You need to produce short notes and a chart about the different paths, what does it involves, what exactly it is, what happen to those paths such as Path of Accumulation, Path of Preparation, Path of Seeing, Path of Meditation and so forth in particular producing the chart highlighting the manners and the stages on abandoning the afflictive and knowledge obscurations.  
Based on revising the material and then whatever understanding you have, you write your own notes and produce your own chart.  In that process, if you have qualms on the paths and grounds then you list out the qualms or questions at the side of your notes. 
You write the notes and make your own chart, and it is not simply writing things down. It is not the matter of cut and paste the chart that was given to you.  For example, what is the milestone for the Path of Preparation? As indicates in the chart, you need the union of calm abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness.  You have to think before you write it down. You need to be prepared so that if someone were to ask you “Why do you need the union of calm abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness to enter into the Path of Preparation? From your own side, you must at least have the answer. Whatever answers it is, whether it is right or wrong, it doesn’t matter. You must have an answer. You don’t just write down something without any thinking or reasons. Just reregulation is not the point. 
Why the union of calm abiding and special insight is needed at the Path of Preparation? If someone were to ask you, then you have to explain why. However, if you have qualms like “If I say this then this is the implication, and if I say that, that is the implication.” If you have thought like this, you have to write down all the opinions. 
This is the homework.  Please make a set of notes as if you are a presenter having to give a talk for 1.5 or 2 hours. From your own side, you have to be able to present it with confidence like “This is the mode of progress on the Hinayana path. This is the mode of progress on the Mahayana path.” You have to be that familiar in your head. So that is the homework. 
Of course we are not going to have time for everyone to stand up here for 1.5 or 2 hours to give their exposition of what they think. The aim of your homework should be a preparation for you to present the mode of progress on the Mahayana path and the mode of progress on the Hinayana path in front of a group of people in 1.5 to 2 hours. But do you have the material in your head to give that talk? The homework is an exercise to reach a point where you are confident enough if you have to give a presentation about Hinayana and Mahayana path to a group of people for 1.5 to 2 hours.
Khen Rinpoche: You got the idea?  We will try that. Alright?  The question is clear. That is.
The dharma is divided into two: 
Scriptural dharma
 Realization dharma 
What is the scriptural dharma?  
Many of you should have known this already. If you still don’t know by now, then now is the time for you to know this.   
The scriptural dharma consists of the 3 collections (pitakas or baskets):
Vinaya
Sutra 
Abhidharma 
What is the subject matter of vinaya? 
The scriptural collection that has its main subject matter is the higher training in ethical discipline.  This is non-negotiable and is a basic stuff that you must remember.
If you were to pick up any treatise, you might not be able to discover what the main subject matter is so easily. As such, the Tibetan dharma king of the past make a rule with regards to paying homage at the beginning of those texts that were translated from Sanskrit to Tibetan or when treatises are to be composed. The point behind these three different kinds of homage is to indicate the scriptural collections that this particular treatise falls into. So by looking at the homage you will be able to identify immediately and easily as to which scriptural collections that this particular treatise fall into.
In order to indicate the text is from the vinaya pitaka then the homage must start with “Homage to the Omniscient One”.
So if you see any treatise in Tibetan which starts “Homage to the Omniscient One”, then immediately you know that this text is part of vinaya pitaka. 
Khen Rinpoche: It is very easy but don’t forget. Next time when people ask, then you must know.
You have to remember everything such as when we start with scriptural dharma:
-  The scriptural dharma is divided into 3 pitakas, 
-  What is the main subject matter?
-  How do u know that this text is belongs to the vinaya pitaka?  
You have to remember everything.  You cannot just remember one and along the way you forget the earlier one. At the end of the class it is as if you learn nothing.  From your own side, you must have that that wish “I must try to remember everything of what I have heard. This is being said. That is the point.” You must have this wish all the time; otherwise, it is not going to work.  
The sutra pitaka show mainly the higher training in concentration.  
When we look at the Tibetan translation of the treatise, how do we know if the text is belonging to the sutra pitaka?   If the text starts with the verse of homage “Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas”, then that is the sign that the text is included in the sutra pitaka. 
The main subject matter of Abhidharma pitaka is the higher training in wisdom.  How do we know the text treatise is included in the Abhidharma pitaka? If the text starts with the verse of homage “Homage to the youthful Manjughosa”, then the text is included in the Abhidharma pitaka.  
You have to memorize these three scriptural collections, their main subject matter and based on the verse of the homage at the beginning as to which collection they belong to.
Another way of looking at scriptural collections is dividing into Hinayana collection and Mahayana collection.  How are they differentiated?  
The Hinayana scriptural collection is intended primarily for the Hinayana trainees
The Mahayana scriptural collections is intended for the Mahayana trainees
There are also terms like the scriptural collections that are common to both Hinayana and Mahayana.  There are also uncommon Hinayana scriptural collection and uncommon Mahayana scriptural collections.
The Mahayana scriptural collections can be divided into:
- the scriptural collection of causal Paramitayana
- the scriptural collection of tantra of the resultant Vajrayana 
As for the tantra of the resultant Vajrayana, there are 4 divisions:
Action tantra
Performance tantra
Yoga tantra 
Unsurpassed yoga tantra.  
These are the four classes of the secret mantra.  
This is a brief presentation of the scriptural dharma. 
As for the realizational dharma, it consists of the 3 higher trainings: 
Higher training in discipline, 
Higher training in concentration
Higher training in wisdom
Another way of looking at the realizational dharma in terms of the clear realizations of the three yanas (vehicles):
Clear realization of the Hearers vehicle
Clear realization of the Solitary Realizer 
Clear realization of the Great Vehicle.
When the clear realization of the three vehicles is expanded:
A. For the clear realization of the Hearer Vehicle:
Hearers Path of Accumulation,
Hearers Path of Preparation, 
Hearers Path of Seeing, 
Hearers Path of Meditation, 
Hearers Path of No More Learning. 
B. For the clear realization of the Solitary Realizer Vehicle:
Solitary Realizer Path of Accumulation,
Solitary Realizer Path of Preparation, 
Solitary Realizer Path of Seeing, 
Solitary Realizer Path of Meditation, 
Solitary Realizer Path of No More Learning. 
C. For the clear realization of the Mahayana Vehicle:
Mahayana Path of Accumulation,
Mahayana Path of Preparation, 
Mahayana Path of Seeing, 
Mahayana Path of Meditation, 
Mahayana Path of No More Learning. 
Khen Rinpoche:  I think there is no problem. You all know this? You know then you do like that. 
It may not be easy for some of you, nevertheless there is no choice and you have to just pay attention and work hard. You need to put in effort otherwise it is not going to work. There is no basis for learning or understanding of the explanation if you don’t even know the words. So at the minimum with no choice you have to know the words. You should be able to speak “This, this, this”. It is only then we can talk about the meaning.
The Great Vehicle of the Mahayana has 2 divisions:
Causal perfection vehicle
Resultant vajra vehicle.
In general there are 2 vehicles: the Hinayana and the Mahayana. Why are there these 2 vehicles? On what basis are they differentiated? This you have to know.
The Hinayana and Mahayana are not differentiated on the basis of view but rather than they are differentiated on the basis of conduct.
You have to memorize this. Even if you don’t know the reason, you should be able to say “The Hinayana and Mahayana are not differentiated on the basis of view, but rather than they are differentiated on the basis of conduct. But that is not enough at all because that is only the basis to build on. Then you should wonder about the meaning of the question: 
Why Hinayana and Mahayana are not differentiated by view rather they are differentiated by conduct?
When we talk about the view, the “view” here refers to the wisdom realizing emptiness.
The Hinayana and Mahayana are not differentiated on the basis of view because even to achieve the Hinayana liberation -the Hinayana Path of No-more-learning- you need the wisdom realizing emptiness. 
So from this you know why it is not correct to differentiate Hinayana and Mahayana on the basis of view. 
This is an example when many a time people may just say: “Yeah, Hinayana and Mahayana are not differentiated by view because in order for Hinayana to achieve liberation you also need the wisdom realizing emptiness”, and then they stop there. It is not so straightforward. Do you know why?
If somebody were to ask you: “Why do you do need the wisdom realizing emptiness to achieve liberation?” If you can’t answer that, then you cannot say you have understood it.
You have to see the reason why it is necessary to realize emptiness in order achieve the Hinayana liberation. In order to answer the question, you have to see the reason why without the wisdom realizing emptiness one cannot achieves the Hinayana liberation. 
There are many scriptural citations that can be found in Arya Nagarjuna, Aryadeva and Chandrakirti’s works that says “In order to achieve liberation one has to realize emptiness”. 
Do you have the confidence to be able to answer the question if someone were to ask: 
Even just to achieve liberation from samsara and not even enlightenment, why do you need to realize emptiness?  
Khen Rinpoche: You must have the confidence. I am asking whether you are confident or not. It is very good that you must have question yourself. If somebody asks, do you have the confidence to answer or not. Then you learn, otherwise you never learn anything. 
Student 1: In order to attain liberation, you must realize your true nature and have no dualistic appearance. Everything all phenomena are empty and nothing exists inherently. You see all phenomena don’t exist of itself on their own.
Khen Rinpoche: Good. If you have a better idea and confident, come and answer. Don’t waste time to talk. Short and quick.
Student 2: I think it is to cut the root of samsara by eliminating the ignorance so there is no need for you to go through the 12 links. That is how you get liberated. 
Khen Rinpoche: So your answer is to cut the root of samsara?
Why do you need wisdom realizing emptiness to cut the self-grasping ignorance? 
You all must follow and understand. Why I ask questions? This is also the indication to pursue a topic. From one question it leads to deeper understanding. So everybody has to hear the questions and think about it.  You are not able to answer the question fully because in the first place you are unable to posit exactly what exactly is samsara?  It is very easy to say “The root of cyclic existence is ignorance - self grasping”. If you cannot answer why you need the wisdom realizing emptiness to cut this ignorance, then…
This is very basic and you should be able to answer. If you cannot answer this after so many years of study, this is not acceptable. 
Khen Rinpoche: Give a precise and concise answer as to why you need the wisdom realizing emptiness to achieve just liberation, not even enlightenment. 
Student 3: So that you can cut the karma and affliction because the samsara is due to rebirths, due to karma and affliction. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why do you need wisdom realizing emptiness to overcome karma and afflictions? 
Student 3: It overcomes ignorance which is the self-grasping of the inherent ‘I’. So due to that karma and affliction arises.
Khen Rinpoche: Do you need the wisdom realizing emptiness to overcome self-cherishing?
Your earlier answer is not completely inadequate, and there is something there but that is not how discussions are carried out. You don’t just stop at that. I am just showing you the way how you can extend the analysis and discussion. In order for debate to stay, you must be able to continue and extend the analysis. 
What I am saying to you is that there is no need to realize emptiness to overcome self grasping because self grasping is the same as grasping at the I. 
That statement is put forth to you: “There is no need wisdom realizing emptiness to overcome ignorance because ignorance is just grasping at the I”.  Why do you need wisdom realizing emptiness to overcome that?
Student 3: It is because of that other afflictions arise. Because you see I as inherently existent as more important than others. 
Khen Rinpoche: All I am saying is “There is no need to realize emptiness to overcome self grasping because there is no need for you to realize emptiness to overcome grasping at I”. 
Student 3: Because there are other possibilities 
Khen Rinpoche: There is no need to realize emptiness to overcome self cherishing, isn’t it? Or do you need? Do you need wisdom realizing emptiness to overcome self cherishing or not? 
Student 3: I thought need. 
Khen Rinpoche: You thought need?
If you say need, then it follows that self cherishing and self grasping are the same what. Are self cherishing and self grasping the same?
Student 3: No
Khen Rinpoche: What is the difference then?
Student 3: One is seeing that I exist inherently, and one is seeing that I is more important than others. 
Khen Rinpoche: Which entails the other? Which subsume the other?
Student 3: You mean which is larger?
Khen Rinpoche: OK.
Many a time you people are at the most has one question and then you just stop there. That shouldn’t be the case. As a result of asking one question there has to be an outflow in that it leads to another question. We are not saying that you can therefore talk about anything under the sky and then just throw in anything. It has to be connected. Precisely there are many connections. Therefore you cannot just stop at one question. Whatever position you hold, there is always an implication which leads to further questions and further review.
You must always think of everything when you are studying. This is just an example. While you have to be able to say “Yes, in order to achieve even just liberation, you need the wisdom realizing emptiness” but you cannot stop there. You have to think and think until you figure out with confident in your mind that “Yes, this is the reason. These are the reasons”. Until then you have to think about it. When you think about it means it has to come from your own side. You really must want to know. You must find that it is important enough to want to think about it, and you want to think about it. You must think and think and think. You must have the interest. Only when you have the interest, then you will think and think and think. One day when you hear somebody or your teacher giving you the summary, and because of having thought about it, and are dying to want to know the answer, and when somebody gives you the answer that hits the mark, it will stays in your mind forever. You will feel so happy. Finally you have found something that makes sense and posit with reason. That is how you develop a real taste of Buddha’s teaching “Wow…the Buddha’s teaching is so amazing.” However, in order for this to happen, you first must want to know. In the first place, do you even want to know? Without that, it is not possible.  
It is so vitally important that when we learn the Buddhadharma you must really want to know and always think about stuff “Why like that? Why like this?” and analyzing all the time. If you don’t do that, and I can sit here and talk about things like “Hinayana Mahayana are not differentiated by view and they are differentiated by conduct”, and you feels very good “Yeah, I learned something” and just leave it there. But nothing really great is achieved because when somebody who is pursuing the topic asking you to explain, then you is stuck.
When we study the Buddhadharma, you must reach a point where you are able to overcome whatever doubts you have pertaining to the topic. You should have no more doubts and no more qualms. You must gain a conviction “It is like this, and it is not like that.” That is the kind of confidence you need. That is how you uphold the Buddhadharma. With regards to Buddhadharma here, upholding the scriptural dharma is done on the basis of first learning the Buddhadharma. Then on the basis of learning, you think about stuff to the point where you have thought about it and gain an ascertainment “It is like this and it is not like that because of this this”. You have eliminated the doubts and then you can share with others with conviction and confidence. That is what is meant by spreading the scriptural dharma and upholding the scriptural dharma. 
It is on the basis of personal learning and having gained a decisive understanding and having eliminated the doubts, then you are able to share that correct Buddhadharma with conviction with others. That is what it meant by propagating the scriptural dharma and upholding the scriptural dharma. It is through this way that you are able to eliminate the misconception and misunderstanding in the mind of sentient beings.  This is what you mean by working for others by eliminating their wrong views or their misconception. 
As mentioned in the Lamrim, sentient beings create negative karma because of either not knowing or having wrong ideas about stuff. Because of not knowing or just believing in the wrong stuff, we accumulate a lot of non-virtue especially the extremely heavy karma of abandoning the dharma. As explained in the Lamrim how terrible or negative karma it is to abandon the Dharma. How do you stop people from doing that? You have to help them to overcome their lack of understanding or their wrong understanding through giving them the correct understanding.
Giving the dharma is the supreme gift as giving the dharma surpasses greatly to giving material. You have to see the reason why this is so. When you give material gifts, you only solve the problem here and now and at the most give temporary relief. But the gift of Dharma is a gift of long term happiness to others because through the gift of dharma, people are able to eliminate their wrong view or lack of understanding. And through that eliminate their karma that causes them to be in their cyclic existence. From this you can see that the gift of dharma greatly surpasses the material gifts.
It is important to learn the Buddhadharma and to overcome whatever misunderstanding or wrong concepts and doubts, and from your own side gain a conviction “It is really like this and it is not like that”. When you have this kind of ascertainment or conviction, it really makes a big difference to how you share the Dharma with others, and it makes a big difference to your own personal practice as well.
As mentioned in the teaching that through hearing and reflection we eliminate all qualms and doubt about the teachings. Then you meditate on the meaning that you have ascertained through your hearing and reflection. So through these three - hearing, reflection and meditation - removing the doubts, and through gaining an ascertainment and familiarizing yourself with that, that is how one progress on the paths and grounds is.
Why you need the wisdom is realizes emptiness to attain even liberation? To attain liberation means that gain liberation from cyclic existence. In order to be free from cyclic existence, we have to overcome the root of cyclic existence. Without overcoming the root of cyclic existence, there is no liberation to talk about. The principal cause of our own cyclic existence is our own three mental poisons: ignorance, anger and attachment. Of the three, anger and attachment is said to come from ignorance. That means ignorance is the root of cyclic existence. Ignorance is the root of all the afflictions. We have to know why. We must be able to explain why that is the case, isn’t it? 
Self-grasping and ignorance is the root of cyclic existence. Then what exactly is this self-grasping and ignorance?  All the four Buddhist tenets agreed that ignorance is the root of samsara. But all of them have their own interpretation as to what ignorance means i.e. they all have different interpretation as to what is the root of cyclic existence. Since you have already studied tenets, you should know this by now.
It is not easy. If you remember from your study, GES, SS, MOS, and AMWS said that in order to achieve liberation there is no need to realize the selflessness of phenomena. You just need to realize the selflessness of person. Why? You must be able to answer why?
Here, we are speaking from the context of the highest school, CMWS. They are the same in saying that ignorance is the root of samsara but the CMWS do not posit ignorance to be just mere unknowingness. As in the Lamrim, ignorance is of two types: *(see notes)
Merely not knowing something 
The discordant class of wisdom (there is a fundamental misapprehension of reality)
Of the two, the fundamental misapprehension of reality is posited to be the root of cyclic existence.
 We have looked at it before in the Lamrim. If you haven’t forgotten about it, then this is it. However, if you have forgotten, then you should check where it is being mentioned in the Lamrim. If you say you have interest in learning and if you are someone who has forgotten where it is being mentioned in the Lamrim, and because you have interest and take it to heart, “Now I know it is in the Lamrim but I do not know where it is being mentioned, then I am going to find it”. You must have the interest on your own side and the strong desire to check it out when you go home. So even if you have forgotten, you must have that wish to learn; otherwise, there is no way we can continue with our study here.It is not easy but it requires effort. The main thing that I am trying to say is “You want to learn or not? Are you bothered enough to learn? 
If we look at CMWS' manner of positing what is ignorance, self-grasping ignorance is basically the mind grasping at true existent. Whether it is grasping at a truly existent person or truly existent phenomena, self-grasping ignorance is that grasping at true existent. So according to the CMWS, the self of person and the self of phenomena are not differentiated by the basis of negation. They are differentiated on the basis of emptiness.
According to the CMWS, the root of samsara (the root of cyclic existence), is this self-grasping ignorance. Self-grasping ignorance is none other than grasping at the true existent.
What is self-grasping ignorance? It is this grasping at true existent and nothing else. What is the way to overcome the self-grasping ignorance? The way to overcome self-grasping ignorance is to see that whatever is grasped at by this mind does not exist. By realizing the thing that the ignorance is grasping does not exist, and when you see the emptiness of that, then that is what is meant by realizing selflessness. The self, the object of negation that is conceived by ignorance does not exist.  Seeing that is the seeing of selflessness.
This is how you should answer the earlier question. You need to be able to say and explain that in order to overcome samsara, we must be able to cut the root of samsara. 
What is the root of samsara? It is the self-grasping ignorance. So in order to overcome this self-grasping ignorance, we have to realize emptiness.
If you pursue it in detail, and along this line of reasoning, then this is about it. Or do you think that there is something else you need to settle. There is still something leftover that you need to settle before you can decisively say “Yes or this is it”. Have we pursued till the end of the reasoning, and that means you have fully justified the answer.
How you pursue the line of reasoning to answer the question as to why you need wisdom realizing emptiness to achieve liberation? In order to achieve liberation it means to free you from cyclic existent. In order to free ourselves from cyclic existence, we have to overcome the root of cyclic existence. The root of cyclic existence is self-grasping ignorance, and in order to overcome grasping at true existent, you have to actualize the wisdom realizing emptiness. Why? Because in order to overcome the grasping of true existent, we have to generate a mind, whose mode of apprehension is the opposite to that of ignorance? This is the brief description of the line of reasoning of the answer. Is there additional question in order to resolve as to why you need wisdom realizing emptiness to achieve liberation?
With this line of reasoning, you still are not confident and still think the question is not answered?
Student 4: As you have said just now that the Hinayana and the Mahayana have the same view. What I really don’t understand and mixed up is selflessness of a person for the lower school and the Hinayana, whereas for CMWS of both selflessness of person and selflessness of phenomena. My question is that both Hinayana Path and Mahayana Path go through the same five paths. When they reached the Path of Seeing, is the seeing of the emptiness the same? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student 4: If the seeing of the emptiness is the same, that means one pursue the meditation thinking of the selflessness of a person would be sufficient.
Ven Gyurme: You are talking about the Prasangika?
Student 4 : When the Hinayana and the Mahayana all go through the same five path..
Ven Gyurme: You are talking about the object? The object that is realized is the same. Or are you talking about the mind? Object or the mind? 
Khen Rinpoche: The object realizing emptiness is the same.
Student 4: For the Mahayana, the object of negation is the same but the bases of the object, they are different.
Ven Gyurme: Basis of emptiness?
Student 4: Basis of emptiness are different.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what you all mean. When you say different, what do you mean by that? The basis is different?
Student 4: The floor and the microphone. Their bases are different. 
Khen Rinpoche:  Hinayana Path of Seeing see emptiness also see the floor emptiness? The emptiness of the microphone also same as the Mahayana Path of Seeing, so what is the difference? 
Student 4: You are saying the Mahayana Path?
Khen Rinpoche: What they see is the same thing. What is the difference?
Student 4: So the mind analyzing that whichever bases, the emptiness will be the same. 
Khen Rinpoche: The emptiness is the same. What is the next question? The Path of Seeing is the same thing so?
Student 4: Yeah, that concludes actually by meditating on the selflessness of a person is sufficient to realize emptiness directly with the mind.
Khen Rinpoche: I understand where you are coming from. 
Khen Rinpoche: All four schools use the term “grasping at a self of person” but they differ greatly as to what it means. Everybody else has the same view except the CMWS. Although they use the same word, you cannot mix up. I would like to ask you: “According to CMWS, what is a self of person and what is selflessness of person? 
According to CMWS, grasping at a self of person means with the person as the basis, the mind apprehending the person as truly existent. 
This is different from grasping at a self of person that is asserted by the other tenets. 
From the perspective of the CMWS, the grasping of the self of person that is asserted by the lower tenet is considered very coarse. The grasping of person that is asserted by the CMWS is subtle.
According to CMWS, when you hit the Path of Seeing, you realize emptiness directly and realize both the selflessness of a person and the selflessness of phenomena, because the object of negation is the true existent or inherent existent:
The true existent that is negated on the basis a person is the selflessness of a person. 
The true existent is negated on the basis a phenomenon, is selflessness of phenomenon. 
So according to the CMWS, the selflessness is differentiated on the basis of emptiness and not by the object of negation. 
So on the Mahayana Path of Seeing, when you achieved the uninterrupted Path of Seeing, you gained the antidote to overcome the acquired grasping of self of person and acquired grasping of self of phenomena. 
According to CMWS point of view, when you achieved the Mahayana Path of Seeing, they don’t just realized the selflessness of a person, but they also realized the selflessness of phenomena at the same time.
Student 4: For the Hinayana Path of Seeing, they just realized the selflessness of person. 
Khen Rinpoche: When you achieved the path of release of Hinayana Path of Seeing, that individual has also removed the acquired grasping at a self of person and acquired grasping at a self of phenomena.
When that individual progresses through the Hinayana Path of Meditation and reaches the Hinayana Path of No-more-learning, he has necessarily removed all form of grasping at the self; whether a self of person or self of phenomena. 
So when one becomes a foe destroyer or arhat, one necessarily has abandoned both grasping at a self of person and self of phenomena. Therefore, according to CMWS, these two, grasping at a self of person and phenomena are posited as afflictive obscuration. Because that arhat has abandoned the afflictive obscuration, therefore he is called foe destroyer (arhat). He is called an arhat because he has abandoned afflictive obscuration.
The arhat has abandoned the grasping of a self of phenomena. How does he abandon that? Definitely he must have realized selflessness of phenomena; without which there is no way to abandon the grasping of a self of phenomena.
Student 4: That is why I am little confused. When we study the SS, the Hinayana is concentrating on only the selflessness of person. It is only in CMWS, you then emphasized both. That is the confusion that the end point are still the same. How could they come to that sense?
One thing good about Student 4 is that whenever she asked question, she has thought about stuff. This is very important that you must always think about stuff.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ignorance (extract from Path to Enlightenment in Tibetan Buddhism by Geshe Archarya Thubten Loden)
Ignorance is a deluded state of mind confused about its object by being unclear about the nature of such things as the law of cause and effect, the Three Jewels, the four noble truths and so on. There are many forms of ignorance but two are particularly significant. 
The ignorance of not knowing karma, the relationship between your actions and the results they produce. This form of ignorance allows you to continue accumulating actions that will bring lower rebirths. 
The ignorance that does not know the true nature of self and phenomena and this is the  
root, or basic, ignorance that binds you to cyclic existence. It is called the self-grasping ignorance because it observes self and phenomena and grasps at them as being self-existent, or inherently existent. From the self-grasping ignorance all other delusions arise and thus contaminated actions are accumulated and cyclic existence perpetuated. Until you eliminate the self-grasping ignorance by correctly perceiving the emptiness of inherent existence of the self and phenomena, it is not possible to permanently remove other delusions. However, by practising the wisdom perceiving emptiness and thus overcoming this basic ignorance, all delusions are completely and permanently ceased. If we wanted to kill off a large oak tree, we could start by trimming its leaves and pruning the outer branches. However, without a great and constant effort the branches and leaves would just keep growing back. By using a sharp axe to cut the tree at its roots, though, it would be killed off forever and no more effort would need be 
applied. The great tree of cyclic existence continues to grow more leaves of suffering from the branches of karma and delusion. However, if we cut its root of self-grasping ignorance with the sharp axe of wisdom wielded by the steady hand of concentration, we will kill the tree of cyclic existence forever. 
The real opponent to ignorance is developing the wisdom perceiving the true nature of all phenomena, their emptiness of inherent existence.
Selflessness of persons and the selflessness of phenomena (Extract BP1 Ornament of Clear Realization)
There are two types of selflessnesses: 
1. the selflessness of person and 
2. the selflessness of phenomena 
and they can be further divided into coarse selflessnesses and subtle selflessnesses. 
Selflessness of person: 
• The coarse selflessness of person is the emptiness of a permanent, unitary, and independent person. 
• The subtle selflessness of person is the emptiness of a self-sufficient substantially existent person. 
• Both the Sutra and Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School assert that the subtle selflessness of person is the emptiness of a self-sufficient substantially existent person. To them, that is the subtlest selflessness of person and there is nothing subtler than that. 
Selflessness of phenomena: 
• The coarse selflessness of phenomena is the emptiness of subject and object as different substantial entities. 
• The subtle selflessness of phenomena is the emptiness of true existence. 
• Only the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School asserts both the coarse selflessness of phenomena and the subtle selflessness of phenomena. 
 The Sutra Autonomy Middle Way School only asserts the subtle selflessness of phenomena i.e., the emptiness of true existence. They do not assert the coarse selflessness of phenomena i.e., the emptiness of subject and object as different substantial entities because, to them, subject and object are different entities. 
The Autonomy Middle Way School does not assert true existence. If an object can exist by way of its own uncommon objective mode of subsistence without being posited by the force of appearing to a non-defective awareness, then that object would be truly existent. 
Both the Consequence Middle Way School and Autonomy Middle Way School assert that phenomena do not exist truly. But the meaning of true existence for the two schools is different. There is a difference in the level of subtlety as the object of negation presented by the Consequence Middle Way School is subtler than that presented by the Autonomy Middle Way School. 
Because the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School asserts coarse and subtle selflessnesses of person and of phenomena, therefore there is the presentation on the main object of meditation of the persons of the three vehicles. 
According to the Autonomy Middle Way School, the main object of cultivation (or object of meditation):- 
• For the hearer lineage is the selflessness of person i.e., the emptiness of a self-sufficient substantially existent person; 
• For the solitary realiser lineage is the emptiness of subject and object as different substantial entities 
• For the bodhisattva lineage is the emptiness of true existence. 
According to the Autonomy Middle Way School, one only needs to realise the selflessness of person in order to achieve liberation from samsara. This is because that realisation is the antidote to the root of samsara, which is grasping at the self of person. One does not have to realise the emptiness of true existence in order to achieve liberation. 
Both Consequence Middle Way School and Autonomy Middle Way School assert that the root of samsara is the grasping at the self of person. However, the self of person as defined by the two schools are different. To the proponents of the Consequence Middle Way School, the emptiness of the self-sufficient substantially existent person is not the subtle selflessness of person. To them, this is only the coarse selflessness of person. Therefore, simply realising the emptiness of the self-sufficient substantially existent person will not help one to achieve liberation as this is not the root of samsara. To them, there is something subtler than that, which is the emptiness of a person. Therefore, to cut the root of samsara and achieve liberation, one needs to realise emptiness. 
Because all of you are predisposed towards the Consequence Middle Way School, due to the strength of those imprints, when we present something that is opposite to its assertions, it is difficult for you all to accept them!
Mahayana Paths & Grounds
According to Prasangika Madhyamika
Amended on 19th October 2008