Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L8 upload.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.638435
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 8                            Date: 26th March 2013

The three vehicles are:
1. The Hearers’ Vehicle
2. The Solitary Realisers’ Vehicle
3. The Bodhisattvas’ Vehicle
We have to know that these are different from the four Buddhist  tenets  and
their  proponents. These two are different things.

When we look at the history of the presentation of the tenets and the  three
vehicles, there are some commentaries that said that:
• the GES and the SS belong to the Hearers’ Vehicle.
• the MOS belongs to the Solitary Realisers’ Vehicle.
• the MWS belongs to the Great Vehicle.
You should know that this is incorrect.

A proponent of a Buddhist tenet is not necessarily someone who  has  entered
the path, be it the hearers’, solitary realisers’,  or  the  Mahayana  path.
That proponent need not necessarily have generated a  path  already  in  his
mind. As such it is not necessarily someone who has entered any one  of  the
three paths. We only talk  about  the  three  vehicles  in  the  context  of
someone who has entered the path already.

There is a difference between:
• a proponent of any one of the Buddhist tenets
• someone who belongs to one of the three vehicles
There are proponents of the Buddhist tenets who have not generated any  path
in their mind.

For example:  A Hinayanist is someone who has  entered  the  Hinayana  path,
i.e.,  someone  who  has  generated  the  path  in  his  continuum.  Such  a
Hinayanist could be a Proponent of the  Great  Exposition,  a  Proponent  of
Sutra, a Proponent of Mind Only, or a proponent of the Middle Way.

In the same way, someone who has entered the solitary realisers’ path  could
be a proponent of any one of  the  four  Buddhist  tenets.  He  could  be  a
Proponent of the Great Exposition, a Proponent  of  Sutra,  a  Proponent  of
Mind Only, or a proponent of the Middle Way.

Likewise, someone who has entered the Mahayana path, a Mahayanist, could  be
a Proponent of the Great Exposition, a Proponent of Sutra,  a  Proponent  of
Mind Only, or a proponent of the Middle Way.

• Therefore the proponent of Hinayana  tenets  is  not  the  same  thing  as
  someone who has entered the Hinayana path. They are not the same.
• It is also wrong to think that the proponent of  Mahayana  tenets  is  the
  same as a Mahayanist, i.e., someone who has entered the Mahayana path.  It
  is wrong to think they are the same thing.

Why is a proponent of Mahayana tenets not necessarily a Mahayanist?

Khen Rinpoche: I would like the new students to try  and  answer  this,  not
the old students who have completed the Basic Program.

What  fallacy is incurred if one  posits  that  the  proponent  of  Mahayana
tenets is necessary a Mahayanist?

1. The Hearers’ Vehicle
2. The Solitary Realisers’ Vehicle
3. The Bodhisattvas’ Vehicle (also known as the Great or Mahayana Vehicle)
In  this  context,  the  vehicles,  paths,  and   clear   realisations   are
synonymous.

When we talk about the path, what  exactly  is  it?  What  is  the  boundary
between the generation of the path and the absence of the path? It  is  said
the  path  is  generated  the  moment  a  fully  qualified  renunciation  is
developed in the mental continuum. Renunciation is the determination  to  be
free. On the other hand, a proponent of any one of the four Buddhist  tenets
need not be someone who has generated a fully  qualified  renunciation,  the
determination to be free, in his mind.

Each of the three vehicles has their own respective five paths:
1. The path of accumulation
2. The path of preparation
3. The path of seeing
4. The path of meditation
5. The path of no-more-learning

There are:
1. The five paths of the hearers
   • The path of accumulation of the hearers
   • The path of preparation of the hearers
   • The path of seeing of the hearers
   • The path of meditation of the hearers
   • The path of no-more-learning of the hearers
2. The five paths of the solitary realisers
   • The path of accumulation of the solitary realisers
   • The path of preparation of the solitary realisers
   • The path of seeing of the solitary realisers
   • The path of meditation of the solitary realisers
   • The path of no-more-learning of the solitary realisers
3. The five paths of the bodhisattvas
   • The path of accumulation of the bodhisattvas
   • The path of preparation of the bodhisattvas
   • The path of seeing of the bodhisattvas
   • The path of meditation of the bodhisattvas
   • The path of no-more-learning of the bodhisattvas

Using the example of the hearers’ path:
1. Path of accumulation
Why is it called the path of accumulation? The path of  accumulation  refers
to  the  time  in  which  that  individual  who  has  entered  the  path  is
accumulating the collection of merit by primarily focussing on  hearing  and
reflection  among  the  threefold  activity  of  hearing,  reflection,   and
meditation.

When the path of accumulation is divided, there are three divisions:
1. Small path of accumulation
2. Middling path of accumulation
3. Great path of accumulation

2. Path of preparation
In Tibetan, the path of preparation is sbyor lam;  sbyor  literally  meaning
connecting or linking to.

As opposed to the path of accumulation that  primarily  focuses  on  hearing
and reflection, the focus here is on  cultivating  the  wisdom  arisen  from
meditation. It is meditating on or familiarising the mind with  the  meaning
of the scriptures, in particular, the meaning of selflessness that has  been
ascertained through the earlier activities of hearing and reflection.

The meditation on the meaning of the scriptures that  had  been  ascertained
earlier and, in particular, meditating on the meaning  of  selflessness,  is
done through the medium of a mental image or meaning generality.

This stage of spiritual development prepares the  person  to  actualise  the
path of seeing and will connect or link this person to the  path  of  seeing
where this person will see selflessness directly as  opposed  to  seeing  or
realising it via a meaning generality.

When the path of preparation is divided, there are four divisions:
1. Heat stage of the path of preparation
2. Peak stage of the path of preparation
3. Forbearance stage of the path of preparation
4. Supreme mundane qualities stage of the path of preparation


3. Path of seeing
The third path is the path of seeing. Why is it called the path  of  seeing?
This is because the individual is seeing truth directly for the first  time.


Ven Gyurme: Rinpoche always says, “rising  path,  rising  path.”  It  sounds
like that, right? It is the “right seeing path!”

Khen Rinpoche: I remember one time Rinpoche  was  talking  about  dependent-
arising. There was an English lady  whose  English  pronunciation  was  very
good. When she heard Rinpoche’s teachings on  dependent-arising,  she  heard
“Tibetan  uprising.”  For  one  year,  she  heard  Rinpoche  say    “Tibetan
uprising.” So she could not get the teachings.  I  hope  that  you  are  not
hearing this in the same way!

There are different ways of dividing the path of seeing. One way is  talking
about the path of seeing in terms of:
• the wisdom of meditative equipoise of the path of seeing and
• the wisdom of subsequent attainment of the path of seeing.

4. Path of meditation
On the path of seeing, the individual has seen the truth  directly  for  the
first time. Once one has seen the object  directly,  with  respect  to  that
object, there is no higher mode of apprehending it than that.

What happens then on the path of meditation? On the path of meditation,  the
individual familiarises his mind with what  he  has  seen  on  the  path  of
seeing, i.e., the truth. He is familiarising himself with  that  realisation
over and over again.

5. Path of no-more-learning
This refers to the time when there is no need  to  train  further  on  one’s
respective path, regardless  of  the  vehicle  one  has  entered.  There  is
nothing more to train or to learn.

So when we talk about the five hearers’ paths, there are:
1. The hearers’ path of accumulation
2. The hearers’ path of preparation
3. The hearers’ path of seeing
4. The hearers’ path of meditation
5. The hearers’ path of no-more-learning

On the path of accumulation,  the  individual  is  focused  on  accumulating
merit.  Among  the  threefold  activities  of   hearing,   reflection,   and
meditation, the individual on the path of accumulation focuses primarily  on
hearing and reflection on the meaning of the  scriptures,  and  particularly
on the meaning of selflessness in order to gain  the  correct  understanding
of selflessness.

On the path of preparation,  that  individual  primarily  meditates  on  the
meaning of selflessness that had been settled in his own  mind  through  the
earlier hearing and reflection. He meditates  on  selflessness  through  the
medium of a mental image or meaning generality. This meditation  will  bring
him closer to and prepares him for realising  selflessness  directly,  i.e.,
seeing the truth directly. He is primarily meditating on the  wisdom  arisen
from  meditation.  This  meditation  can  counter  or  stop  many   manifest
afflictions such as manifest  anger,  manifest  attachment,  and  so  forth.
Through meditating over and over again on selflessness via  a  mental  image
or meaning  generality,  his  mind  is  prepared  for  the  eventual  direct
perception of selflessness.

When the individual sees the truth directly for the first  time,  then  that
individual, for the first time, comes to possess  in  his  hand  the  actual
antidote to the afflictions.

In the previous class we talked about the two types of obscurations:
1. Afflictive obscurations
2. Non-afflictive obscurations

This wisdom directly perceiving selflessness becomes the actual antidote  to
the afflictive obscurations.

An afflictive obscuration can be seen in terms of:
• a path of seeing abandonment
• a path of meditation abandonment
There are some afflictive obscurations that have  to  be  abandoned  by  the
path of seeing, while other afflictive obscurations  are  abandoned  by  the
path of meditation.

• What is a path of seeing abandonment?  The  afflictive  obscurations  that
  are abandoned by the  path  of  seeing  are  the  intellectually  acquired
  afflictions. When an individual directly perceives the truth for the first
  time, that is when he enters and achieves the  path  of  seeing.  At  that
  time, the intellectually acquired afflictive obscurations are abandoned.
•  The  innate  afflictive  obscurations  are  abandoned  by  the  path   of
  meditation when one is familiarising one’s mind with and  meditating  over
  and over again on what has been realised earlier.

After abandoning all the  innate  afflictive  obscuration  on  the  path  of
meditation, this hearer achieves the hearers’ path of  no-more-learning  and
he achieves the respective enlightenment of his own path. In this  case,  he
achieves the result of the foe destroyer, a hearer arhat.

When we look at the presentation of the path according to the GES,  this  is
how the five paths are generally explained.

   7B  Actual presentation of the grounds and paths

   It is asserted that there are differences in the way in which the persons
   of the three vehicles traverse the path.

   Those of the hearer lineage conjoin the view realizing the person  to  be
   empty of  being  self-sufficient  substantially  existent  with  a  small
   collection of merit and,  having  cultivated  that  for  at  least  three
   lifetimes, attain the small enlightenment.

   Those of the solitary realizer lineage conjoin  the  view  realizing  the
   person to be empty of being self-sufficient substantially existent with a
   middling collection of merit and, having cultivated that for at least one
   hundred eons, attain the middling enlightenment.

   Bodhisattvas conjoin the view realizing the person to be empty  of  being
   self-sufficient substantially existent with a great collection  of  merit
   and, having cultivated that for at  least  three  countless  great  eons,
   attain the great enlightenment.

   There are differences in the way in which they accumulate merit.

   Bodhisattvas, having accumulated merit for at least three countless great
   eons on the great stage of the path of accumulation and below,  actualize
   the heat stage of the path of preparation through to the path of no-more-
   learning on one seat.

   Those of the solitary realizer lineage, having accumulated merit  for  at
   least one  hundred  great  eons  on  the  great  stage  of  the  path  of
   accumulation  and  below,  actualize  the  heat  stage  of  the  path  of
   preparation through to the path of no-more-learning on one seat.

   Those of the hearer lineage accumulate merit on all four  learning  paths
   and, even after having attained a superior’s path, must also train on the
   learning paths for up to fourteen lifetimes (Page 5).

According to the GES:
• The object of meditation of the three vehicles is the same: the  emptiness
  of a self-sufficient substantially existent person.
• In terms of  the  object  of  negation,  the  apprehension  of  the  self-
  sufficient substantially existent person is also the same.
• But the time that they spend  in  accumulating  the  collection  of  merit
  differs:
   o The hearer with a small collection of merit cultivated  over  at  least
     three lifetimes attains the hearers’ enlightenment.
   o The solitary realiser with a middling collection  of  merit  cultivated
     over  at  least  one  hundred  eons  attains  the  solitary  realisers’
     enlightenment.
   o The bodhisattva with a great collection of  merit  cultivated  over  at
     least three countless great eons attains full enlightenment.


According to the GES, the bodhisattva accumulate merit over three  countless
great eons. On which path among the five paths does  these  three  countless
great eons occur? It happens on the great stage of the path of  accumulation
and below. According to the GES, the collection of merit  happens  primarily
on the path of accumulation. Based on that, there  is  some  meaning  behind
the term, “the path of accumulation.”

After having accumulated this huge amount of merit, the bodhisattva,  within
the same meditative equipoise, actualise and manifest:
• the heat stage of the path of preparation
• the peak stage of the path of preparation
• the forbearance stage of the path of preparation
• the supreme mundane qualities stage of the path of preparation and
• the path of seeing
• the path of meditation
• the path of no-more-learning.
All these occur within one meditative equipoise in  one  sitting.  According
to the GES, this is how  a  bodhisattva  achieves  enlightenment.  The  very
start of  the  path  of  preparation,  i.e.,  the  heat  stage  of  path  of
preparation, all the way up to the path of no-more-learning is  achieved  in
one meditative equipoise in one sitting.


   They assert that a buddha’s form aggregate is not a buddha because it  is
   an object to be abandoned. This is so because it is included in the  same
   lifetime as the bodily support of the earlier bodhisattva on the path  of
   preparation. This is necessarily so because the  bodily  support  of  the
   bodhisattva on the path of  preparation  is  an  aggregate  projected  by
   previous karma and afflictions.

   A complete enjoyment body (Skt. sambhogakaya) is not accepted, and it  is
   asserted that, at the time of a nirvana without remainder  of  a  supreme
   emanation body, the continuum of awareness is severed.

   Although a buddha superior has abandoned all sufferings and their origins
   without exception, it  is  not  contradictory  that  he  still  has  true
   sufferings in his continuum. This  is  because  abandoning  every  single
   affliction that observes true sufferings is posited  as  abandoning  true
   sufferings.

   From the point of attaining the state of foe destroyer until they give up
   their compositional factor of life [i.e., until  they  die],  hearer  and
   solitary realizer foe destroyers are posited  as  being  with  remainder,
   whereas from the point of giving up their compositional  factor  of  life
   [i.e., having died] they are  posited  as  having  passed  beyond  sorrow
   without remainder [i.e., having attained a nirvana without remainder].

   Although at the time of a nirvana with remainder they have abandoned  the
   afflictive obscurations without exception, they have  not  abandoned  the
   non-afflictive obscurations. Although at the time of  a  nirvana  without
   remainder the non-afflictive obscurations are not destroyed by the  power
   of an antidote, they do not exist because at that time, their  support  –
   the continuum of awareness – is severed (Pages 5 – 6).

You may have heard of the twelve deeds of  the  Buddha,  starting  from  the
deed of birth all the way up to the deed of passing away. According  to  the
GES:
• The first deed of being born up to the deed  of  subduing  the  maras  are
  considered to be the deeds of an ordinary person.
• The deed of achieving enlightenment, the deed  of  turning  the  Wheel  of
  Dharma, and the deed of passing away into parinirvana are considered to be
  the deeds of the Buddha.

According to what is commonly accepted  with  regard  to  the  life  of  the
Buddha, he finished the accumulation of merit, then he sat under  the  bodhi
tree. After subduing the hosts of maras under the  bodhi  tree,  he  entered
meditative equipoise and within that meditative equipoise, in  one  sitting,
he achieved enlightenment.

That moment of entering meditative equipoise is the heat stage of  the  path
of preparation. In that one sitting, he progressed from the  heat  stage  of
the path of preparation all the way up  to  the  path  of  no-more-learning.
From the perspective of the  Hinayana,  this  is  how  the  Buddha  achieved
enlightenment in one sitting  under  the  bodhi  tree.  After  subduing  the
maras,  he   entered   meditative   equipoise   and   then   he   actualised
enlightenment. The time he entered meditative equipoise is  where  the  heat
stage of the path of preparation started.

When we analyse from this perspective, who then is that person  who  entered
meditative equipoise under the bodhi tree after having  subdued  the  maras?
Isn’t that person an ordinary  being?  A  person  who  is  on  the  path  of
preparation is an ordinary being, not a superior being.  An  ordinary  being
has a contaminated body and mind. On the basis of that  same  body,  in  one
meditation session and in one sitting, that person progresses  all  the  way
up to enlightenment.
After  having   achieved   enlightenment,   according   to   this   Hinayana
perspective, the body is still there. It is the same body  that  the  Buddha
had when he was an ordinary being on the  path  of  preparation.  Therefore,
according to this Hinayana perspective, the Buddha’s body is not the  Buddha
Jewel because it is true suffering.

According to the Hinayana perspective, after having attained  enlightenment,
that body is the same body that the Buddha had when  he  entered  meditative
equipoise under the bodhi tree. At that time, he was not  a  buddha  but  an
ordinary being. Being an ordinary being means having  a  contaminated  body.
That body that entered meditative equipoise  is  the  result  of  karma  and
afflictions. He achieved enlightenment in  one  sitting  but,  after  having
achieved  enlightenment,  the  body  is  still  there.  From  the   Hinayana
perspective, that body is contaminated and it is true suffering. It  is  not
the Buddha but is an object of abandonment.

According to the Hinayana perspective, they do assert  a  supreme  emanation
body,  i.e.,  the  form  body  of  the   Buddha.   After   having   achieved
enlightenment up to the point before manifesting the deed  of  passing  into
parinirvana, the form body during  that  period  is  the  supreme  emanation
body. After passing into parinirvana, the continuum  of  matter,  i.e.,  the
body is severed. The continuum of the Buddha’s mind is  also  severed,  just
like the flame of a  butter  lamp  going  out  of  existence.  This  is  the
Hinayana explanation.

In the Mahayana, there is a presentation of  the  complete  enjoyment  body,
one of the form bodies of the Buddha. This is not accepted however from  the
Hinayana perspective because, once the Buddha passed into  parinirvana,  the
continua of the Buddha’s consciousness and body were severed.

You may have heard the term, “nirvana  with  remainder.”  According  to  the
Hinayana perspective, this refers to  the  time  when  the  Buddha  had  his
contaminated body up to just before he  passed  into  parinirvana.  At  that
time, the Buddha had a contaminated body from before. That period is  called
nirvana with remainder.

After passing into parinirvana or passing beyond the sorrowless  state,  the
continua of both the body and consciousness were severed.  We have to  think
about this particular perspective with regard to the  Buddha  going  out  of
existence. The continua of both matter and consciousness were  severed.  Was
there  something  that  remained  behind?  What  remained   was   the   non-
compositional factor.  We have to think about what it really means  when  it
is said that the Buddha goes out of existence.

The solitary realisers also accumulate merit. They accumulate merit  for  at
least one hundred great eons. This happens on the great stage  of  the  path
of accumulation and below. The solitary realisers also actualise  their  own
enlightenment in one sitting starting from the heat stage  of  the  path  of
preparation through to the path of no-more-learning.

The  body  of  the  person  who  has  achieved   the   solitary   realiser’s
enlightenment is  also  contaminated  due  to  the  same  reasons  mentioned
before.  That body is the continuation of the  body  that  he  had  when  he
entered the heat stage of the path of preparation. Between that time,  after
having achieved the solitary realiser’s  enlightenment  up  to  just  before
passing into nirvana, is called the nirvana with remainder.

When this solitary realiser passes away, he  achieves  the  nirvana  without
remainder. It is the same thing. The continua of  matter  and  consciousness
are severed. When the  aggregates  of  that  solitary  realiser  go  out  of
existence, since the continua of the body  and  consciousness  are  severed,
there isn’t any question of getting another set of aggregates.

Those of the hearer lineage  are  said  to  accumulate  merit  on  all  four
learning paths. The four learning paths are  all  the  paths  excluding  the
path  of  no-more-  learning.  The  path  of  accumulation,  the   path   of
preparation, the path of seeing, and the path of  meditation  are  the  four
learning paths. The hearers do not only accumulate  merit  on  the  path  of
accumulation but, in fact, they accumulate merit on all  the  four  learning
paths.

Those of the hearer lineage, even  after  having  attained  the  path  of  a
superior, must train on the learning paths for up to fourteen lifetimes.  So
those of the hearer lineage accumulate merit  on  all  four  learning  paths
over at least three  lifetimes  after  which  they  actualise  the  hearer’s
enlightenment. After having actualised the hearer’s enlightenment, there  is
also the hearer’s nirvana with  remainder  and  nirvana  without  remainder.
After achieving the nirvana  without  remainder,  similar  to  the  previous
explanation, the continua of both the consciousness and body are severed.

According to the GES, there are three final vehicles. This means that  there
are three final fruits of attainment.  Why?  Because  sentient  beings  have
different dispositions, there are three final vehicles and  therefore  three
final fruits of attainment.

For those of the hearer lineage, once  they  have  achieved  their  hearer’s
enlightenment, i.e., after having achieved the  nirvana  without  remainder,
there is nothing more or higher than that. For them,  that  is  their  final
fruit of attainment. It is similar for the solitary realiser. For  those  of
the bodhisattva lineage,  once  they  have  achieved  buddhahood,  there  is
nothing more to achieve.

In summary, when we look in more detail, what exactly is abandoned when  one
achieves  either  the  hearer’s  nirvana  with  remainder  or  the  solitary
realiser’s nirvana with remainder?  Of the two obscurations, the  object  of
abandonment is the afflictive obscurations. The non-afflictive  obscurations
are not abandoned. But when they achieve the nirvana without remainder,  the
non-afflictive obscurations also cease to  exist.   That  cessation  happens
not because of the force of an antidote but because the basis for  the  non-
afflictive obscurations has ceased to exist.  Therefore  the  non-afflictive
obscurations also cease to exist.

It is different for someone who has achieved the Mahayana path  of  no-more-
learning. The person who achieves the Mahayana path of  no-more-learning  is
a buddha, the nirvana with remainder. Nevertheless, a buddha is someone  who
has completely abandoned both  the  afflictive  obscurations  and  the  non-
afflictive obscurations.

For someone who has achieved the Hinayana nirvana  with  remainder,  whether
it is a hearer or solitary realiser, as discussed in  the  previous  lesson,
we said that although they have achieved  their  respective  nirvanas,  they
still  have  the  four  causes  of  non-knowingness  that  are  due  to  the
complexity and subtlety of phenomena, distance, time, place, and  so  forth.
They are not all-knowing, but a buddha is not like  that.  Someone  who  has
achieved buddhahood is someone who realises all phenomena directly  as  they
are.

According to the GES, a buddha is all-knowing  but  their  understanding  of
all-knowingness and omniscience is not like that of the Mahayana.  According
to the GES, the convention, obscuration to knowledge, does  not  exist.  The
GES asserts that a buddha knows everything but a buddha has to focus on  the
object to be able to know it. The Mahayana understanding, however,  is  that
a buddha, in any one moment, cognises  every  phenomena.  According  to  the
Hinayana, a buddha  knows everything but a buddha  has  to  know  everything
serially, i.e., object by object, in stages. In the  Mahayana  presentation,
a buddha cognises all phenomena directly in any one moment.


   When the proponents of things, [i.e., the Great  Exposition,  Sutra,  and
   Mind Only schools,] differentiate  definitive  and  interpretive  sutras,
   they differentiate them by means of whether or not they are  suitable  to
   be accepted literally.

   [Some[1] among] the two schools that propound objects, [i.e.,  the  Great
   Exposition and Sutra schools,] do not  assert  the  Great  Vehicle  (Skt.
   Mahayana) scriptural collection to be  the  Buddha’s  word  because  most
   Proponents of the Great Exposition accept that the sutras are necessarily
   sutras of definitive meaning (Page 6).

“Proponents of things” or proponents  of  truly  existent  things  primarily
refer to the GES and the SS. Perhaps it is all  right  to  include  the  MOS
because they do assert that the thoroughly  established  nature  and  other-
powered nature are truly existent.

According to the GES and the SS, the Buddha does not talk about things  that
are untrue or false. That being the case, whatever the Buddha had  said  can
be taken literally. Therefore, for  them,  the  sutras  are  necessarily  of
definitive  meaning.  For  them,  you  have  to  take  the  Buddha’s   words
literally. For the proponents of these Hinayana tenets, the GES and the  SS,
when they look at the Mahayana scriptural collections, it cannot  fit  their
minds. Therefore they assert that the Mahayana  scriptural  collections  are
not the Buddha’s words. It cannot fit their mind because their worldview  is
that, as long it is the Buddha’s words, you can take  them  literally.  When
you look at the Mahayana teachings, you cannot take them literally  all  the
time. According to their perspective, because it doesn’t  fit  into  reality
of the situation, it is not the  sutras  of  definitive  meaning.  Therefore
they are not the Buddha’s words.

We have finished the GES now.

As long as you have (1) the understanding of the  two  truths  according  to
the GES, (2) the meaning of the two selflessnesses of person,  (3)  how  the
five paths of the three vehicles are traversed, and (4) what is  the  object
of abandonment, I think that is sufficient. As long as you have an  idea  of
what I have just mentioned, then it is enough. It helps if you can  do  this
little exercise on your own:  summarise  your  understanding  of  the  GES’s
presentations of the two truths, the three vehicles, and the five  paths  in
your own words:
• With regard to the two truths, posit an illustration for each.  Using  the
  illustrations, highlight the difference between the two  truths.  That  is
  for the two truths.
• With regard to the two selflessnesses of persons, summarise  in  your  own
  words what the non-existence of the permanent,  unitary,  and  independent
  self is. What is the problem if such a self is said to exist?
• You can do the same thing with the non-existence  of  the  self-sufficient
  substantially existent person. What exactly is the  non-existence  of  the
  self-sufficient substantially existent person? What is the problem  if  we
  were to say that such a person exists? What  are  the  reasons  given  and
  logic used to establish  that  a  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
  person does not exist?
• With regard to the three final vehicles, you have to be clear in your  own
  mind what the three final vehicles and their respective five paths are. It
  is very clear in the root text. For example, the main object of meditation
  is the emptiness of the  self-sufficient  substantially  existent  person.
  Then there are the differences in which merit  is  accumulated.  Therefore
  the method of traversing the path is different. It also said that when you
  achieve nirvana without remainder, you go out  of  existence  due  to  the
  continua of the body and mind being severed.

When  we  look  at  the  next  school,  the  SS,  we  will  focus  on  their
presentation of the  two  truths.  We  are  not  going  to  talk  about  the
selflessnesses of persons because their assertions are the same as the  GES.
If you have understood all the discussions up to now, then that  is  enough.
We are not going to talk about that.

As for the presentation of minds,  the  valid  cogniser  and  the  different
kinds of mind, that was already covered in the previous  module  on  lo-rig,
so we will not talk about it again.

If you have questions on the GES, think about it and prepare to  bring  them
up in the next class. Only questions pertaining to the GES.


|Great Exposition School:                                             |
|Actual presentation of the grounds and paths                         |
|               |Hearer Vehicle    |Solitary        |Bodhisattva     |
|               |                  |Realiser Vehicle|Vehicle         |
|Object of      |                                                     |
|meditation     |Emptiness of a self-sufficient substantially existent|
|               |person                                               |
|               |                  |                |                |
|Collection of  |Small             |Middling        |Great           |
|merit          |                  |                |                |
|Length of time |                  |                |                |
|of accumulating|At least three    |At least one    |At least three  |
|the the        |lifetimes         |hundred eons    |countless great |
|collection of  |                  |                |eons            |
|merit          |                  |                |                |
|               |                  |                |                |
|Attainment     |Small             |Middling        |Great           |
|               |enlightenment     |enlightenment   |enlightenment   |
|               |Accumulate merit  |Having          |Having          |
|The manner of  |on all four       |accumulated     |accumulated     |
|accumulating   |learning paths and|merit for at    |merit for at    |
|merit          |                  |least one       |least three     |
|               |Even after having |hundred great   |countless great |
|               |attained a        |eons on the     |eons on the     |
|               |superior’s path,  |great stage of  |great stage of  |
|               |must train on the |the path of     |the path of     |
|               |learning paths for|accumulation and|accumu-lation   |
|               |up to fourteen    |below, actualise|and below,      |
|               |lifetimes         |the heat stage  |actualise the   |
|               |                  |of the path of  |heat stage of   |
|               |The four learning |preparation     |the path of     |
|               |paths are 1) the  |through to the  |preparation     |
|               |path of           |path of         |through to the  |
|               |accumulation, 2)  |no-more-learning|path of         |
|               |the path of       |in one sitting. |no-more-learning|
|               |preparation,      |                |in one sitting. |
|               |3) the path of    |                |                |
|               |seeing and        |                |                |
|               |4) the path of    |                |                |
|               |meditation        |                |                |





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong


-----------------------
[1] Jamyang Shayba’s Great Exposition of Tenets says: ‘Even most  Proponents
of Sutra Following Scripture and Proponents  of  Sutra  Following  Reasoning
assert that the Great Vehicle scriptural collections are  the  word  of  the
Buddha requiring interpretation.’

