Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L20 upload.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.753075
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 20                          Date: 16th May 2013

Question: Regarding the Hinayana tenets  and  the  Mahayana  tenets,  yYoouu
explained that it was the characteristic mark oof Mahayana tenets that  they
posit the four bodies of athe bBuddha. Is that the only basis  for  positing
the difference between the Hinayana and the Mahayana  tenets  or  ?  Or  are
there some  other  specific  differences  for  highlighting  the  difference
between the Hinayana and the Mahayana tenets?.

Answer: As mentioned in one of the previous lessons, one of the things  that
set the Mahayana tenets apart from the Hinayana tenets is  the  presentation
by  the  Mahayana  tenets  presentation  of  what  a  bBuddha  is.  In   the
presentation, Tthey talked about the four embodiments or the four bodies  or
four kayas of a bBuddha. I think the Hinayana tenets are not  able  to  make
such a presentation.

I wonder if the mind of enlightenment or / bodhicitta is  also  one  of  the
things that sets the Mahayana tenets  apart  from  the  Hinayana  tenets.  I
wonder whether the Hinayana tenets  do  accept  that  there  is  a  mind  of
enlightenment/ bodhicitta or not.

About  Uusing  the  assertion  of  external  objects  as  a  point  of   the
differentiation or between the Hinayana and Mahayana tenets, I think it   is
not feasible I think  because one of the sub-schools of  the  AMWS  and  the
CMWS itself also asserts  external  objects.   and  the  CMWS  also  asserts
external objects. These two are Mahayana tenets.

When If you look at the Hinayana tenets, I do  not  n’t  think  there  is  a
presentation of a progressing towards enlightenment by  traversing  the  ten
bodhisattva grounds. Such  a  presentation  is  not  made  in  the  Hinayana
tenets.

This is something that requires further thoughts. I would think  Athat  bout
the presentation of the four bodies, I would think that this is one  of  the
key distinguishing features of the Mahayana  tenets  that  sets  them  apart
from  the  Hinayana  tenets.  The  Hinayana  tenets  do  not  have  such  an
explanation of the four bodies of a bBuddha.

We have have completed finished the MOS and we have started on  the  MWS  in
the previous lesson.

When If you look at the presentation of the view of  selflessness,  you  can
see  that  there  is  a  progression  in  terms  of  the  subtlety  of   the
explanations as we move from  one  tenet  to  the  nextother.  When  If  you
compare the presentation of the view of selflessness  in  the  Hinayana  and
Mahayana tenets, you  will  find  that  the  presentation  of  the  view  of
selflessness in the Mahayana tenets is more deeper and more  profound.  Even
within the Mahayana tenets,  one  sees  alsoalso   the  differences  in  the
subtlety of their respective presentations of selflessness.
All the four Buddhist tenets present a view of selflessness.
All the four Buddhist tenets are the same in asserting that the root of  all
our problems, the root  of  cyclic  existence,  and  the  root  of  all  our
sufferings is the conception or apprehension of a self, or the  apprehension
of a self, the or grasping at the self. All Buddhist  tenets  say  the  same
thing. They All Buddhist tenets all say that the only way to  eradicate  the
apprehension of a self is through realiszing selflessness.

 They are all the same, and Yyou have  to  know  that.   aAll  the  Buddhist
tenets say the same thing with regards to  what  is  the  root  of  all  our
problems, which is the apprehension of a self.  The  only  antidote  to  the
apprehension of a self is to realisze the selflessness.

Having said  that,  these  four  Buddhist  tenets  have  their  own  way  of
asserting what exactly this apprehension of a  self  is  exactly,  and  they
have their own assertions  as  to  exactly  what  exactly  is  the  view  of
selflessness that is the antidote to the apprehension  of  a  self.  As  you
move through the tenets, you will see that the presentation of  selflessness
becomes increasingly more profound and extensive.

The most important kind of understanding that athe  Buddhist  can  have  get
and the most important concept to settle is this view of selflessness.  What
exactly is selflessness? This at is the a most important concept  to  settle
and to delineate clearly in your mind. What exactly does that means?

We talked about the eEightfold nNoble pPaths,  .  oOne  of  which  is  right
view. When one arrives at the gains a correct  meaning  of  selflessness,  I
think one can considers this understanding of the selflessness to  be  right
view. Essentially,

Wwhat is right view? Right view is basically  seeing  things  as  they  are,
understanding  what exactly reality is , and how things exist exactly.  This
is of crucial importance. This is the reason why we educate ourselves  about
the four Buddhist tenets.

Why do we have to study the tenetslearn? The point here is to discover  what
reality is. How do things and  events  and  ,  we  ourselves  and  phenomena
exist? What is their nature? Why is it so  important  to  have  right  view,
i.e.,  realising  things  as  they   are?   ;   in   this   case   is   just
seeing/realizing/understanding things as they are?  Why is it  so  important
to just rrealisze the nature of things  and  phenomena  and  the  nature  of
reality? Because when if we have the right view, when if  our  understanding
of reality is correct, right, then our the kind of interaction we have  with
reality will be valid.

On the basis of right view, you have right  analysis,   or  right  thinking,
or right thought.  When  If  you  look  at  our  lives,  all  our  problems,
unhappiness,  and sufferings always come from our  misconceptions,  and  the
distorted perceptions of reality. We go against reality. We have  all  these
wrong conceptions.  We suffer because we have all these wrong  conceptionss.
If we want to stop our problems and sufferings, we have to stop these  wrong
conceptionss. The only way to stop these misconceptions is to gain an  exact
understanding of how things exist. Therefore, right view is  the  basis  for
right thinking, right perception,  and  our  the  correct  interaction  with
reality.

On basis of right view  we  have  right  thought.  On  the  basis  of  right
thoughtinking, one has right speech.  Basically Our  whatever  physical  and
verbal actions that we carry out  will  be  realistic  and  not  harmful  to
others. So Bbased on the right thought, inking, you will know what  to  say,
what not to say, when to say something,  and when not to say something.

When weIf you have that, then we have right action.  We  can  could  perhaps
relate right action to living our lives according to karma, abandoning  non-
virtues and creating virtues. All these can only come  from  right  thought,
the right perception of reality that , which comes from right view.

Then right livelihood would also  follow  naturally.  One  would  engage  in
right livelihood and apply oneself by exerting  right  effort  as  well,  by
putting effort correctly into that would also come about..

On the  basis  of  all  these,  then  you  can  have  the  correct  kind  of
mindfulness. Without the earlier understanding or realizations,  it  is  not
really possible to have right mindfulness.  So you see  how  we  start  from
right view, then  you  have  right  thought,  inking,  right  speech,  right
action, right livelihood, and then you have right effort. On  the  basis  of
all these then comes right mindfulness, ; the correct kind  of  mindfulness.
So Wwithout the earlier understandings, it is not possible to  have  correct
mindfulness.

On the basis of right mindfulness, correct kind of  mindfulness  then  comes
right concentration. Right cConcentration here is  not  talking  about  just
having single-pointedness of  mind,  ;  the  ability  which  being  able  to
concentrate. That is not the point. The right concentration that is part  of
the eEightfold nNoble pPath is the concentration that  has  selflessness  as
its object of observation. This is the kind of concentration that we need.

The whole point of developing mindfulness is to be able to  develop  single-
pointedness of mind, then having this single-pointedness  of  mind  focusing
on the ultimate nature of reality,  - the selflessness. The goal is  not  to
gain et single-pointedness  of  mind  for  the  sake  of  having  a  single-
pointedness of mind. It That is athe tool. With  right  concentration,  with
the calm-abiding (or /meditative serenity)  focusing on  selflessness,  then
one strives to develop special  insight.  With  special  insight,  you  will
finally be able to overcome disturb  the  afflictions/destructive  emotions.
This is the distinguishing feature of Buddhist teachings, Buddhism.

As I have mentioned to you before, a couple  of  times,  you  have  to  see,
discover and realisze for yourself how extremely important it  is  to  learn
and educate yourself, especially going more deeperdeeply  into the  Buddhist
teachings. Literally Wwe have to study the Ggreat Ttreaties which is what  ,
like what we are trying to  do  here.  We  look  deeper  into  the  Buddhist
teachings, and think about it.

You say you want to meditate, but you must know how  to  meditate.  What  do
you want to meditate on? What is  the  purpose  of  your  meditation?  As  I
mentioned in the last  lesson,  one  of  the  most  important  thing  is  to
discover for ourselves—through  the  whole  point  of  llearning,  educating
ourselves,  and  practiscing—,  one  of  the  most  important  thing  is  to
discover for ourselves how  do  we  exist,  how  do  others  exist,  how  do
phenomena exist, and what is the ultimate nature or  final  ,  what  is  the
final reality?

Of course Llearning about the ultimate nature of reality  as  like  what  is
presented in the tenets is not an  easy  feat.  Many  conditions  must  come
together for hearing  the  explanations,  reading  the  texts,  reading  and
different commentaries, discussing with your peers, and thinking about  what
you have learnt. stuff. You have to  do  all  these  in  order  to  gain  an
understanding, and  to clarify, and to iimprove ncrease  your  understanding
of selflessness.

If you do not n’t think  what  you  have  learnt  over  time,  and  by  just
listening will not lead you toto  any understanding. No  way.  You  need  to
analysze,  on something that requires  the  understanding  of  reality.  You
need to looking  at the presentation of selflessness from all the  different
angles,  using all kinds of different avenues of reasoning, logic,   and  so
forth. Only then you will you  be able to eliminate your qualms,  your  lack
of understandings,,  and your doubts.

   2  Divisions

   There are two divisions:
1. Autonomists (Skt. Svatantrika) and
2. Consequentialists (Skt. Prasangika).

   3  Meaning of each division

   The explanation of the Autonomy School and the Consequence  School  (Page
   19).
 (Root text page 19)
2 Divisions
There are two divisions:
1. Autonomists (Skt. Svatantrika) and
2. Consequentialists (Skt. Prasangika).
3 Meaning of each division
The explanation of the Autonomy School and the Consequence School.
There are two divisions of proponents of the Middle Way:
1. 1. Middle Way Autonomist s(Svatantrika-Madhyamaka) who  assert  existence
   by way of its own character.
2. 2.  Middle  Way  Consequentialists  (Prasangika-Madhyamaka)  who  do  not
   assert existence by way of its own character.
So what Those proponents of Middle Way who asserts existent by  way  of  its
own character are AMWS.
Those proponents of Middle Way who do not assert existent by way of its  own
character is a CMWS.
The thing that differentiates the AMWS from  the  CMWS  is  their  assertion
beliefs that phenomena things and events, basically  everything,  exists  by
way of their own character.

Existing by way of its own character
What is existencet by way of its own character and  what  is  non-existentce
by way of its own character?
What is the difference between these two?



Existing ent by way of its own character means that when you search for  the
imputed object, at the end of the day, you will be able to find  it,   i.e.,
you will be able to point to something that is theat imputed object.

Because the AMWS asserts that  all  things  and  events  are  findable  upon
analysis, when you look for it are findable, such as the  person.  Therefore
the person and all other phenomena exist by  way  of  their  own  character,
because when you look for the ‘I’ or the person, according to the AMWS,  you
will be able to point to something and say: “There”,  “That  is”.  According
to them, whatever they point to, there is  something.  Uultimately  you  can
identify: “That is the person. That is the self.”  Therefore,  according  to
the AMWS, everything exists by way of its own character.
Since tThe AMWS asserts that all phenomena exist by way of their  character,
i.e, ; and iwhen f you look for theat imputed object, you will  be  able  to
find it, t. This means that the  person  also  exists  by  way  of  its  own
character, because  the  person  can  be  found  whenif  you  look  for  it.
According to the AMWS, you will be able  to  point  to  something  and  say,
“There it is!” Ultimately you can identify, “That is  the  person.  That  is
the self.” At the end of the day, you should be able to point  to  something
that is the person.

This at is what they believe. This  is  their  fundamental  premise  of  the
AMWS— and from which they are working on. tThere is something you can  point
to that is theat very thing itself. So for the “‘I,”’,  they posit that  the
mental consciousness is the illustration of the person. They do thought  ink
aabout it and , and after  eliminating  e  the  various  possibilities,  and
through their own thinking, they say, ; “If you  have  to  say  who  at  the
person is, the mental consciousness is the person.”.

TBasically  the  AMWS  asserts  says  that,   if  it  is  an  existent,   it
necessarily exists by way of its own character. Why? Because when  you  look
for the imputed object,  you  definitely  you  will  be  able  to  point  to
something that is the object. Therefore the object it can be found. So  what
they are saying is that if it is an existent you will be  able  to  find  it
when you look for it.  In other words, iIf you are  not  able  to  find  the
object it when you look for it,  that means it does not exists at all.

If you do remember the our As discussedion in from the previous lesson,  the
Pproponents of Middle Way, both the AMWS and the CMWS, do  not  assert  true
existencet. So Bboth of them are the same in  asserting  that  phenomena  do
not truly exist truly, and there isn’t true existent. But:
• tThe AMWS says that the meaning of true existencet is not the same as  the
  meaning of existing ent by way of its own character, ; whereas
• the CMWS says that true existence and t, existing ent by way  of  its  own
  character are different ways of saying the same thing. but Tthey means the
  same thing.



                              1 Autonomy School


   The explanation of the  Autonomy  School  (Skt.  Svatantrika)  has  seven
   outlines:
   1. definition,
   2. divisions,
   3. etymology,
   4. way of asserting objects,
   5. way of asserting object-possessors,
   6. way of asserting selflessness, and
   7. presentation of the grounds and paths.

   1  Definition

   The definition of an Autonomist is: a Proponent of the Middle Way who, by
   way of accepting autonomous reasons, does not assert true existence  even
   conventionally.

   Autonomist (Skt.  Svatantrika)  and  Proponent  of  the  Middle  Way  who
   Propounds Inherent Existence are equivalent (Page 20).

True existence
(Root text page 20)
Autonomy School
The  explanation  of  the  Autonomy  School  (Skt.  Svatantrika)  has  seven
outlines:
1. definition,
2. divisions,
3. etymology,
4. way of asserting objects,
5. way of asserting object-possessors,
6. way of asserting selflessness, and
7. presentation of the grounds and paths.
1 Definition
The definition of an Autonomist is: a Proponent of the Middle  Way  who,  by
way of accepting autonomous reasons, does not  assert  true  existence  even
conventionally.
Autonomist (Skt. Svatantrika) and Proponent of the Middle Way who  Propounds
Inherent Existence are equivalent.
Let us ’s try to understand the meaning of true existencet.
The AMWS have their own take on what exactly is true existence is  exactlyt.
Their interpretation ultimately can be traced to what  the  Buddha  said  in
t“The Descent into Lanka Sutra”.  There is a quotation  from  “tThe  Descent
into Lanka Sutra” that reads, : “All phenomena exist  through  appearing  to
the consciousness. , Aall phenomena exist conventionally and  all  phenomena
do not exist ultimately.”

Exist conventionally
Why is it that all phenomena exist conventionally?
All phenomena exist  conventionally  because  phenomena  exist  through  the
force of that phenomena appearing to a consciousness.
How do we posit the existence of phenomena?
The existence of phenomena is posited through the force  of  them  appearing
to a consciousness. For that reason, all phenomena exist conventionally.
So Tthe Buddha said, : “All phenomena exist conventionally.”.  What  is  the
reason that for Buddha to saidy that?
All phenomena exist conventionally because  all  phenomena  are  posited  to
exist  through  the  force  of  the   phenomena   their   appearing   to   a
consciousness.
So Tthis at is the reason why all phenomena  exist  conventionally  and  not
existing ultimately.

Exist ultimately
For, if a phenomenon can exist without being posited through  the  force  of
appearing to a consciousness,  then  that  phenomenon  would  be  ultimately
existent.

According to the AMWS, if a phenomenon is established  by  way  of  its  own
uncommon mode of existence[1] without being posited  through  the  force  of
appearing  to  a  non-defective   awareness[2],   that   phenomenon   exists
ultimately. That phenomenon is truly existent. This is the meaning  of  true
existence to the AMWS.
According to AMWS this is the meaning of true existent.

If there is anything that you point to that is established  by  way  of  its
own uncommon mode of existent (existent from its  own  side)  without  being
posited through the force of that phenomena  appearing  to  a  non-defective
awareness, then  that  phenomena  would  be  existing  ultimately  or  truly
existent.
So, if a phenomenon is established by  way  of  its  own  uncommon  mode  of
existent without being posited through the force  of  appearing  to  a  non-
defective awareness, then that phenomenon would be truly existent.
But because according to the AMWS, there is no isn’t any  phenomenonon  that
you can point to that is is established by way of its its own uncommon  mode
of existencet without being posited through the force of appearing to a non-
defective  awareness.  ,  Ttherefore  that  phenomenaon   does   not   exist
ultimately or truly exist. . All phenomena have to exist conventionally.

According to the AMWS, how do things exist?
In order for something to be considered an existent, it has to be  something
that is appearing to a mind.
According to them, all phenomena are posited  because  they  appear  to  the
mind, i.e. posited through appearing to a  consciousness  and  therefore  it
exists.
According to the AMWS, this is the meaning of true existence.  If  there  is
anything that you can point to  that  is  established  by  way  of  its  own
uncommon mode of existence (i.e. existing from its own side)  without  being
posited through the force of that phenomenon appearing  to  a  non-defective
awareness, then that phenomenon will  exist  ultimately  or  will  be  truly
existence.
So, if the phenomenon is established by way of  its  own  uncommon  mode  of
existence without posited through the force of appearing to a  non-defective
awareness, then that phenomenon would be truly existence.
According to the AMWS, there isn’t any phenomenon  that  you  can  point  to
that is established by way of its  own  common  mode  of  existence  without
being posited through the force of appearing to a non-defective awareness.
You cannot point to any phenomena like that.
Therefore phenomena do not exist ultimately.
Therefore all phenomena have to exist conventionally.
How do things exist according to the AMWS?
In order for something to be considered as  an  existentce,  it  has  to  be
something that is appearing to a mind. According to  them,   Aall  phenomena
are posited because they appear to a mind, i.e. the  phenomena  are  posited
through appearing to a consciousness. Therefore it exists.
The AMWS assert that in order for something to exist, it has to  be  posited
by mind.
Here “posited by mind” means that that phenomenon must appear to a mind.
Because it appears to athe mind, therefore that phenomenon can  be  posited.
Therefore it is an existentce.

On top of that, the AMWS also assert that there must be something also  from
the side of the object, i.e.,  there must  be  existence  from  of  its  own
side.

These  two  collectively  account  for  the  existence  of  for  any   given
phenomena.
In short, Ffor anything to exist:
1. It must appear to a mind
2. There is also existence from the side of the object.
When these two come together,  then thatere is how things exists.
Therefore tThe AMWS do not accept that phenomena are established by  way  of
their its own uncommon mode of existence without being posited  through  the
force of appearing to a non-defective awareness.

Returning Going back to the quotation from the Descent to the  Lanka  Sutra,
all phenomena exist because they appear to a  consciousness,  i.e.,  through
the are posited through the force of appearing to a mind.
If phenomena exist then they must appear to a  mind.  That  is  how  we  can
posit that phenomenon. Therefore it makes it an existence.
So it must appear  to  a  mind.   What  exactly  is  this  mind?  What  then
constitutes this mind?

The AMWS and CMWS have a different assertion as to what this mind is—a  mind
that when a phenomenon appears to it, the phenomenon can be .
What is this mind if a phenomenon appears to it, then it can  considered  as
an existent.ce?

There is a difference between the AMWS and CMWS.
According to the AMWS, this  particular  mind  has  to  be  a  non-defective
awareness.
In what way is an a non-defective awareness non-defective?
It is non-defective,  i.e.,  there is nothing  wrong  with  that  particular
mind existing by way of its own characters.
You have to remember the quotation from Descent to the Lanka Sutra,  because
that is the basis:
Phenomena are posited through the force of appearing to a mind.
What is this mind? AMWS say  that  this  mind  has  to  be  a  non-defective
awareness.
What is the meaning of a non-defective awareness?  How  is  a  non-defective
awareness non-defective?
What exactly about it is non-defective?
The factor of it existing by way of  its  own  character  is  non-defective,
because it that cannot be harmed by a reason.
• According to the AMWS, them, all phenomena anything  and  everything  that
  exist must exist by way of its own character.
• According to AMWS, if it is an existentce, that phenomenon is  necessarily
  posited through the force of it appearing to a non-defective awareness.
• If whatever basis in question, Iif an that object  or  the  basis  is  not
  posited through the force of appearing to a non-defective awareness,  then
  that object basis is a non-existentce, i.e., it does not exist..
   [Root text: page 20]
   2 Divisions
   There are two divisions:
   1. Sutra Middle Way Autonomists (Skt. Sautrantika-Svatantrika-Madhyamika)
   and
   2. Yogic Middle Way Autonomists (Skt. Yogacara-Svatantrika-Madhyamika).
   The definition of a Sutra Middle Way Autonomist is: a  Proponent  of  the
   Middle Way who propounds  a  presentation  of  conventionalities  through
   mostly conforming with the Proponents of Sutra.
   The definition of a Yogic Middle Way Autonomist is: a  Proponent  of  the
   Middle Way who propounds  a  presentation  of  conventionalities  through
   mostly conforming with the Proponents of Mind Only.

   2  Divisions

   There are two divisions:
   1. Sutra Middle Way Autonomists (Skt. Sautrantika-Svatantrika-Madhyamika)
      and
   2. Yogic Middle Way Autonomists (Skt. Yogacara-Svatantrika-Madhyamika).

   The definition of a Sutra Middle Way Autonomist is: a  Proponent  of  the
   Middle Way who propounds  a  presentation  of  conventionalities  through
   mostly conforming with the Proponents of Sutra.

   The definition of a Yogic Middle Way Autonomist is: a  Proponent  of  the
   Middle Way who propounds  a  presentation  of  conventionalities  through
   mostly conforming with the Proponents of Mind Only (Page 20).
In these two definitions, the words,  “‘mostly conforming,”’  mean  most  of
the time but not  all of the time.
   [Root text: page 20]

   4  Way of asserting objects

   Existence by way of its own characteristics, existence from its own side,
   and inherent existence are equivalent.

   Uncompounded space, true cessations, the past and future, and the  subtle
   selflessness of persons are both non-affirming negatives and conventional
   truths.

   Ultimate truth, final reality, and the subtle selflessness  of  phenomena
   are equivalent (Pages 20 – 21).
4 Way of asserting objects
Existence by way of its own characteristics, existence from  its  own  side,
and inherent existence are equivalent.
Uncompounded space, true cessations, the past and  future,  and  the  subtle
selflessness of persons are both non-affirming  negatives  and  conventional
truths.
Ultimate truth, final reality, and the subtle selflessness of phenomena  are
equivalent.
• Existence by way of its own character, (2) existence from  its  own  side,
  and (3) inherent existence are mutually inclusive.
•  Ultimate  truth,  (2)  suchness,  and  (3)  the  subtle  selflessness  of
  phenomena are mutually inclusive.

Here Yyou see here  that there is a difference in the  presentation  of  the
two truths according to the AMWS and the MOS.


According to the MOS:
• In the MOS, Eemptiness is an ultimate truth. In the MOS,
• Tthe subtle selflessness of a persons is an ultimate truth.

According to the AMWS:
• Tthe subtle selflessness of a persons is a conventional truth.
• Tthe subtle selflessness of phenomena  is an ultimate truth.
The subtle selflessness of phenomena here is referring to the  emptiness  of
true existence.

According to the AMWS, ultimate truth and emptiness are mutually  inclusive.
E
The emptiness here  is the selflessness of phenomena,  -  the  emptiness  of
true existence.
TTherefore, according to AMWS, the subtle selflessness of a persons  is  not
an emptiness.

The definition of the two truths,  -conventional truth and ultimate  truth,-
is not given in the root text for the AMWS but it  is  similar  pretty  much
the sto ame as the MOS[3]. Page 1 of your chart.

|                     |Conventional truth     |Ultimate truth         |
|Autonomy Middle Way  |An object that is      |An object that is      |
|school               |realiszed in a         |realiszed in a         |
|(Svantantrika        |dualistic manner by the|non-dualistic manner by|
|Madhyamaka)          |direct valid cogniszer |the direct valid       |
|                     |that directly realizes |cogniszer that directly|
|                     |it.                    |realiszes it.          |
|Mind Only school     |That which is realized |That which is realiszed|
|(Cittamatra)         |through                |through                |
|                     |dualistic appearance by|the subsidence of      |
|                     |a valid                |dualistic              |
|                     |direct perceiver that  |appearance by a valid  |
|                     |directly realiszes it  |direct                 |
|                     |                       |perceiver that directly|
|                     |                       |realizes it            |

According to the AMWS, what is an ultimate truth? An
uUltimate truth is athe truth for the ultimate awareness.
You can read “ultimate” here as referring to the ultimate awareness. An u
Ultimate awareness here refers to the meditative  equipoise  of  a  superior
being, i.e., ; which is the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness.
In Tibetan, ultimate truth is dDon  dam  bden  pa:  which  we  talked  about
before cannot bring this completely from the English words ultimate truth.
• Don literally means object,
• Dam is the short for bden pa which means holy or ultimate.
• Bden pa in this context refers to the ultimate awareness,  the  meditative
  equipoise of a superior being.

Don here is the object; Tthe object here is the emptiness.
Simply speaking, E emptiness is an ultimate truth.
All phenomena, other than emptiness, are conventional truths.


Although  emptiness  is  an  ultimate  truth,  emptiness  does   not   exist
ultimately.
Why does emptiness does not exist ultimately?
• Because emptiness exists conventionally.
Why does emptiness exist conventionally?
• Because it is posited through the force of appearing to a mind.
•
According to the AMWS, if it is an existencte:
• It is necessarily not ultimately existencte.
• It is necessarily exists conventionally.

There is a reason why you have to make a distinction between  (1)  emptiness
being an ultimate truth and (2) emptiness ,  being  ultimate  existence  and
notnot  being ultimately existentce. There is a difference.
Although emptiness is an ultimate truth, it  but emptiness  does  not  exist
ultimately.
Why emptiness does not exist  ultimately?  Why  is  it  that  emptiness,  an
ultimate truth,  does not n’t exist ultimately?
Because  everything  that  exists,  includinge  emptiness,  have  to   exist
conventionally.
According to the AMWS,  there  is  nothing  that  can  exist  without  being
posited through the force of appearing to a mind.
If it is posited through the force of appearing to a mind,   that  means  it
exists conventionally and . Iit does not exist ultimately.


   Sutra Middle Way Autonomists assert that the five sense objects  –  forms
   and so forth – are different entities from consciousness  and  that  they
   are gross external objects composed of partless[4] particles.

   Yogic Middle Way Autonomists assert that the five sense objects  –  forms
   and so forth – are one entity with the  consciousness  apprehending  them
   (Page 21).
[Root text: page 21]
Sutra Middle Way Autonomists assert that the five sense objects – forms  and
so forth – are different entities  from  consciousness  and  that  they  are
gross external objects composed of partless particles.
Yogic Middle Way Autonomists assert that the five sense objects – forms  and
so forth – are one entity with the consciousness apprehending them.

I just assume that you understand these two paragraphs.   and  I  will  then
move on.

   5 Way of asserting object-possessors

   The mental consciousness is  asserted  to  be  the  illustration  of  the
   person.

   They assert a collection of six consciousnesses.

   There are two types of awarenesses:
   1. valid cognizers and
   2. non-valid cognizers.

   There are two types of valid cognizers:
   1. direct valid cognizers and
   2. inferential valid cognizers.

   Sutra  Middle  Way  Autonomists  do  not  assert  self-cognizing   direct
   perceivers.

   Yogic Middle Way Autonomists assert all four types of direct  perceivers.
   Self-cognizing  direct  perceivers  and  yogic  direct   perceivers   are
   necessarily non-mistaken consciousnesses, while  the  other  two,  [sense
   direct perceivers and mental direct perceivers,] can be  either  mistaken
   or non-mistaken.

   Proponents of Sutra, Proponents of Mind Only, and Autonomists all  accept
   that:
    •  a  direct  perceiver  is  necessarily  a  consciousness   free   from
      conceptuality,
    • a subsequent cognizer is necessarily a non-valid cognizer,
    • a consciousness that is mistaken with respect to its determined object
      is necessarily a wrong consciousness,
    • if it is a mistaken consciousness with respect to a phenomenon, it  is
      necessarily not a valid cognizer with respect to that phenomenon,
    • if it is an inferential  cognizer,  it  is  necessarily  not  a  valid
      cognizer with respect to its appearing object, and so on.

[Root text: page 21]
5 Way of asserting object-possessors
The mental consciousness is asserted to be the illustration of the person.
They assert a collection of six consciousnesses.
There are two types of awarenesses:
   1. valid cognizers and
   2. non-valid cognizers.
There are two types of valid cognizers:
   1. direct valid cognizers and
   2. inferential valid cognizers.
Sutra Middle Way Autonomists do not assert self-knowing direct perceivers.
Yogic Middle Way Autonomists assert all four  types  of  direct  perceivers.
Self-knowing direct perceivers and yogic direct perceivers  are  necessarily
non-mistaken consciousnesses, while the other two, [sense direct  perceivers
and mental direct perceivers,] can be either mistaken or non-mistaken.
Proponents of Sutra, Proponents of Mind Only,  and  Autonomists  all  accept
that:
    •  a  direct  perceiver  is  necessarily  a  consciousness   free   from
      conceptuality,
    • a subsequent cognizer is necessarily a non-valid cognizer,
    • a consciousness that is mistaken with respect to its determined object
      is necessarily a wrong consciousness,
    • if it is a mistaken consciousness with respect to a phenomenon, it  is
      necessarily not a valid cognizer with respect to that phenomenon,
    • if it is an inferential  cognizer,  it  is  necessarily  not  a  valid
      cognizer with respect to its appearing object, and so on.
We had discussed these points in the previous module on  lo-rig  did  looked
at Lorig in the previous module, and we talked  quite  a  fair  bit  on  all
these points so there is no need to repeat them.

   6 Way of asserting selflessness

   The person being empty of being permanent, unitary,  and  independent  is
   asserted to be a coarse selflessness of persons, while the  person  being
   empty  of  being  self-sufficient  substantially  existent  is  a  subtle
   selflessness of persons.

   Yogic Middle  Way  Autonomists  assert  that  a  form  and  the  cognizer
   apprehending that form being empty of being  different  substances  is  a
   coarse selflessness of phenomena.

   All phenomena being empty of true existence is asserted to be the  subtle
   selflessness of phenomena.

   The two [subtle] selflessnesses are differentiated by way of  the  object
   of negation and not by way of the basis  of  the  emptiness  because  the
   refutation of the object of negation - true existence – upon the basis of
   a person is the subtle selflessness of phenomena, while the refutation of
   self-sufficient substantial existence upon the basis of a person  is  the
   subtle selflessness of persons.

   The two conceptions of self are differentiated by  way  of  the  mode  of
   apprehension and not by  way  of  the  observed  object  because  through
   observing the basis – the person  –  and  apprehending  it  to  be  truly
   existent it is a conception of a self of phenomena, and through observing
   the basis – the person  –  and  apprehending  it  to  be  self-sufficient
   substantially existent it is a conception of a self of persons (Pages  21
   - 22).
[Root text: page 21]
6 Way of asserting selflessness
The person being empty of  being  permanent,  unitary,  and  independent  is
asserted to be a coarse selflessness of  persons,  while  the  person  being
empty  of  being  self-sufficient  substantially  existent   is   a   subtle
selflessness of persons.
Yogic  Middle  Way  Autonomists  assert  that  a  form  and   the   cognizer
apprehending that form being  empty  of  being  different  substances  is  a
coarse selflessness of phenomena.
All phenomena being empty of true existence is asserted  to  be  the  subtle
selflessness of phenomena.
The two [subtle] selflessnesses are differentiated by way of the  object  of
negation and  not  by  way  of  the  basis  of  the  emptiness  because  the
refutation of the object of negation – true existence – upon the basis of  a
person is the subtle selflessness of  phenomena,  while  the  refutation  of
self-sufficient substantial existence upon the basis  of  a  person  is  the
subtle selflessness of persons.
The two conceptions of self  are  differentiated  by  way  of  the  mode  of
apprehension  and  not  by  way  of  the  observed  object  because  through
observing the basis – the person – and apprehending it to be truly  existent
it is a conception of a self of phenomena, and through observing  the  basis
– the person – and  apprehending  it  to  be  self-sufficient  substantially
existent it is a conception of a self of persons.

We will do the “Presentation of the grounds and paths” in the next lesson.

Question:  A non-defective awareness is asserted to be a consciousness  that
is established by way of its own character because it cannot  be  harmed  by
reasoning. Was there a correct  understanding?  Therefore  Ddoes  that  mean
that since a wrong consciousness is also  established  by  way  of  its  own
character,   therefore  a  wrong  consciousness  is  also  a   non-defective
awareness? In fact all consciousnesses that exist are established by way  of
its  own  character,   therefore  all  consciousnesses   are   non-defective
awareness. Is there a redundancy in saying non-defective?

Answer: AThe non-defective awareness cannot refer to every mind.
A nNon-defective awareness specifically refers to a valid cogniszer.

For example, a mirage appears  to  an  eye  consciousness.  Just  because  a
mirage appears to an eye consciousness, you cannot say  that  therefore  the
mirage is posited to exist.  There  has  to  be  a  non-defective  awareness
beside that part of the explanation  of  earlier  about  what  non-defective
means. that It refers specifically to a vvalid cognizer.

Phenomena are posited  through  the  force  of  them  appearing  to  a  non-
defective awareness. Because  these  phenomena  appear  to  a  non-defective
awareness, therefore we say that they exist.  Basically. Tthe  positer  here
is the mind to which a  phenomenon  is  appearsing  to  and  it  is  a  non-
defective awareness. We cannot say that this non-defective  awareness  means
all kinds of mind. Specifically, it has to be a valid mind/awareness.

Question: Both Between the MOS and the AMWS, both assert that an the  object
exists by way of its own character,   and  relying  on  a  consciousness  to
impute it for its to existence. How  is  the  assertion  of  the  AMWS  more
subtler in this respect aspect to the assertion of the MOS?

Answer: In  the  MOS,  although  they  assert  that  phenomena  are  in  the
entity/nnature of mind, at the same time,  they assert that there are  truly
existentce/truly established  phenomena such as the mind itself.
For the MOS, although they do not assert external objects,  they  do  assert
true existence.
The pPhenomena are truly existentce including  such as the mind itself.


You need a method to deal with the destructive emotions such  as  anger  and
attachment that haves the mind as their focus. Just  the  concept  of  there
being no external objects  cannot  harm  the  attachment  to,  for  example,
mental sensations, mental feelings, such as  pleasurable  feelings,  because
these mental sensations such as pleasurable feelings are real and are ,  and
truly  existencte.  In  this  case,  asserting  that  the  mind   is   truly
established/truly existentce cannot help in  dealing  with  such  situations
the  attachment  to  the  mind  such  as  pleasurable   sensation,   whereas
understanding that even the mind is not truly existentce, does help.

Basically, The the position of the AMWS position is  more  powerful  than  .
Unlike the MOS. The , their world view of the MOS that everything is in  the
entity of mind is helpful in dealing with attachment to objects  other  than
the mind, but ultimately, they think that  the  mind  is  truly  existentce.
They still apprehend a truly existentce mind. , Ttherefore, the  afflictions
based on that apprehension can arise.

But the AMWS, not only asserts that phenomena other than mind are not  truly
existentce, they also assert that the mind itself is not  truly  existentce.
This is so much more powerful.
The AMWS explains how the minds do not exist in the way it  appears  to  us.
Although it appears to be as truly existentce,   but  that  is  not  how  it
exists.

Of course, Tthe most  profound  explanation  about  the  emptiness  of  true
existence comes only in the  CMWS.  It  is  the  presentation  of  the  CMWS
presentation that is the most profound because  they  assert  say  that  all
phenomena exist as merely imputed by thought,  imputed  by  mind,  and  that
phenomena exists as mere name.

You can actually see and feel that there is a  difference  between  the  MOS
ppresentation of the MOS a  and  the  MWS  ppresentation  of  the  MWS.  The
assertions of the MWS is being more profound in that not only is  phenomena,
 other than the  mind not truly existentce, even  the  mind  itself  is  not
truly existentce. So, So tthis is the more  profound  and  deeper  than  the
MOS.

But within the MWS,  you have these two schools:
1. Autonomists (Skt. Svatantrika) and
2. Consequentialists (Skt. Prasangika).
We haven’t even started on them yet.. If you think about it, there  must  be
a difference between these  two.  As  to  what  a  difference  is,  this  is
something much more difficult to distinguish in both  understanding  and  in
actual experienceing these two.

Question: In MOS, they have provedn the non-existence  of  external  objects
by proving there is no such thing as a directionally partless particle.  Now
here, we have the Here the higher schools assert that there  is  a  partless
particle. So, Hhow do they again prove that there is a partless particle?

Answer: What you just  said  is  the  assertion  of  the  Sutra  Middle  Way
Autonomists (Skt. Sautrantika-Svatantrika-Madhyamika). Remember  that  there
assertions are “it is mostly  conforming  with  the  Proponents  of  Sutra.”
(Page 20).

It is conforming with the SS and with………
[The recording is cut- off at this point.]

(The gist of Khen Rinpoche’s answer is  that  while  the  Sutra  Middle  Way
Autonomists do not posit a directionally partless particle, they  do  assert
that there are partless particles).




Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong




-----------------------
[1] “Established by way  of  its  own  uncommon  mode  of  existence”  means
“existing from its own side.”
[2] Refer to chart on “Meaning  of  Terms  used  to  Describe  the  Mode  of
Existence of Phenomena in the Mahayana Schools.”

[3] Refer chart on the “Two Truths.”
[4] This needs  to  be  investigated  since  Jamyang  Shayba  in  his  Great
Exposition of Tenets says ‘Because of being refuted by many, it is  mistaken
that Proponents  of  the  Middle  Way  and  of  Mind  Only  assert  partless
particles.’

