Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L03upload2.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.249525
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 3                        Date: 26th February 2013

In the last lesson we looked at who is a proponent  of  Buddhist  tenets.  A
person who propounds Buddhist tenets firstly is a  Buddhist.  As  discussed,
whether someone is a Buddhist or not is determined by  whether  that  person
accepts the Three Jewels as their objects of  refuge.  On  top  of  that  he
accepts the four seals. The four seals are the four features that attest  to
a particular teaching  or  doctrine  to  be  Buddhist.  These  are  the  two
characteristics that constitute the person who propounds Buddhist tenets.

The proponent of Buddhist tenets is a Buddhist, that is:
• someone who accepts the Three Jewels as their objects of refuge
• someone who also accept the four seals

How many divisions of proponent of Buddhist  tenets  are  there?  There  are
four divisions of proponents of Buddhist tenets:
1. The Proponents of the Great Exposition (Sanskrit: Vaibhasika),
2. The Proponents of Sutra (Skt. Sautrantika),
3. The Proponents of Mind Only (Skt. Cittamatra) and
4. The Proponents of the Middle Way (Skt. Madhyamika).
These are the four divisions of proponents of Buddhist tenets.  This  number
is definite. There are only four and not more  than  four  divisions.  These
proponents of Buddhist tenets are all followers of the Buddha.

As I mentioned in the previous lesson:
• the Proponents of the Great Exposition and the  Proponents  of  Sutra  are
  the followers of the first turning of the Wheel of Dharma.
• the Proponents of the Middle Way are the followers of the  second  turning
  of the Wheel of Dharma.
• the Proponents of the Mind Only are the followers of the third turning  of
  the Wheel of Dharma.


                          1 Great Exposition School


The explanation of the Great Exposition School (Skt. Vaibhasika)  has  seven
outlines:
   1. definition,
   1. divisions,
   2. etymology,
   3. way of asserting objects,
   4. way of asserting object-possessors,
   5. way of asserting selflessness and
   6. presentation of the grounds and paths.

1  Definition

The definition  of  a  Proponent  of  the  Great  Exposition  is:  a  person
propounding Lesser Vehicle (Skt. Hinayana) tenets who does not assert  self-
cognizers but does assert truly existent[1] external objects (Page 2).

“Self-cognisers” is also translated as self-knowers.

The Proponents of the Great Exposition are those who:
• do not assert self-cognisers,
• assert truly established external objects, and
• propound Hinayana tenets.

In the traditional study of Buddhist philosophy, the study of  lo-rig  (mind
and awarenesses) is usually done before the study of  tenets.  This  is  why
the tenets module comes after lo-rig. In the lo-rig module, one  would  have
studied the different kinds of mind such as the self-knower.  On  the  basis
of that understanding, it is  not  so  difficult  when  one  looks  at  this
definition.  When  you  are  looking  at  this  subject  without  any  prior
understanding of lo-rig, then it will be more challenging.

Self-knowers
The Proponents of the Great Exposition  do  not  assert  self-knowers  (also
known as self-cognisers), but the Proponents of Sutra and the Proponents  of
the Mind Only do assert self-knowers.

As covered in lo-rig, when we talk about the consciousnesses,  we  can  look
at them in terms of other-knowers and self-knowers. Consciousness itself  is
clear and knowing. According to those who assert  self-knowers,  within  the
collection of one consciousness:
• there is a part of the consciousness  that  knows  an  object  other  than
  itself. This is the other-knower.
• there is also another part of the consciousness that  knows  itself.  This
  is the self-knower.

For example,  for  an  eye  consciousness  apprehending  blue,  within  that
collection of an eye consciousness apprehending blue:
• there is a part of that mind that knows itself. This part of the  mind  is
  the self-knower.
• there is another part of that  mind  to  which  the  object  blue  appears
  clearly and this eye consciousness is cognising the object blue. This part
  of the mind is called the other-knower.

The Proponents of the Great Exposition do  not  assert  self-knowers,  i.e.,
they do not assert that the consciousness has  the  ability  to  see  itself
clearly. As you know, a self-knower is that  which  has  the  aspect  of  an
apprehender. So the Proponent of the Great Exposition does not assert  self-
knowers. I think that this is easy to understand for those who  studied  lo-
rig in the previous module.

To  summarise,  the  Proponent  of  the  Great   Exposition   asserts   that
consciousnesses are only other-knowers and consciousnesses do not  have  the
aspect that look at the consciousness itself clearly.

Truly established external objects
The Proponents of the Great Exposition  assert  truly  established  external
objects. They assert (1) external objects, and they assert  that  (2)  these
external  objects are truly established.

What does an “external object” mean? An external object is a  coarse  object
that is formed through the  aggregation  of  many  subtle  particles  coming
together forming a coarse object that is suitable to  be  apprehended  by  a
sense  power  consciousness  and   therefore  it  is  a  condition  for  the
production of, for example, a sense consciousness apprehending it.  External
objects exist before the consciousness apprehending them can  be  generated.
So the Proponents of the Great Exposition assert external objects.

On top of that they assert that  external  objects  are  truly  established.
This is because for them anything that exists  has  a  substance  about  it.
There is something right there that exists  independently  as  a  substance.
This has  nothing to do with the mind imputing it. They don’t  know  how  to
explain or assert a position where the mind plays a part  in  the  existence
of the object.  For  them,  there  is  something  right  there  that  exists
independently as a substance and therefore, things are truly established.

The Proponents of the Great Exposition are unable to posit that there  is  a
part of phenomena that is imputed by  consciousness.  Rather  for  them,  if
things exist, they  are  truly  established  in  the  sense  that  there  is
something  right  there  independently.  This  something   can   be   called
“substance.”  Therefore,  to  the  Proponents  of  the   Great   Exposition,
everything that exists is necessarily substantially established.

When these distinguishing features exist, then  that  makes  the  person  in
question a Proponent of the Great Exposition. When there  is  a  person  who
does not assert self-knowers but who asserts truly established  objects  and
is a proponent of Hinayana tenets, then that makes him a  Proponent  of  the
Great Exposition.

Of course it is not possible to understand everything at once, but you  have
to memorise the definition. When you do not memorise the  definition,  there
is nothing for you to think about. For now, if you are able to say a  person
who is a Proponent of the Great Exposition does not assert self-knowers  but
asserts truly established objects and is a  proponent  of  Hinayana  tenets,
that is enough.
On the basis of being able to recall these few points and on  the  basis  of
having this information in your mind, after  a  while,  naturally  questions
will arise, ”What is a self-knower? What is an external  object?  What  does
truly established mean?” Then it will become  clearer  and  clearer  as  you
start to think about these points. The basis for you to understand from  the
very beginning what a Proponent of the Great  Exposition  is  is  memorising
the definition. Without that, there  is  no  basis  for  you  to  learn  and
understand.

2  Divisions

There are three divisions:[2]
   1. Proponents of the Great Exposition from Kashmir,
   2. Proponents of the Great  Exposition  from  the  Western  Region  (Skt.
      Aparantakas) and
   3. Proponents of the Great  Exposition  from  the  Central  Region  (Skt.
      Magadhas).

3  Etymology

Why are they called ‘Proponents of Particulars’?

They  are  called  such  because  they  propound  tenets  through  following
[Vasumitra’s]  Great  Exposition  of  Particulars   (Skt.  Mahavibhasa)  or,
alternatively, they  are  called  Proponents  of  Particulars  because  they
propound the three times to be particulars [i.e., instances]  of  substances
(Page 2).

There is a set of teaching called The Seven  Knowledges  that  was  composed
primarily  by  Buddha’s  main   disciples,   the   Arhats   Shariputra   and
Maudgalyayana. The Seven Knowledges is not the actual speech of the  Buddha.
The Proponents of the Great  Exposition  take  these  teachings  to  be  the
teachings of the Buddha. The  Great Exposition of Particulars  mentioned  in
the etymology are the commentaries on The Seven Knowledges. It is said  that
this particular text is huge and is composed of about 100,000 verses.  Later
in time Vasubandhu condensed the essential meaning of the  Great  Exposition
of  Particulars  and  wrote  the  Treasury  of  Manifest   Knowledge   (Skt.
Abhidharmakosa).

Here we are looking at the etymology of why they are called  “Proponents  of
Particulars.” One explanation is that they are followers of the text,  Great
Exposition of Particulars.

“Alternatively, they are  called  Proponents  of  Particulars  because  they
propound  the  three  times  to  be   particulars   [i.e.,   instances]   of
substances”: Composed phenomena have the  factors  of  production,  abiding,
and disintegration. For the Proponents of the Great Exposition, these  three
factors can be related to the three times. For the Proponents of  the  Great
Exposition, the three times are particulars or instances of substances.

An example to understand the three times to be particulars of substances  is
this. A golden cup is made from gold. This golden cup  is  melted  down  and
transformed into a golden plate. Later, the golden  plate  is  again  melted
down and remoulded into a statue.   As  the  golden  cup  becomes  a  golden
plate, its entity has changed as it is no longer a cup but it has  become  a
plate. When it is melted down again and remoulded into a statue, its  entity
changes again  into  that  of  a  statue.  As  the  golden  objects  undergo
transformation, their entities change but the fact  that  the  substance  is
gold has not changed.

Another example: the sprout of the past, present, and  future.  The  sprouts
of these three times are different and change as the past sprout is not  the
present sprout and the present sprout is not  the  future  sprout.  But  the
sprouts of  the  past,  present,  and  future  are  sprouts  that,  being  a
substance, have not changed.

The future sprout is posited at the time of the seed. The present sprout  is
posited when the sprout first arises. The past sprout is  posited  when  the
sprout matures, becomes a tree and bears fruit. The sprout ceases to  exist.
At the time of the fruit, there is no sprout left.

When you think about the  explanation  of  the  past,  present,  and  future
sprouts, their entities have changed but  the  substance  of  them  being  a
sprout has  not  changed  because  the  substance  remains.  The  substance,
sprout, exists in the past, present, and future sprouts.

Another example:  A young girl can  be  said  to  be  a  future  mother.  In
future, when she conceives and gives birth, she becomes a mother.  When  she
passes away from this life, then she is a past mother.

Just like the substance, sprout, that  exists  in  the  past,  present,  and
future, so this substance, mother, also exists in  the  past,  present,  and
future.

Someone who propounds the three times to be  particulars  of  substances  is
called a Proponent of Particulars.

4  Way of asserting objects

The definition of thing is: that which is able to perform a function.

Thing, existent, and object of knowledge are equivalent.

There are two types of things:
   1. permanent things and
   2. impermanent things.

Examples of permanent things are uncompounded space, analytical  cessations,
and non-analytical cessations.

Examples  of  impermanent  things  are  created  phenomena,  products,   and
impermanent phenomena (Pages 2 – 3).

According to the Great Exposition School (GES), thing, existent, and  object
of knowledge  are  mutually  inclusive.  The  presentation  of  the  GES  is
different from what we learned in lo-rig.

According to the GES, there are two types of things:
1. permanent things
2. impermanent things

We are not going into details in class. Those who are interested to  know  a
little bit more about the GES’s idea of what constitutes  reality,  you  can
do so in your private discussions or during the Sunday sessions.  For  those
who have done the previous module, there is not much to be said  about  this
although there are some slight differences  but  generally  we  had  covered
them. For those who are new and would like to learn  more,  you  can  do  so
privately.


Another way of dividing things is into:
   1. conventional truths and
   2. ultimate truths.

The definition of a  conventional  truth  is:  a  phenomenon  such  that  an
awareness apprehending it is cancelled  if  it  is  broken  up  or  mentally
separated into its individual parts.

Illustrations [of conventional truths]  are,  for  example,  a  vase  and  a
woollen cloth  because  if  a  vase  is  broken  with  a  hammer,  the  mind
apprehending it is cancelled, and if a woollen cloth is separated  into  its
individual threads, the mind apprehending it is cancelled (Page 3).

According to the GES, a vase is an  illustration  of  a  conventional  truth
because when  the  vase  is  smashed  with  a  hammer,  the  valid  cogniser
apprehending the vase ceases to exist. When you conceive  a  vase,  you  are
conceiving it in terms of its shape that looks like a vase.  When  the  vase
is smashed, the mind apprehending it is cancelled or ceases.

Another  subtler  example:  the  water  in  a  cup.  According  to  Buddhist
philosophy, water is an aggregation of eight different kinds  of  particles.
This is the Buddhist formulation of what  constitutes  atomic  reality.  The
particles are earth  particle,   water,  fire,  and  wind.  There  are  four
others: form, smell, taste, and touch.

Water is an aggregation of these eight particles. Let us assume  that  water
has this nature. If the water is individually isolated  into  its  different
parts, i.e., we take away its smell, its taste, and so forth,  one  by  one,
at the end of it, there will be no water left and the mind apprehending  the
water is cancelled.

These are some of the examples that illustrate  what  a  conventional  truth
is,  whether it be a vase that is smashed by a hammer or mentally  isolating
the eight particles that make up water, the mind apprehending  the  vase  or
water is cancelled or ceases.

For the Proponents of the  Great  Exposition,  conventional  truth  is  also
referred to  as  conventionally  existent,  conventionally  established,  or
imputedly existent. According to  the  GES,  these  are  different  ways  of
saying the same thing.

The definition of an ultimate truth is: A phenomenon such that an  awareness
apprehending it is not cancelled if it is broken up  or  mentally  separated
into its individual parts.

Illustrations [of ultimate truths] are, for example, directionally  partless
particles, temporally partless [moments of] consciousness, and  uncompounded
phenomena.

The Treasury  of  Manifest  Knowledge  (Skt.  Abhidharmakosa)  says:  “Those
things – such as a pot or water – that the mind cannot engage  if  they  are
broken or mentally separated  into  other  [things]  exist  as  conventional
[truths]. Others exist as ultimate [truths].”

The three times are asserted to be substances. A pot is  asserted  to  exist
also at the time of the past of the pot and at the time  of  the  future  of
the pot (Page 3).

This school asserts directionally partless particles.  This  refers  to  the
smallest possible particle. We can say  that  this  is  the  basic  building
block of matter. For them, such a particle is directionally  partless.  Such
a directionally partless particle  is  an  ultimate  truth.  For  them,  the
smallest particle is directionally  partless.   We  cannot  do  anything  to
destroy this directionally partless particle or mentally break  it  up  into
something smaller because it is  the  smallest  possible  particle.  So  for
them, it is an ultimate truth.

Similarly, when we talk about consciousness, there are  temporally  partless
moments of consciousness. For the GES, for the  same  reason,  in  terms  of
time, the smallest moment of time is also an ultimate truth.

Uncompounded space would also be  an  illustration  of  an  ultimate  truth.
Perhaps the reason why it  is  an  illustration  of  an  ultimate  truth  is
because uncompounded space is  permanent.  Therefore  it  does  not  undergo
change. For that reason, it fits into the definition of  being  an  ultimate
truth. Perhaps just as uncompounded space itself does  not  undergo  change,
therefore the valid cogniser apprehending the uncompounded  space  will  not
undergo change as well, i.e., the valid cogniser cannot be cancelled.

According to this school, ultimate truth,  ultimately  existent,  ultimately
established and substantially existent means the same thing.

Substantially established vs. substantially existent
According to the GES, if it is an established base, which  means  it  is  an
existent, it is necessarily substantially  established.  All  phenomena  are
necessarily  substantially  established,  but  whatever   is   substantially
established  is  not   necessarily   substantially   existent.   Substantial
existence is related to the ultimate truth.

In  general,  when  we  say   something   is   substantially   existent   or
substantially  established,  they  mean  the  same  thing.  But,   in   this
particular context, when we are looking  at  the  divisions  of  established
base,  according  to  the  GES,  substantially  existent  and  substantially
established do not mean the same thing.

• Although  all  phenomena  are  substantially  established,  they  are  not
  necessarily substantially existent.
• According to this school, all phenomena are necessarily truly  established
  but, at the same time, it does not mean  that  everything  is  necessarily
  ultimately established.
• For this school, if it is an established base,  it  is  necessarily  truly
  established  but  whatever  is  truly  established  is   not   necessarily
  ultimately established because if something is ultimately established,  it
  is substantially existent and that is an ultimate truth.

Going back to this school’s understanding of conventional truth, a  vase  is
a conventional truth. The word for conventional  is  “kun  rdzob.”   In  the
higher schools, “kun rdzob” is  translated  as  “obscurational.”  We  cannot
translate it as either conventional or obscurational all  the  time  because
it depends on the context.

There are different ways of looking  at  the  word,  “kun  rdzob.”  In  this
context, the vase is a conventional truth. It is  conventional  because  its
existence  is  the  aggregation  of  many  factors  coming  together.   When
everything comes  together,  that  phenomenon  comes  into  being  and  that
phenomenon is produced. Therefore it is a truth. The vase,  in  this  sense,
is a conventional truth.

A directionally partless particle is not  a  conventional  truth  because  a
directionally partless particle is the smallest  possible  particle  and  it
stands alone on its own without depending on anything else. The  element  of
having to depend on something else is not  there.  Therefore  it  is  not  a
conventional truth. It is an ultimate truth.

|              |CONVENTIONAL TRUTH       |ULTIMATE TRUTH             |
|Great         |A phenomenon which is    |A phenomenon which is such |
|Exposition    |such that, if it were    |that, if it were broken or |
|school        |broken or mentally       |mentally separated into    |
|(Vaibhasika)  |separated into parts, the|parts, the mind            |
|              |mind apprehending that   |apprehending that object   |
|              |object would cease       |would not cease            |

Question:  Referring  to  the  definition  of  a  Proponent  of  the   Great
Exposition, it is mentioned that  they  assert  truly  established  external
objects. Is a truly established external object the same  as  an  inherently
existent object?

Answer: What  the  highest  school  says  about  a  thing  not  being  truly
established is the very thing that the  GES  says  does  exist,  i.e.,  true
establishment.

Question: What exactly are Hinayana  tenets?  Do  Mahayanists  hold  such  a
view?
The Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS) asserts  that  all  arhats  realise
the same emptiness at the point of achieving liberation. Why  is  it  called
Hinayana tenets when eventually all arhats realise the emptiness defined  by
the CMWS?

Answer: Literally speaking, the  Mahayana  is  the  Great  Vehicle  and  the
Hinayana is the Lesser Vehicle. For the person who enters the path,  whether
he is entering a Hinayana path or a Mahayana path, he has  entered  a  path.
The  difference  between  these  two  paths  depends  on  whether  there  is
bodhicitta in the person’s mind or not. There is a difference  in  terms  of
the vastness of the motivation in the mind. Someone who  has  bodhicitta  is
someone who has entered the Mahayana path. Otherwise, he is someone who  has
entered  the  Hinayana  path.  Therefore  there  is  a  Mahayanist   and   a
Hinayanist.
The question then is: Is a  Mahayanist  and  a  Hinayanist  the  same  as  a
proponent of Mahayana tenets and a proponent of Hinayana tenets?

Earlier on we saw that there are four proponents of Buddhist tenets:
1. The Proponents of the Great Exposition
2. The Proponents of Sutra
3. The Proponents of Mind Only and
4. The Proponents of the Middle Way

The Proponents of the Great Exposition and the Proponents of Sutra  are  the
proponents of Hinayana tenets.

The Proponents of Mind Only and the Proponents of the  Middle  Way  are  the
proponents of Mahayana tenets.

Is there a Proponent of Great Exposition who has entered the Mahayana  path?
When you think about it, there is no reason to say, “no” as it  is  possible
that there is someone who is a Proponent of the Great  Exposition  that  are
Hinayana tenets but who has entered a Mahayana path.

It is also possible to say that there are hearer arhats who  are  Proponents
of the Middle Way or the Proponents of Mind Only.

When you think about this, you should be able to see that  a  Hinayanist  is
not necessarily a proponent of Hinayana tenets.  Likewise  a  Mahayanist  is
not necessarily a proponent of Mahayana tenets.

What we have said so far is non-contentious and is quite clear. But when  we
look at what exactly are Hinayana tenets and what defines  Hinayana  tenets,
this is something that we need to think about.

Can we say that  Hinayana  tenets  are  a  system  that  believes  in  truly
established  external objects  and  not  the  self-knower?  Can  the  system
include the assertion  of  truly  established  external  objects  and  self-
knowers, which is the definition of the Sutra School?

When these defining characteristics are put  together,  can  these  defining
characteristics be the defining  characteristics  of  what  constitutes  the
Hinayana tenets?

Is there someone who is a proponent of Mahayana tenets  and  is  a  Hinayana
arhat? Yes, it is possible.

One can also say that there can be a proponent of Hinayana  tenets  who  has
entered the Mahayana path.

So there is a difference between a Hinayanist and a  proponent  of  Hinayana
tenets.

Question: A Proponent of the Great Exposition is defined  as  a  person  who
asserts truly established external objects. According to the chart  (extract
appears below), a conventional truth is  truly  established  but  not  truly
existent. In this context then, is the external object referred  to  in  the
definition a conventional truth or an ultimate truth?
Answer:  In  this  school,  conventional  truth,  conventionally   existent,
conventionally established, and imputedly existent are  mutually  inclusive,
i.e., they mean the same thing.

Ultimate   truth,   ultimately   existent,   ultimately   established,   and
substantially existent are mutually inclusive,  i.e.,  they  mean  the  same
thing.

In this school, anything that exists, a  phenomenon,  is  necessarily  truly
established.

In general convention, truly established and truly existent means  the  same
thing.

In the perspective  of  the  higher  schools,  especially  the  CMWS,  truly
established, truly existent, and inherently existent means the  same  thing.
Also for the higher schools, substantially  established,  and  substantially
existent are the same.

But in this school, one has to make a difference. In this  school,  although
everything is substantially established, it does not  mean  that  everything
is substantially existent.

In general, established and existent means the same thing but  when  affixed
to “substantially,” in  this  school,  then  substantially  established  and
substantially existent do not mean the same thing.

In this school, truly existent means an ultimate truth. So  truly  existent,
ultimate   truth,   ultimately   existent,   ultimately   established,   and
substantially existent are mutually inclusive,  i.e.,  they  mean  the  same
thing.

|          |             |Ultimately |Truly      |Establishment |Inherent |
|          |             |established|established|by            |existence|
|          |             |Truly      |           |way of its own|Existing |
|          |             |Existent   |           |character     |from its |
|          |             |           |           |              |own side |
|Great     |Ultimate     |YES        |YES        |YES           |YES      |
|Exposition|truth        |           |           |              |         |
|school    |             |           |           |              |         |
|          |Conventional |NO         |YES        |YES           |YES      |
|          |truth        |           |           |              |         |

With reference to the above chart, according to the GES, conventional  truth
is not truly existent  and  not  ultimately  established,  whereas  ultimate
truth is truly existent and ultimately established.

Are the two truths truly established? Yes, both are truly  established.  For
this school, both conventional truth and ultimate truth are  established  by
way of their own character, inherently existent, and exist  from  their  own
side.

Perhaps the reason why people are confused is because the  imprints  of  the
CMWS are too strong in the  mind!  To  the  proponent  of  the  CMWS,  truly
established, truly existent, inherent existence and so forth are the same.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; Transcribed by Phuah Soon  Ek  and  Vivien
Ng;
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
-----------------------
[1] Refer to page 179 in Cutting Through Appearances,  Practice  and  Theory
of Tibetan Buddhism, by Geshe Lhundup Sopa and Jeffrey  Hopkins  (New  York:
Snow Lion Publications, 1989), henceforth referred  to  as  Cutting  Through
Appearances for short.  For the sake of clarity,  “truly  established”  will
be substituted for “truly existent.”


[2] There is also a division into 18 sub-schools:  Majority  Community,  One
Convention, Proponents of World-Transcendence, Much Hearing,  Proponents  of
Imputation, Monument Ones, Eastern Mountain  Ones,  Western  Mountain  Ones,
Abiding Firmly, Proponents of the Existence of  All,  Vatsiputra  Followers,
Dharmottara Followers, Bhadrayana Followers,  Mahasammata  Followers,  Great
Teaching, Dharmagupta Followers, Kashyapa Followers  and  Uttara  Followers.
[Maps of the Profound (Hopkins) pages 210-217]

