Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L19 upload.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.820165
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 19                          Date: 14th May 2013

Question: “The five sense objects – forms and so forth  –  are  produced  on
the basis of a substance that is an inner consciousness in  dependence  upon
the latencies of common and uncommon actions deposited upon the  mind-basis-
of-all.” (Page 16). What are the consciousnesses  that  deposit  common  and
uncommon actions and what will these latencies produce?

Answer: The mind-basis-of-all is the basis of infusion of the  latencies  of
all actions. What deposits those latencies on  the  mind-basis-of-all?  This
can be any consciousness.
• If you assert  a  collection  of  six  consciousnesses,  any  of  the  six
  consciousnesses can be the depositor of the latencies of actions.
• If you assert a collection of eight consciousnesses, on top of  the  usual
  six consciousnesses, you add the afflicted  mentality.  So  the  afflicted
  mentality can also be a  consciousness  that  deposits  the  latencies  of
  actions.
All these latencies are deposited  on  the  mind-basis-of-all  that  is  the
basis of infusion of the latencies of all actions. The mind-basis-of-all  is
neutral.

Latencies of common and uncommon actions
Let us look at the latencies of common actions. All of us are  able  to  see
the water in a cup. We all have the  common  or  shared  appearance  of  the
water in a cup. That is due to the  ripening  of  the  latencies  of  common
actions.

While we are all able to see the water, it is possible for an individual  to
see certain things about the water  that  other  people  cannot  see,  i.e.,
there is the appearance of something that is not shared with others. We  can
call that an uncommon latency. I guess we could look at it in this way.

We can also say that it is an  uncommon  latency  that  accounts  for  human
beings being able to see that liquid as water because what we see  as  water
is not seen as water, for example, by the hell  beings.  That  latency  that
causes us human beings to be able to see the cup of liquid as water  can  be
an uncommon latency, i.e., something that is unshared  with  others  and  is
peculiar to human beings only.

I think we can talk about latencies of common and uncommon actions  in  such
a way. This is something for you to think about.

We have finished with the Mind Only School. Now we will look at  the  fourth
tenet, the Middle Way School.

The Hinayana tenets
The GES and the SS are the  Hinayana  tenets.  Those  Hinayana  tenets  only
propound a selflessness of persons and not a selflessness of phenomena.  The
Hinayana tenets  propound  that,  just  by  realising  the  selflessness  of
persons, one would be able to eradicate  all  the  destructive  emotions  or
afflictions. Why is this so? This is because all  the  destructive  emotions
or afflictions arise from the sense of the “I.” The stronger  the  sense  of
the “I” or self, the stronger is the anger or attachment that is induced  by
that sense of  the  “I.”  According  to  the  Hinayana  tenets,  if  we  can
eradicate this false sense of  the  “I”  and  realise  the  selflessness  of
persons, we will be able to eradicate all our afflictions.

In the Hinayana tenets, in the presentation of the selflessness of  persons,
they talk about the emptiness of a  self-sufficient  person.  They  propound
that the self-sufficient person does  not  exist  whatsoever.  By  realising
that the self-sufficient person does not exist, it is said  that  our  three
mental poisons will decrease. Realising the selflessness of persons  is  the
method to pacify our destructive emotions.  When  our  destruction  emotions
are  pacified,  correspondingly  the  suffering  that  we  experience   will
decrease.

It is very important to gain a good  understanding  of  what  I  just  said.
Although there is a very extensive presentation of all conventionalities  in
the four Buddhist tenets, as I mentioned before, we should  focus  on  their
presentation of what constitutes reality, their view.

The Mahayana tenets
Review of the MOS’s refutation of external objects
The presentation of the Mahayana tenets starts with the presentation of  the
view of the MOS. You may have noticed that the presentation of  the  MOS  is
more profound than the Hinayana tenets. For example, the  MOS  asserts  that
the objects of the senses such as form, sound, smell, taste,  and  touch  do
not exist in the way they appear to  us.  The  MOS  explains  how  phenomena
exist very differently from how they actually appear to us.

According to the MOS, phenomena such as form and  so  forth,  although  they
appear to exist as external  objects,  in  reality,  those  appearances  are
hallucinations and are false because phenomena are only established  through
the  ripening  of  latencies.  This  ripening  of  latencies  produces   the
appearance of phenomena such as form and the mind perceiving it.

This is how the MOS explain the existence of phenomena such as form  and  so
forth. Although they appear to us to have an external  objective  existence,
i.e., they appear to exist as external objects,  in  reality,  they  do  not
exist as external objects. Form comes into being  through  the  ripening  of
latencies or imprints that are stored in the mind-basis-of-all.

Such a worldview is founded on the fundamental  premise  that  the  mind  is
truly established. In the MOS,  the  mind  is  given  primacy  and  is  very
important. The truly established mind holds the  imprints  or  latencies  of
actions. When these latencies ripen, they produce  the  appearance  of  form
and so forth and the consciousness that perceives those form and so forth.


According to the MOS, due to the ripening of  the  latencies  of  ignorance,
the  appearance of external objects such  as  external  forms  is  produced.
This is a false appearance. We mistakenly believe that  there  are  external
forms and we mistakenly believe that they  are  beautiful  forms.  Based  on
that belief, we get emotionally involved, we get attached, and so forth.

According to the MOS, it will be very  helpful  if  an  individual  realises
that those appearances are false. Although there is  the  appearance  of  an
external object, in reality, external objects do not  exist.  Objects  exist
only through the ripening of an imprint that is deposited on  the  mind.  It
is coming from the mind and is not coming from outside. This  will  help  us
to work against our attachment, anger, and other afflictions.

As mentioned earlier, this particular worldview of the MOS is based  on  the
fundamental premise that the mind is truly  established.  To  the  MOS,  the
mind is everything. It  is  possible  to  experience  pain  or  pleasure  by
focusing on the mind itself rather than focusing on objects other  than  the
mind. When we focus on the mind itself, it is possible to feel  pain,  hurt,
happiness, pleasure, and so forth.  Based  on  these  feelings  of  pain  or
pleasure that  are  derived  from  focusing  on  the  mind,  then  anger  or
attachment can arise due to these emotions. So we  also  need  a  method  to
deal with the anger and attachment  induced  by  the  feelings  of  pain  or
pleasure that comes from focussing on the mind itself.

Worldview of the MOS is not enough: the assertions of the MWS
According to MOS, there are the appearances of forms and  so  forth  to  the
mind that arise due to the ripening of latencies. But  when  we  talk  about
the mind itself, the mind is truly established. There can be a  grasping  at
the mind, i.e., when the mind is happy,  there  is  the  grasping  at  happy
feelings and when the mind is unhappy, there  is  the  grasping  at  painful
feelings. This in turn gives rise to attachment, anger,  and  so  forth.  In
this case, the view that there are no external  objects  does  not  help  in
dealing with the attachment  or  anger  directed  at  the  mind  and  mental
events. This why we need to know the  assertions  of  the  MWS.  We  need  a
method to deal with that kind of attachment.

According  to  the  MWS,  all  phenomena—outer  and  inner—are   not   truly
established. While phenomena are not truly established  or  truly  existent,
phenomena appear as if they are truly established  or  truly  existent.  The
mind assents to that appearance. This is what we call  the  apprehension  of
true existence that is a perverse  or  wrong  consciousness.  Why?  This  is
because although phenomena appear to be truly existent, in reality, they  do
not truly exist. Therefore the mind that  apprehends  true  existence  is  a
wrong consciousness.

It is insufficient simply to hold the worldview of  the  MOS  that  external
objects do not exist. We need a method to  deal  with  the  apprehension  of
true existence. Therefore there is a need to understand the presentation  of
the final tenets, the MWS. The explanation of the MWS of  how  phenomena  do
not truly exist is  a  method  to  eradicate  and  destroy  the  destructive
emotions.

The Buddha gave many teachings over a long period of time. It is  said  that
the purpose of all these teachings is to lead sentient beings to be able  to
establish for themselves what reality really is—especially what  constitutes
the person or self, what is the ultimate nature of the person, and  what  is
the ultimate nature of phenomena. That is the ultimate  purpose  behind  all
the teachings given by the  Buddha.  Therefore  the  heart  essence  of  the
entire buddhadharma that we are studying, learning,  and  reflecting  on  is
the presentation of what constitutes reality: the  ultimate  nature  of  the
person and the ultimate nature of phenomena. It becomes extremely  important
to delineate for ourselves what exactly is the ultimate nature of  the  self
and the ultimate nature of phenomena.

With regard to delineating the ultimate nature of the self and the  ultimate
nature of phenomena, the Buddha also said many  things  in  many  teachings.
The ultimate and most profound teachings on selflessness are  the  teachings
or the views that are propounded by the MWS.

Why we need to study all the tenets
While it is true that the MWS represents  the  most  profound  view  on  the
nature of reality, just saying that it is the most profound from  the  onset
is not very meaningful. This is because you can only  come  to  realise  its
profoundity when you compare it to other existing views. This is one of  the
reasons why the study of the four tenets is  important.  It  is  only  after
understanding well that the views of reality propounded by the tenets  below
the MWS are coarser that one can come to fully appreciate  how  very  subtle
and very profound the assertions of the MWS are.

Without understanding the lower tenets and simply  studying  the  tenets  of
the MWS tenets, you can only say that they are profound and  that  is  about
it.  But this is not an understanding at all. It is not a realisation.  This
is the reason why you need to study tenets.

There are students who ask, “Why do we need to go through  all  the  tenets?
Since the MWS is the highest tenet, we should go for that. Why  do  we  need
to start from the bottom?”  Many people feel like that.

You should see the progression from the coarser view to  the  subtler  view.
We started with the selflessness of persons according to  all  schools  from
the  AMWS  to  the  GES.  All  of  them  assert  that  the   self-sufficient
substantially  existent  person  does  not  exist   whatsoever.   Relatively
speaking, that is a coarse view.

The MOS then refutes external objects, explaining how there are no  external
objects. Their worldview is a little bit more refined than the  selflessness
of persons.

When we come to the MWS, we shall see how the MWS  refutes  true  existence.
Then we see how their view is indeed much more  profound  and  much  subtler
because we already have some understanding of the coarser views.

There are also people who  say  this  over  and  over  again,  “My  time  is
limited. I don’t have much time. What is the point of me studying all  these
things? Won’t it be much better if I meditate?”

Why do we want to meditate? What is the reason? There is  only  one  reason:
we want to have peace in the heart, peace of mind,  and  to  get  happiness.
For that reason, people meditate on the breath, some meditate on  themselves
as the deity, and some try  to  develop  single-pointed  concentration.  The
purpose of doing all this is to look for peace.


When we meditate on the breath and try to focus our mind,  we  do  get  some
peace. This comes from settling the  mind  and  by  stopping  all  our  busy
thoughts. When the busy thoughts subside, of course we get some peace.  When
we meditate and focus on our breath to feel  peaceful  for  15  minutes,  we
will get 15 minutes of peace. If we sit for an hour, we will get an hour  of
peace. But we are not going to spend our lives sitting there for  24  hours,
stopping all kinds of thoughts. We will not be  able  to  get  24  hours  of
peace by doing that.

The  whole  purpose  of  meditation  is  to  find  happiness  and  to  avoid
suffering. There is no other reason. That is also the reason why we  educate
ourselves by  learning the Dharma. There is no other reason. We study  these
subjects to investigate what are causing us problems and who is this  person
or “I” who is feeling the pain.

Through this education, we can think through things such as  why  we  suffer
and who is the “I” who is suffering.  In  particular,  with  regard  to  the
teachings  on  selflessness,  even  though  we  may  gain  only   a   coarse
understanding but if it is a correct understanding that comes from  analysis
and thinking, it definitely helps a lot. There  and  then,  you  get  peace.
Your mind becomes more peaceful and you will be able  to  stop  the  grosser
manifestations of your destructive emotions.

This is meditation that involves thinking and analysis. When  this  analysis
and thinking start to lead to the  correct  understanding  of  what  is  the
nature of this “I” or self who suffers or experiences pain, even though  our
understanding is coarse, it can start to  pacify  our  afflictions.  If  our
understanding  is  correct,  when  the  afflictions  are  pacified,  it   is
difficult for them to come back again.

Nothing can compare to this kind of meditation  because  once  it  hits  the
mark,  it  is  very  powerful.  You  can  really  experience  and  feel  the
difference.  This kind of meditation on the ultimate nature of  the  “I”  is
more effective and more powerful than any other kind of meditation.

There are many kinds of meditation such as  meditation  on  the  breath,  on
single-pointedness, and so forth. When you do these kinds of meditation,  it
helps for  15  minutes  or  an  hour.  You  will  get  some  peace  as  your
discursive thoughts settle  for  a  while.  But  when  you  arise  from  the
meditation, you have to confront the world again and all kinds  of  thoughts
will return. Then what are you going to do?

The meditation on  the  nature  of  the  self  is  powerful  because  it  is
something that involves thinking and analysis from various perspectives.  It
is very effective and more powerful than other meditations  that  deal  with
these things.

Whatever  education  in  Buddhist  teachings  that  you  have  received,  in
particular the learning and understanding of what exactly the person or  “I”
is, is very helpful. When that understanding is stable and  correct,  it  is
helpful in  dealing  with  all  kinds  of  situations.  Even  when  you  are
experiencing difficult situations,  the  mind  is  not  that  disturbed  and
shaken.

But learning is not enough. Just  hearing,  reading,  and  studying  is  not
enough because those activities alone will not bring  about  any  noticeable
change. On the basis of learning,  reading,  listening,  and  studying,  the
more important thing is to think and analyse. Real  understanding  can  only
come about from such reflection and analysis, “It is like that!”
With that kind of understanding, definitely you can  use  it  to  deal  with
problems  in  your  daily  life.  You  will  see  immediate  and  noticeably
different results. Until we gain  such  an  understanding  that  comes  from
thinking and reflection, we will not notice or feel any positive  change  or
benefit. So  do  not  ever  think  that  learning  and  thinking  about  the
teachings of the Buddha is a waste of  time.  Never  think  in  such  a  way
because, as I mentioned earlier, the essence behind studying all this is  to
ultimately arrive at an understanding of what exactly is the  “I”’  and  how
phenomena exist.


                             1 Middle Way School


   The explanation of the system  of  the  Proponents  of  Non-Nature  (Skt.
   Nihsvabhavavadin)[1] has three outlines:
1. definition,
2. divisions, and
3. meaning of each division.

   1  Definition

   The definition of a Proponent of Non-Nature (Skt. Nihsvabhavavadin) is: a
   person  propounding  Great  Vehicle  tenets  who  does  not  assert  true
   existence even conventionally.

   2  Divisions

   There are two divisions:
1. Autonomists (Skt. Svatantrika) and
2. Consequentialists (Skt. Prasangika).

   3  Meaning of each division

   The explanation of the Autonomy School and the Consequence  School  (Page
   19).

Those proponents of Buddhist tenets who assert that phenomena do  not  truly
exist, i.e., those who assert that there is not even a single atom  of  true
existence out there, are the Proponents of the Middle  Way.  The  Proponents
of the Middle Way have two divisions:
• Both are similar in asserting that phenomena do not truly exist.
• The Proponents of the Middle Way who assert that while phenomena  are  not
  truly existent, phenomena do exist by  way  of  their  own  character  are
  called the Middle Way Autonomists (Svatantrika-Madhyamika).
• The Proponents of Middle Way who asserts that just  as  phenomena  do  not
  truly exist, phenomena do not exist by way of their own character as  well
  are called Middle Way Consequentialists (Prasangika-Madhyamika).

The teachings on how all phenomena lack  even  an  atom  of  true  existence
comes from the second turning of the Wheel of Dharma where the  Buddha  said
this many times in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras.

It was Nagarjuna and his spiritual son,  Aryadeva,  who  clearly  elucidated
the  meaning  of  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutras.  Nagarjuna  was   the
trailblazer[2] of the Middle Way School. Even though, Nagarjuna  father  and
son, “father” referring to Nagarjuna and “son” referring to Aryadeva,   were
the ones who clearly elucidated the meaning  of  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom
Sutras, their explanations were done according to the general  structure  of
the Middle Way School. They did not divide the structure of the  Middle  Way
into the Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS  or  Svatantrika  Madhyamika)  and
the Consequence Middle Way  School  (CMWS  or  Prasangika-Madhyamika).  They
merely explained the general structure of the Middle Way. While  in  reality
Nagarjuna and Aryadeva were Middle Way  Consequentialists  themselves,  they
did not explicitly identified themselves as such but  merely  presented  the
general system of the Middle Way as it is.

Subsequently there came to be different interpretations  of  what  Nagarjuna
and Aryadeva taught.  It  was  Buddhapalita  and  Chandrakirti  who  clearly
showed and explained that  what  Nagarjuna  and  Aryadeva  had  taught  were
indeed the tenets of the CMWS. They asserted that  the  views  of  Nagarjuna
and Aryadeva were essentially the views that formed the views of  the  CMWS.
They asserted that the presentation by the AMWS was incorrect.

Later on, the  Indian  master  Bhavaviveka  rejected  the  presentations  of
Buddhapalita and Chandrakirti and formulated his  own  explanation  of  what
exactly were the thoughts of Nagarjuna. Thus he became  the  trailblazer  of
the AMWS.

Who is the one who started the CMWS?  There are different  views.  Some  say
it is Chandrakirti. Some say it is Buddhapalita.

So those are the two schools of the Middle Way: the AMWS and the CMWS.  Both
are similar in asserting that phenomena do not truly  exist.  There  is  not
even an atom of true existence.

Assertions of the AMWS
But the AMWS asserts that phenomena exist by way  of  their  own  character.
Although things do not have an atom of true existence,  phenomena  do  exist
by way of their own character.  Proponents  of  this  view  are  called  the
Middle Way Autonomists.

The AMWS asserts that, if a phenomenon exists, it necessarily:
• exists by way of its own character,
• exists inherently, and
• exists from its own side.
According to the AMWS, if someone were to say that  a  phenomenon  does  not
exist by way of its own character, does not exist from  its  own  side,  and
does not exist inherently, such a phenomenon does not exist.

If things do not exist from their own side, then what  exists?  How  do  you
explain the existence of the object? The AMWS cannot accept  that  phenomena
exist merely by being imputed by  mind  as  there  must  be  something  that
exists from the side of the object. For them,  if  a  phenomenon  exists  as
merely imputed by mind, then one can make up anything with  one’s  mind.  So
the AMWS says, “If you assert phenomena exist as merely imputed by mind,  it
is tantamount to say that things do not exist.” Because for the  AMWS,  they
do not know how to explain existence  and  non-existence  if  they  have  to
accept that things are imputed by mind. They do not know how to define  what
exists and what does not exist if everything  is  merely  imputed  by  mind.
Therefore for the AMWS, there must be something coming from the side of  the
object.

Exist from its own side/exist inherently/exist by way of its own character
With the exception of the CMWS, all the other  Buddhist  tenets  (the  AMWS,
the MOS, the SS, and the GES) are the same in asserting that phenomena  must
(1) exist from their own side, (2) exist inherently, and (3)  exist  by  way
of their own character.

Why? This is because, when you look for the object,  you  must  be  able  to
find it. This is what is meant by things “existing  from  their  own  side,”
i.e., when you search for the imputed object, you  can  point  to  something
that is the object. For example, when you look for the “I,”  there  must  be
something that you can point to that is the self.  According  to  all  these
tenets, there is the “this or that.”

Only the  CMWS  asserts  that  the  imputed  object,  when  sought,  is  not
findable. That means you cannot point to the thing that is the  object  when
you look for it. Only the CMWS says that. Starting from  the  AMWS  and  the
tenets below it, they say that when you look for  the  imputed  object,  you
will be able to find it. You can definitely point to something that  is  the
object.

Refuting true existence
Proponents of the Middle Way, be it the AMWS or the  CMWS,  are  similar  in
asserting that phenomena do not truly exist. There  is  not  even  a  single
atom of true existence. There is no true existence, no true establishment.

The AMWS  asserts  that  phenomena  do  not  have  a  single  atom  of  true
existence. Phenomena are not truly  existent,  not  truly  established.  How
then does  the  AMWS  explain  the  non-existence  of  true  existence?  For
example, conventional phenomena are  not  truly  existent.  If  conventional
phenomena are truly existent, they have to exist in  the  perspective  of  a
valid cogniser or ultimate awareness.

Here an ultimate awareness,  in  this  context,  refers  to  the  meditative
equipoise of a superior that is the wisdom  directly  perceiving  emptiness.
If conventional phenomena are indeed truly existent, this  means  that  they
not only appear as truly existent—they appear  in  the  way  they  exist—but
they  will  have  to  exist  in  the  perspective  of  the  wisdom  directly
perceiving emptiness.

However conventional phenomena do  not  exist  in  the  perspective  of  the
wisdom directly perceiving emptiness. Since that is  the  case,  this  means
that there are no truly existent conventional phenomena. This is one of  the
explanations of how conventional phenomena do not  truly  exist  because  it
does not  exist  in  the  perspective  of  the  wisdom  directly  perceiving
emptiness.

According to  the  AMWS,  the  meaning  of  (1)  true  existence,  (2)  true
establishment, and (3) ultimate establishment is:  “Established  by  way  of
its own uncommon mode of existence without being posited through  the  force
of  appearing  to  a  non-defective  awareness[3].”  This  is  the  self  of
phenomena and is  the object of negation. Not established by way of its  own
uncommon mode of existence  without  being  posited  through  the  force  of
appearing  to  a  non-defective  awareness  is  the  meaning  of  not  truly
existent, not truly established, and not ultimately established

We have not yet started with the meaning of “Established by way of  its  own
uncommon mode of existence  without  being  posited  through  the  force  of
appearing to a non-defective awareness.” First we have to  know  the  words.
This is the explanation of true existence, true establishment, and  ultimate
establishment, according to the AMWS. The opposite of that  is  the  meaning
of  the  non-existence  of  true  existence,  the  non-existence   of   true
establishment, and the non-existence of ultimate  establishment.  First,  we
must  be able to say all the words.

Please read pages 20 to 21 on your own because  if  I  were  to  go  through
everything, there is no time. The outlines 1-4 are quite straightforward.
1. definition
2. divisions
3. etymology
4. way of asserting objects

If there is anything that you don’t understand,  you  can  bring  it  up  in
class. Otherwise I will not read through all this in class as it  will  take
time. I will explain the meaning of true existence according  to  the  AMWS.
We should be able to finish the AMWS in one or two lessons. It is  important
that you read the root text.

Question:  In the MOS, the mind is truly established. In Lesson 17,  it  was
mentioned that: “All things are accepted to be the  common  locus  of  being
truly  established  and  being  a  falsity.”  Is  “truly  established”  here
according to the AMWS different from “truly established” as in “the mind  is
truly established”?

Answer:  In  the  MOS,  other-powered  natures  and  thoroughly  established
natures are truly established whereas imputational  natures  are  not  truly
established.

What is the meaning of true existence and true  establishment  according  to
the MOS?
• If it exists as not merely imputed by thought, then it is truly  existent.
  It is truly established.
• If it exists as merely imputed by thought, then it is not truly  existent.
  It is not truly established.
If it is not merely imputed  by  thought  but  exists  by  way  of  its  own
character and exists from  its  own  side,  then  that  means  it  is  truly
established. That is the meaning of true existence  and  true  establishment
according to the MOS.

(Student misheard Khen Rinpoche saying in the beginning of the  class  that,
according to the MOS, only the mind is truly established)
It is not only the mind. Primacy is given to the  mind.  Why  do  they  have
such a worldview? This worldview is based on the premise that  the  mind  is
truly established.

Question: A conventional truth is defined as that which is realised  by  the
direct valid cogniser directly realizing it by way of  being  together  with
dualistic appearance. What is the meaning of “together” here?

Answer: For example, the  eye  consciousness  apprehending  blue,  that  eye
consciousness apprehends blue by way of  being  accompanied  with  dualistic
appearance. What accompanies  the  realisation  of  blue  is  the  dualistic
appearance.



Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong



-----------------------
[1] JN: Changed from ‘Middle Way School (Skt. Madhyamika).’
[2] A trailblazer is someone who starts a tradition.

[3] Refer to chart on “Meaning  of  Terms  used  to  Describe  the  Mode  of
Existence of Phenomena in the Mahayana Schools.”


