Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L6 upload2.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.780195
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 6                            Date: 19th March 2013

When we talk about the self, person, or “I,” it is  this  self,  person,  or
“I” that wants to be happy, who doesn’t want problems and suffering.  It  is
obvious that there is a self, person, or “I.”

But when we investigate the nature of  this  self,  person,  or  “I,”  i.e.,
exactly what this self is, then the four  Buddhist  tenets  have  their  own
explanations  as  to  what  exactly  this  self,  person,  or  “I”  is.   In
particular, for those of us who assert past and future  lives,  i.e.,  those
of us who believe in reincarnation, then it is even more important  to  find
out exactly what is this person or “I” that moves  from  life  to  life.  We
believe that there is a self, person, or “I” that moves from  life  to  life
and it is this self, person, or “I” who accumulates  karma  and  experiences
the results of the karma accumulated.

Leaving aside Buddhists, even the  non-Buddhists  who  assert  reincarnation
also have to account for the person or “I” who  moves  from  life  to  life.
Many of them have thought about this and, based on  their  own  conclusions,
they come to believe that  there  is  a  self  or  “I”  that  is  permanent,
unitary, and independent. For them, this is the  only  way  to  express  the
self or “I”: There is a self or “I” who moves from life to life.  Then  this
self, the soul, or person has to be  permanent,  unitary,  and  independent.
This is the position of many of the non-Buddhist schools.  However  Buddhism
refutes the existence of such a permanent, unitary, and independent self.

Many of the non-Buddhist schools that believe in reincarnation  assert  that
there is a person that is permanent,  unitary,  and  independent.  They  say
that the self or person is completely  distinct  from  the  body  and  mind,
i.e., it is a completely separate or different  entity  from  the  body  and
mind. The self is completely unrelated to and not dependent on the body  and
mind.

These non-Buddhist schools do not know how to relate the self  to  the  body
and mind. They are unable to posit a self, person, or “I” that is  dependent
on the body and mind. They cannot figure out how the self,  person,  or  “I”
can be related to, dependent on, or be of the same entity as  the  body  and
mind.

We are now looking at the proponents of the Buddhist tenets,  starting  from
the proponents of the Great Exposition School (GES) all the way  up  to  the
Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS). All the  proponents  of  the  Buddhist
tenets are the same in asserting that a permanent, unitary, and  independent
self does not exist whatsoever. They assert unanimously  that  there  cannot
be an “I” that is not dependent on the body and mind, i.e.,  there  isn’t  a
person or “I” that is of a different entity from the body and mind.


   6 Way of asserting selflessness

   Subtle selflessness and subtle selflessness of persons are asserted to be
   equivalent.

   A selflessness of phenomena is not accepted because it is  accepted  that
   if it is an established base it is necessarily a self of phenomena.

   Among them, the Followers  of  Vatsiputra,  [one  of  the  eighteen  sub-
   schools,] accept a selflessness of person that is [a person] being  empty
   of being permanent, unitary, and independent. However, they do not accept
   a selflessness of person that is [a person] being empty  of  being  self-
   sufficient substantially existent because they accept  a  self-sufficient
   substantially existent self that is inexpressible even in terms of  being
   one entity with or a different entity  from  the  aggregates,  and  being
   permanent or impermanent (Page 6) .

All the four Buddhist tenets are similar in asserting the  non-existence  of
the permanent, unitary, and independent self.

Position of the Vatsiputriyas
Here we are looking at the way the GES asserts selflessness. There are  many
divisions in the GES. One of these sub-divisions is called the Followers  of
Vatsiputra. Being proponents of Buddhist tenets, they also do not  assert  a
permanent, unitary, and independent self.

However, this particular  sub-school,  the  Followers  of  Vatsiputra,  does
assert a self-sufficient substantially existent person. These  Vatsiputriyas
do not know how to posit a person that is of the same entity with  the  body
and mind. For them, if the person or “I” is of  the  same  entity  with  the
body and mind, they find it  difficult  to  explain  reincarnation.  Perhaps
they do not know how to explain how this “I” then moves from life to life.

At the same time they cannot not assert that the “I” is of the  same  entity
with the body and mind because the Buddha taught in  some  sutras  that  the
“I” is of the same entity with the body and mind, i.e., there isn’t  an  “I”
that is of a different entity from the body and mind. So they say that  this
self-sufficient substantially existent person exists but it is  neither  one
entity with nor a different entity from the  aggregates.  As  they  find  it
difficult to assert a person that is of the same entity with  the  body  and
mind, therefore they accept that there is “a  self-sufficient  substantially
existent self that is inexpressible even in terms of being one  entity  with
or a different entity from the aggregates.”

The Vatsiputriyas also find it difficult to say that the self  is  permanent
or impermanent. Therefore they say that the self is  inexpressible  even  in
terms of being permanent or impermanent.

The Vatsiputriyas,  who  are  a  sub-division  of  the  GES,  are  the  only
proponents of Buddhist tenets who  assert  a  self-sufficient  substantially
existent person,  whereas  the  other  sub-divisions  of  the  GES  and  the
proponents of the other Buddhist tenets such as the Sutra School  (SS),  the
Mind-Only School (MOS), and the Autonomy Middle  Way  School  (AMWS)  assert
that the  self-sufficient  substantially  existent  person  does  not  exist
whatsoever.

We claim that the self cannot be permanent, cannot be  unitary,  and  cannot
be independent. It is important to know why the self or  the  person  cannot
be permanent,  cannot  be  unitary,  and  cannot  be  independent.  This  is
something we have to think about. The concept of a permanent,  unitary,  and
independent self is referred to as atman or soul in  some  other  religions.
Such a self is asserted by many non-Buddhist philosophies  and  non-Buddhist
religions. This is in contrast to what the Buddha taught.  In  Buddhism,  we
say that such a soul or self does not exist whatsoever.

Coarse selflessness of persons
We always hear about selflessness and that there isn’t a  self  in  Buddhist
teachings. For the sake of simplicity, we can take this  to  mean  that  the
Buddha taught that a permanent,  unitary,  and  independent  self  does  not
exist. We  can  take  the  non-existence  of  the  permanent,  unitary,  and
independent self to be the coarse selflessness of persons.

We also talk about the non-existence of  the  self-sufficient  substantially
existent person. This is the subtle selflessness of  persons,  according  to
the GES, the SS, the MOS, and the  AMWS.  The  non-existence  of  the  self-
sufficient substantially existent  person  is  the  subtle  selflessness  of
persons asserted by all Buddhist tenets, with the  exception  of  the  CMWS.
The CMWS  has  a  different  presentation  of  the  subtle  selflessness  of
persons.






















• What is the problem when we  say  that  self  or  “I”  is  permanent?  Why
  doesn’t such a permanent self exist?
• Why isn’t there a unitary person? Why  can’t  there  be  a  self  that  is
  unitary?
• Why can’t there be a person or an “I” that is independent?
In Buddhist tenets, there is this assertion  that  the  permanent,  unitary,
and independent self does not exist.  We should be able to explain why  this
is so.

A permanent self
If we were to assert that the self is permanent, that means  the  self,  the
person, or “I” is unchanging. But we have to be able  to  posit  a  self  or
person that experiences happiness and suffering. If we assert that the  self
or person is permanent, how then do we explain that there  is  a  self  that
experiences happiness and suffering? If the “I” is permanent, i.e., the  “I”
is unchanging, how does  it  experience  happiness  and  suffering?  If  the
person or “I” does not change,  how does the  “I”  achieve  liberation?  How
can the person achieve enlightenment?

An independent self
If you were to assert that there is an “I”  that  is  independent,  in  this
context, independence means being independent of causes and conditions.  You
then have to be able to explain how such  an  “I”  that  is  independent  of
causes and conditions exists. You should be able to account for an “I”  that
is independent of causes and conditions.  For  Buddhists,  it  is  extremely
difficult  to  account  for  an  “I”  that  is  independent  of  causes  and
conditions.

An unitary self
We Buddhists assert that there is no soul. So there is  no  permanent  self,
no unitary self, and no independent self. The fact  that  the  self  is  not
permanent and is not independent is quite straightforward.  What  about  the
self that is not unitary, i.e.,  the  self  possesses  parts?  What  is  the
problem when we say the self is unitary, i.e., it is partless?

According to the GES,  a  partless  moment  of  consciousness  and  partless
particles exist.  So what is wrong with saying that a partless self  exists?
According to  the  GES,  the  self,  the  person,  or  the  “I,”  are  truly
established and is an ultimate truth. According to the GES,  the  self,  the
person, or the “I” is not a phenomenon whereby an awareness apprehending  it
is cancelled when it is mentally separated into its individual  parts.  This
means that it is not a conventional truth.  It is an ultimate truth  and  is
substantially existent.  There is an “I” that  has  to  come  from  previous
lives, in fact from beginningless lifetimes up to now, and there is  an  “I”
that moves on from this life to the next life.

According to the GES, such an “I” is truly  existent.  If  you  think  about
this, one would probably have to say that the self, the person, or  the  “I”
is an ultimate truth.

In this system, if it is an ultimate truth, is it necessarily  partless?  If
it is a partless phenomenon such as a directionally  partless  particle,  it
is necessarily an ultimate truth.

But if it is  an  ultimate  truth,  is  it  necessarily  partless?  In  this
discussion, it seems that we would have to say that the  self,  the  person,
or the “I” is an ultimate truth in this system. Yet we cannot say  that  the
self, the person, or the “I” is partless.

The main thing here is to explain why the  self,  the  person,  or  the  “I”
cannot be partless. Being a proponent of Buddhist tenets, you  cannot  claim
that there is a soul. In this case, the soul is partless  or  unitary.  What
is the problem with  saying that the self is partless? This is something  to
be discussed further.

In short, in Buddhism, a permanent, unitary, and independent  self,  a  soul
or atman does not exist whatsoever. The non-existence of such a self is  the
coarse selflessness of persons. You have to  memorise  what  is  the  coarse
selflessness of  persons.  For  now,  you  just  need  to  remember  that  a
permanent, unitary, and independent self does not exist whatsoever.

On the basis of remembering that the coarse selflessness  of  persons  means
the non-existence of  a  permanent,  unitary,  and  independent  self,  then
think, “What is the problem with saying that the person is  permanent?  What
is the problem with saying that the person is unitary? What is  the  problem
with saying the person is independent?”

By thinking about these points, using many reasons, you will  then  come  to
an ascertainment: “The person cannot be permanent because of this  and  that
.…”  That kind of understanding constitutes an understanding of  the  coarse
selflessness of persons.

When we look at our own experience of looking at  ourselves,  we  have  this
strong belief inside us that the “I” of yesterday and the “I”  of  today  is
exactly the same person. Nothing has changed. There is this appearance of  a
permanent or unchanging “I,” a person that is so real. We  believe  that  to
be the case.

But such a permanent self or “I” does not  exist.   Although  we  have  this
appearance of an “I” that has not changed over time - the “I”  of  yesterday
and the “I” of today being exactly the  same  -  in  reality,  the  “I”  has
changed because the “I” is not permanent. The  “I”  of  yesterday  does  not
exist now. The “I” of yesterday has already  ceased  and  disintegrated.  In
that sense the “I” has changed.

This is nothing very special. It is just  coarse  impermanence,  not  subtle
impermanence. Having said that, even if we just had  this  understanding  of
coarse impermanence, that the “I” of yesterday has already  ceased  and  the
new “I” now is not the “I” of yesterday, it is very helpful because  it  can
help us to counteract many of our afflictions.

On top of that understanding, we can come to an understanding that  we  are,
in fact, undergoing change in every single  moment,  down  to  the  smallest
moment of time. When we understand that the “I” does not exist  for  even  a
single moment and changes from moment to moment, that constitutes  the  real
understanding of subtle impermanence. That  understanding  can  then  really
help in counteracting our afflictions, the three mental poisons.

The “I” does not exist for more than the smallest unit of time. In each  and
every single moment, it is different. That is the reality but  that  reality
does not appear to us. What appears to us  instead  is  the  unchanging  “I”
that remains the same.

When  we  realise  the  non-existence  of  the   permanent,   unitary,   and
independent self, that realisation is  very  helpful  in  counteracting  our
coarse afflictions, i,e., our  coarse anger, our coarse attachment, and  our
coarse ignorance.

The non-existence of the permanent, unitary, and  independent  self  is  the
coarse selflessness of persons. After that comes the subtle selflessness  of
persons,  i.e.,  the  non-existence  of  the  self-sufficient  substantially
existent person.

You are now at the initial stages of training. You have  no  choice  but  to
memorise these terms. It is the basis for you to engage in  discussions  and
to analyse the subject. You have to be able to pick up the terms.  You  have
to be able to say, for example, “the non-existence  of  the  self-sufficient
substantially existent person.” That is non-negotiable.

Subtle selflessness of persons
There are four Buddhist tenets and the majority of them  starting  from  the
GES up  to  the  AMWS,  with  the  exception  of  the  CMWS,  conduct  their
investigation of the “I” on the basis of asserting that the “I” exists  from
its own side.

On the basis of that assertion, they then  investigate  how  there  isn’t  a
self-sufficient substantially  existent  person.  In  their  investigations,
they look into the problems if they were to assert that  there  is  a  self-
sufficient substantially existent person. They focus on that issue.

When we look at our own experience, our own idea of  ourselves,  i.e.,  when
we look at the person or the “I,” we have this idea, “I am the possessor  of
the aggregates (or the body and mind).”  We have  this  belief,  “I  own  my
body and mind.” “I am the user of my body and mind.”

This worldview of ourselves and how we relate to our own body  and  mind  is
similar to the relationship between a businessman or trader  and  the  goods
he trades in. We have the idea that we are the businessmen owning the  goods
to be traded. In this case, the goods to be traded are our  body  and  mind.
We are like the owner of the body and mind. This belief that the  self,  the
person, or the “I” is the owner of the  body  and  mind  is  innate,  arises
naturally, and is not taught.

How do we know we operate in  such  a  way?  Imagine  a  time  when  we  are
feeling unwell, especially when we are down with some sickness. When we  see
someone with a healthy body and who is free of  pain,  we  have  this  idea,
“How nice it will be if I  can  have  that  body.”  We  have  this  wish  to
exchange bodies, but not the wish to exchange the self.

Another example: when we see someone who  is  more  attractive  or  handsome
than us, we may have the idea, “How nice it will  be  if  I  can  have  that
beautiful body.” We have the wish to exchange our body if given a choice.

This is how we believe the “I” is the owner of the body. The  body  is  like
something that can be traded or exchanged,  just  like  what  a  businessman
does with the goods that he owns. He can sell  them  or  exchange  them  for
something better. This is how we think.

It is the same when we look at our mind. We feel that we own  our  mind.  We
have different kinds of mind such as our intelligence, our  wisdom,  and  so
forth. For someone who is not so intelligent or wise, when he sees a  person
who is intelligent, he envies that person and thinks, “How  wonderful  if  I
can be like him and have his wisdom and intelligence.” He has  the  wish  to
exchange his mind if it is possible. Such  a  wish  is  innate  and  is  not
taught.

In this case, the “I”  does  not  seem  to  depend  on  the  body  and  mind
whatsoever. Rather we have the idea that it is the body and  mind  that  are
dependent on the self. The self, the person, or the “I” is like  the  owner.
We have this idea that the self exists in this way, i.e., that  the  “I”  is
not dependent on the body and mind whatsoever but is the possessor or  owner
of the body and mind. Such a belief, in philosophical terms, is  called  the
apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person.

A permanent, unitary, and independent self doesn’t exist. A person  that  is
the possessor or owner of the body and mind also does not exist.

With regard to a permanent, unitary, and independent  self,   when  we  talk
about the permanent, unitary, and independent self permanent  self  in  this
context, we are saying that the self is not dependent on, nor is it  related
to the body and mind. Thus we  say  the  self  is  permanent,  unitary,  and
independentpermanent. Permanent, unitary,  and  independent  Permanent  here
has the connotation that the self or the “I”   is  completely  unrelated  to
the body and mind, i.e., there is no relationship between them.

When we talk about the self-sufficient substantially existent person, it  is
something similar to that but not exactly the same.

When there is an apprehension of a  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
person, there is the idea that there is a person  or  an  “I”  that  is  the
possessor of the aggregates. In that sense, the person or  the  “I”  is  not
dependent on the body and mind. In this  relationship,  the  body  and  mind
have some kind of dependence or reliance on the “I.”

So there is this slight difference  between  these  two  apprehensions:  the
apprehension  of  a  permanent,  unitary,  and  independent  self  and   the
apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person.

It is  very  important  to  get  an  understanding  of  what  we  have  been
discussing. Once you get this right, then there is nothing much else to  say
about the selflessness of persons. With  the  exception  of  the  CMWS,  the
presentation of the selflessness of persons in the GES,  the  SS,  the  MOS,
and the AMWS are the same.

So for now, what you have to remember is this:  All  the  tenets,  with  the
exception of the CMWS, assert that:
• the non-existence of a permanent, unitary, and  independent  self  is  the
  coarse selflessness of persons
• the non-existence of a self-sufficient substantially  existent  person  is
  the subtle selflessness of persons

Quite  a  few  non-Buddhist  philosophical  systems  and  many  other  major
religious traditions of the world assert a soul  or  atman.  What  they  are
saying essentially is that there is a permanent,  unitary,  and  independent
self. They are saying that there is soul or a self that goes to heaven  that
is completely unrelated to the body and mind, i.e., that  is  separate  from
the body and mind and is of a different entity from the body and mind.

All Buddhist tenets  say  unanimously  that  such  a  soul  does  not  exist
whatsoever. A self that is completely unrelated to the  body  and  mind  and
that is of a different entity from the body and mind  does  not  exist.  The
non-existence of this self is the coarse selflessness of  persons.  In  this
case, when we say, selflessness of persons, we are referring to  the  coarse
selflessness of persons. The word, “selflessness,” means the lack of or  the
non-existence of a self. In this context, it is the self that is  permanent,
unitary, and independent. Such a self does not exist. The  non-existence  of
such a self is called the coarse selflessness of persons.

It is easy to say this but it is not easy to gain  an  ascertainment  of  or
conviction about this. You have to prove to your own mind  that  the  person
is not permanent, that the person is not unitary, and  that  the  person  is
not independent.

You have to think and ask yourself, “What is the problem when I say the  “I”
is permanent? What is the problem if  the  “I”  is  partless?  What  is  the
problem if the “I” is independent?” This is something that you have to  work
at by thinking about it and through discussion.

As long as you are able to get an understanding in your heart  that  such  a
self does not exist, I think that is sufficient. If you are able  to  arrive
at an understanding of this through such a process of  reasoning,  then  you
can say, “I have gained an  understanding  of  the  coarse  selflessness  of
persons.”

The non-existence of the self-sufficient substantially  existent  person  is
subtler than the non-existence of the permanent,  unitary,  and  independent
self because the object of negation is subtler. This means that it  is  more
difficult to understand.

To  be  able  to  say  we  know  the  apprehension  of  the  self-sufficient
substantially existent person, we have to look at  our  own  experience  and
see how such a mind operates. What is this mind thinking when it  apprehends
the person to be like the owner or possessor of the body and mind? How  does
it work?

When we look at our own  experiences,  we  will  be  able  to  see  that  we
innately believe that we are the owner of the body and mind. In  this  case,
it is not that the “I” is completely unrelated to the  body  and  mind,  but
that the “I” is like the owner or possessor of the body and mind.

The manner of the apprehension is this: the “I” seems not to depend  on  the
body and mind completely. When we look at the body and mind,  the  body  and
mind seem to be dependent on the “I.” This particular  way  of  apprehending
the “I” can be understood through  the  examples  that  were  given  earlier
about how innately we have this wish to  exchange  our  body  or  mind  with
somebody else. We believe that  there  is  an  “I”  that  is  the  owner  or
possessor of the body and mind. The “I”  is  independent  of  the  body  and
mind. That is the meaning of self-sufficient.

Does the “I” exist in the way that we believe it to exist? In this case,  we
innately believe that:
• there is an “I” that is the owner or possessor of the body and mind
• there is an “I” that is not dependent on the body and mind
There is such an appearance of the “I” and we believe in it.

The question is: Does such an “I” exist in reality? Does the  “I”  exist  in
the way it appears to our mind? Is there a self-sufficient person or an  “I”
that is the owner or possessor of the body and  mind,  with  the  owner  not
depending on the body and mind? The answer is, “No.”


It is one thing to say, “No,”  but  it  is  another  thing  to  be  able  to
establish in your heart and mind that such a  self-sufficient  substantially
existent person  does  not  exist.  That  is  another  completely  different
matter.

Question: Can you give an example of an ultimate truth that is partless?

Answer: Feeling, person, i.e., we can posit any of five aggregates.

Question:  There  are  intellectually  acquired   afflictions   and   innate
afflictions.  In  the  case  of  the  apprehension  of  the  self-sufficient
substantially existent person, there are two forms:
• the intellectually acquired apprehension
• the innate apprehension
The antidote to these two apprehensions is said to be the same. If  that  is
the  case,  why  do  we  need  to  abandon   the   intellectually   acquired
apprehension before we can abandon the innate one?

Answer:  The  mode  of   apprehension   of   the   intellectually   acquired
apprehension of the self-sufficient substantially existent  person  and  the
mode of apprehension of  the  innate  apprehension  of  the  self-sufficient
substantially existent person are different.

To keep it simple, the mode of apprehension of the  intellectually  acquired
apprehension  of  the  self-sufficient  substantially  existent  person   is
similar to the apprehension  of  the  permanent,  unitary,  and  independent
self.  What  is  the  intellectually  acquired  apprehension  of  the  self-
sufficient substantially existent person? It is the apprehension of  a  self
that is of a different entity from the  aggregates.  It  is  similar  to  an
apprehension  of  a  permanent,   unitary,   and   independent   self.   The
intellectually acquired apprehension of  the  self-sufficient  substantially
existent person clings on to the self or an  “I”  that  is  of  a  different
entity from the body and mind.

In the case of the innate apprehension of the self-sufficient  substantially
existent person, this particular mind does not apprehend a self or a  person
that is  of  a    different  entity  from  the  body  and  mind.  Rather  it
apprehends a self or “I” that is the owner, possessor, or controller of  the
body and mind. So the modes of apprehension are different.

Here we are comparing two different minds:
1.  The  intellectually  acquired  apprehension   of   the   self-sufficient
   substantially  existent  person:  the  mode  of   apprehension   involves
   apprehending the self or the “I” to be of a  different  entity  from  the
   body and mind.
2. The innate apprehension of  the  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
   person: there is no such apprehension of a self of an “I” that  is  of  a
   different entity from the body and mind.

This topic is extremely challenging and difficult. It is something  we  need
to work at  over  years  of  thinking.  There  are  materials  available  in
English. One can look at them but it is still difficult to  decisively  say,
“This is this and this is not that.” It doesn’t matter whom we  are  talking
about. It is difficult for anyone to say exactly, “It is like  this.  It  is
not like that.”

Question: Is the partless particle an ultimate truth and a form at the  same
time?
Answer: It is not a non-associated compositional factor!  It  is  form.  The
aggregate of form would be form.

Question: The partless particle that cannot  be  destroyed  is  an  ultimate
truth and at the same time it is form, which is an impermanent thing?

Answer: Yes.

Question: A person is substantially existent; yet, in this school,  it  says
that it is empty  of  being  self-sufficient  substantially  existent.  This
sounds a bit contradictory to me. Is it trying to say  that  the  person  is
substantially existent but not self-sufficient?

Answer: If you remember, according to the  GES,  if  it  is  an  established
base, it is necessarily substantially established. This means the person  is
necessarily  substantially  established.   The   person   is   substantially
established but the self-sufficient substantially existent person  does  not
exist. Obviously there is a difference.

In the context of  saying  that  a  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
person does not exist, that is to help us understand how  we  innately  view
ourselves as being an owner, possessor, or controller of the body and  mind.
It is not unrelated to the body and mind but it is  like  an  owner  of  the
body and mind.

Let  us  look  at  the  partless  particle.  Are  partless  particles  self-
sufficient substantially existent? They are  substantially  established  but
are they are self-sufficient?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: So there is self-sufficient substantial establishment.

There is self-sufficient substantial existence. But we say that the self  is
not self-sufficient substantially existent.

We  have  to  prove  or  establish  that  the  partless  particle  is  self-
sufficient. If the partless  particle  is  self-sufficient,  then  it  would
mean[1] [that it does  not  depend  on  a  previous  moment  of  a  partless
particle to come about. This  would  mean  that  it  is  permanent.  If  the
partless particle is permanent, then  it  would  not  be  form  as  form  is
necessarily impermanent.][2]





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong










-----------------------
[1] The recording was abruptly cut off at this point.
[2] This section of the transcript (in brackets) is taken from the notes  of
a student.

