Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L13 (Upload2).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.794322
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 13                         Date: 11th April 2013

According to the MOS, all phenomena can be grouped  into  three  categories,
the three natures:
1. . These three categories are the three natures:-
The Tthoroughly established nature
2. Other-powered nature
3. Imputational nature

Sometimes people get stuck at and cannot go beyond the level of words.  They
cannot go beyond the level of words, and Tthey are confounded by  the  terms
such as other-powered nature. You don’t have to be  confused  or  confounded
by these words., Yyou just have to know what exactly what they  it means.

Other-powered nature
According to this school,  other-powered  nature  is  just  another  way  of
saying  “impermanent  phenomenaon,  compounded  phenomenaon,  and   composed
phenomenaon”.
So  according  to   this   school,   Therefore,   other-powered   phenomena,
impermanent composed  phenomena,  and  composed  impermanent  phenomena  are
synonymous.

What is the main characteristic of such phenomena?
Other-powered  natures,  impermanent  composed   phenomena,   and   composed
impermanent phenomena basically refer to phenomena  that  undergo  momentary
change, i.e., phenomena that  change ing from moment to moment. This  change
is due to the cause  that  brought  about  that  particular  phenomenon.  So
Iimpermanent phenomena or composed phenomena are  under  the  power  of  the
causes that brought them about. Hence they are it  about,  therefore  it  is
called other-powered.

Why impermanent phenomena change from moment to moment?
What is impermanent phenomenon?
What is composed phenomenon?
Those phenomena undergo momentary  change.  All  impermanent  phenomena  are
like that. T- they undergo momentary change. But w
Why is it their  nature of  impermanent  phenomenon  tto  undergo  momentary
change?
Because they are under the control of the  power  of  their  own  respective
causes that which brought  about  their  its  existence.  So  Tthis  is  the
meaning of “other-powered.” The  word  ‘other-powered”  is  just  a  way  of
helping us to understand what exactly  impermanent  phenomenon  or  composed
phenomenaon are is.

Thoroughly established nature
Then there is this thoroughly established nature. Again you  are  confounded
by the term. Put it simply, thoroughly established nature means emptiness.
In the context of the MOS, thoroughly established  nature  is  the  same  as
ultimate truth.
Thoroughly established nature means emptiness.  According  to  this  school,
what kinds of emptinesses are there?
• There  is  the  emptiness  of  a  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
  person.
• There is the emptiness of the subject and object as different entities.y
• There is the emptiness of phenomena as naturally bases  of  engagement  or
  referent of names.
These emptinesses are all thoroughly established natures.

In short, what is thoroughly established nature? It is emptiness.
Emptiness of what? (1) They are emptiness of the self  of  persons  and  (2)
the emptiness of the self of phenomena.

In the context of the MOS, is school, emptiness is an ultimate truth.
In  this  school,  thoroughly  established  nature,  ultimate  truth,    and
emptiness are synonymous.

Imputational nature
Then you have the imputational nature which is “kun btags” in Tibetan.
Imputational natures are of two types:
1. eExistent
2. nNon-existent

• Imputational natures that which  are  existents  refer  to  all  permanent
  phenomena other than emptiness;, for example, uncompounded space.
• Imputational natures  that  which  are  non-existents  are,  for  example,
  external objects. According to this school, external objects do not exist.
  An external object
What is external object?
According to  this  school,  it  is  an  imputation  through  the  force  of
conceptuality.
• Another example is the  sky-flowers.  That   which  does  not  exist,  but
  nevertheless it is imputed by conceptuality.

These are the things that you have to remember. According to  the  MOS,  all
phenomena are included in these three natures:. Of the three:-
•  Thoroughly  established  natures  and  other-powered  natures  are  truly
  established.
• Imputational natures are not truly established.

According to this school, what is an ultimate truth?  It  is  emptiness.  If
emptiness is ultimate truth,  then every other phenomenon that exists  would
be a conventional truth.  This means out of the three natures:
• Thoroughly established nature is an ultimate truth
• Other-powered nature and imputational nature are conventional truths.



|The Three Natures                                          |
|Other-powered      |Thoroughly         |Imputational       |
|phenopheno-mena,   |established nature,|natures are of two |
|composed           |ultimate truth, and|types:             |
|phenopheno-mena,   |emptiness are      |eExistent (e.g.    |
|and impermanent    |sy-nonymous.       |uncom-pounded      |
|phe, impermanent   |There are the      |space)             |
|phenonomena  are   |eEmptiness of the  |nNon-existent (e.g.|
|synonym-mous.      |self of persons    |external objects)  |
|The mMain          |and the emptiness  |It is an           |
|characteristic: is |of the self of     |iImputation through|
|that they undergo  |phenomena.         |the force of       |
|mo-                |                   |conceptuality.     |
|Phenomena that     |                   |                   |
|undergo momentary  |                   |                   |
|change.            |                   |                   |
|This change is due |                   |                   |
|to the cause that  |                   |                   |
|brought about that |                   |                   |
|particular         |                   |                   |
|phenomenon.        |                   |                   |
|truly established  |truly established  |not truly          |
|                   |                   |established        |
|Conventional truth             |Ultimate truth                   |
|How the self does not exist in |How phenomena, other than the    |
|the way it appears             |self, do not exist in the way    |
|                               |they appear.                     |
|                               |To MOS, it is the non-existence  |
|                               |of external objects              |

The MOS: Non-existence of external objects
At the end of the day, what you are trying to find out now is how  phenomena
do not exist in the way they appear.
According to the MOS, what do we mean when we say phenomena do not exist  in
the way they appear?
According to the MOS, this is where the non-existence  of  external  objects
comesing into play.
To meditate  on  the  selflessness  of  phenomena  means  to  discover  that
phenomena do not exist in the way they appear to us. According to  the  MOS,
they say that although there is the  appearance  of  the  external  objects,
but in reality,  external objects do not exist.

When something pleasant appears to us and our mind, we get attached  to  it.
We get attached because we think that there is  something  real  out  there,
outside of  the mind. There is an appearance of something outside there  and
we believe in  that  appearance.  it;  Ttherefore  we  get  attached.  Here,
according to the MOS, the appearance of external objects, although  external
objects they appear,  but that is not how things exist.

The MOS explains that  all  objects,  all  forms,   and  sounds,   that  you
experience see do not exist as separate from your mind, ;  outside  of  your
mind. Rather, how they exist ais just an appearances  or  a  projections  of
your mind. S, specifically they are it is athe  projections of the  ripening
of a karmic seeds or imprintss in your mind. Due to the awakening  of  these
karmic  seeds and the imprints, then you  have  the  appearance  of  theseis
objects. That is what an the object is. So Itit is not  something  external,
something outside of  to your  mind.  Therefore,  there  areis  no  external
objects.

Your experienceing of the an appearance of a beautiful object  is  only  due
to the ripening of karmic imprints in your mind.  There  is  nothing  coming
from the side of an object outside of your mind. According to  the  MOS,  if
we are able to understand that the appearance of this beautiful form and  so
forth is just a projection of “my” own mind—, that it is just a ripening  of
a particular karmic imprint in “my” own mind, and,  other than that,   there
is really nothing out there that is  outside of  ‘my’ mind  and,   from  its
own side,  a real external object—. If we have  this  kind  ofthis  kind  of
world view definitely then will definitely it will help  us  to  reduce  our
grasping at and attachment to such an  object.

Sometimes we may do have very exciting dreams. ,  and  Wwe  get  emotionally
involved in the dream and ; we get attached to or upset by  it.   about  it.
When we wake up from the dream and realisze that it is just  a  dream,  then
whatever  fear  or  attachment  we  may  have  had  have  during  the  dream
disappearsed. Sometimes, even after we waoke  up  from  the  dream,  in  the
initial period,  there may still be is still some tense feeling,   or  fear,
excitement or  attachment to the dream. or still excited or attached to  it.
But after a while, when you are a little bit more awake, because it  was  is
just a dream, that sense of e emotional involvement will then fadegoes off.

Based on the world view that there is something right there outside  of  the
mind, that there is a real external object right there  and that  everything
is coming from the side of the object, whether pleasant or unpleasant,  then
our emotional involvement will be very strong. But Recall  if  we  thinkthen
of the view of the MOS’s view and follow after it by thinking in  this  way:
and think; “Although there is this appearance  of  a  real  external  object
right there,  but I understand that this is just  a  projection  of  my  own
mind.  and Iit is just made up by my mind. What I see  is  none  other  than
just tthe result of the a rripening of a karmic imprint in my  mind.  ,  and
Iit is coming from my own mental comes as the projection of my  mind.  There
is  Nno real external object right there separate from my  the  mind.”  When
you can think in this way,  then  ,”  I  think  definitely  you  can  see  a
reduction in your emotional involvement with the object,  ;  whether  it  be
anger (or aversion) is anger or attachment.

According to the MOS, when if we come  to  realisze  that  all  conventional
truths do not exist in the way they appear to us, that how  there  areis  no
external objects, over time, we will reduce our clinging,  grasping,  anger,
and attachment.

From this, one ese, one can understand that by delineating the view  of  the
selflessness of phenomena, or in simple English, by understanding what  that
isselflessness of phenomena is, you have a far  more powerful tool  in  your
hands to work with against t tthe afflictions. Besides having  the  view  of
the selflessness of persons, now you add the view  of  the  selflessness  of
phenomena. , Ddefinitely what  you  have  at  your  disposal  is  much  more
powerful than just having the view of the selflessness of persons.

The view of the Middle Way School
The MOS, the AMWS,  and the CMWS talk about the  selflessness  of  phenomena
but they differ as to what that selflessness of phenomena is.

According to the Middle Way SchoolMWS (MWS), they say that  the  way  things
and phenomena appear to us is not a factual or  accurate  representation  of
the reality. It is not true. According to the MWS, they explain that when  a
things and phenomenona appears to us, it they appears as if that is the  way
the object actually exists, that that is its . That is the very nature.  The
way the phenomena appear is  exactly  the  nature  of  the  object;  how  it
actually exists.
We are talking here about how,  how, in general, the MWS explains about  how
things appear to us. We are , and not talking about  reality.  According  to
the MWS, Madhyamika School, when a things appears to us, it they appears  as
if that is the final or /ultimate nature of that object, that there is .  It
is nothing beyond that. That is what we  call,  in  philosophical  technical
language, the final mode of the abiding of the object.

According to the MWS, how do things and  events/  phenomena  appear  to  us?
They ings appear to us as if that is their  final/ or ultimate nature,  that
that is  on what the objects really areis. Things appear to us  as  if  that
is how they exist finally or ultimately. That is how things  appear  to  us.
They are real.  If phenomena existed in the way they appear to us,  that  is
the meaning of ultimate establishment.

We are talking about appearance. According to the MWS, things appear  to  us
as if that is how it is exists finally/ ultimately. In simple English,  when
you see a person, you see the actual face without any mask and what you  see
is what you get. This is how things appear to us. It is real.  That  is  the
final nature of the object. According to the MWS, if  phenomena  existed  in
the way they it appears to us,  that would mean that the objects would  have
to be ultimately established. That would mean that the objects haves  to  be
truly established. That is the meaning of  true  establishment  or  ultimate
establishment.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Are yYou are getting somewhere  with  thiso  orr
not? You must squeeze your brain a bit.

It is not easy because we are looking at the great treatises here.  Normally
I say that receiving initiations is nothing. That It iis very easy. We  just
sit there but whether you receive the  initiation  or  not  is  a  different
question. You just think that you have received it.

Thinking about selflessness is much more challenging than  receiving  taking
initiations, and even far  much  more  challenging  than  conferring  giving
initiations. It is very easy to confer  initiations.  give.  I  mean  anyone
body can give initiations, but the difference lies in is whether the  person
is qualified or not. But Eeven then, it is a very easy matter of just  going
through the motions and performing doing the rituals.

It is much more challenging to present these is teachings, and  it  is  also
much more challenging to understand  theseis  teachings.   But  it  is  only
through understanding these is teachings that you will , you  see  a  change
in the mind. When If you think about this, these are the  things  that  will
cause the mind to change. Especially Wwhen you see the truths for  yourself,
you  are  then   able  to  eliminate  whatever  superimpositions  or   wrong
understandings that you may have. Then you experience gain thatthe   joy  of
such that understanding.  Tthat which is not something you can gain from  an
the initiation.

When you sit through an initiation, you may if  you  think,  ;  “I  generate
great bliss” ” and that is about it. Of course when we do not n’t  have  the
realiszation of great bliss,  then we  cannot  talk  about  the  feeling  of
great bliss. On the other hand, tThe joy that comes from learning  and  from
seeing some truths that we have discovered for ourselves,  that  is  certain
to bring about some real benefits and joy.

As I have mmentioned before about my own experience. ,  Bbecause  I  do  not
n’t understand everything, I do think about the teachings. When  stuffs.  If
there is something that I gained some understanding of some points  after  I
hadve thought about them,  it,  I  feel  the  joy,   and  thinking,  :  “How
wonderful.”. When If I sit through initiations, I think there is some  bliss
but that is about it. It is difficult for me to experience  the  same   kind
of joy that I find from discovering the teachings  for  myself.  I  find  it
difficult to experience thate  same joy when I am attending initiations.

Through Oour own discovery of the teachings of the Buddha comes  about  when
’s teachings, we study, learn, and think  about  the  teachingsit.  When  we
start to see some truths in them, it then that joy is very different. It  is
only then that  you really have some faith in the teachings of the  Buddha’s
teaching. By doing so, you really have some faith in Buddha. It  is  amazing
and it is heartfelt. That It can only  come  about  through  ddiscovering  y
when you look at the Buddha’s teachings  by and thinking  about them. it.  I
don’t think it is possible to have this kind of feeling and this sense  kind
of discovery by sitting through the initiations. Simply Just by being to  be
present and receiving the initiation, I think it is  difficult  to  generate
have the same kind of faith in the  Buddha.

Of course, I am talking  about  us  as  ordinary  individuals.  Most  of  us
basically are like that. With Tthe exception are  of  those  who  really  do
have very high realiszations. , Wwhen they receive take empowerments, it  is
a completely different experience. We would like to think we are like   them
but we arewere not. We are ordinary individuals.

So for us, the way is  to  make  the  discovery  for  ourselves  is  through
learning the teachings of the Buddha’s teaching  and  then  seeing  its  the
authenticity and the ttruth for by ourselves. When we see  that  truth,  the
joy that one experiences gained is very different. At that  time,  Then  you
really start to have a , what you call, the real understanding ofn  what  is
a bBuddha and generate , and the real faith in the Buddha. For us,  that  is
the only way. That is why Lama Tsongkhapa keeps on saying that we  ;  “mMust
learn, we  must educate ourselves,  and we must reflect about what  we  have
learnted.
Y”
You have to think about the four seals. In particular,  that what we do  not
n’t want is suffering. All contaminated  phenomena  are  in  the  nature  of
suffering. At the end of the day, what we don’t want is suffering. In  order
to overcome suffering, we have to overcome its cause,  i.e.,  our  which  is
ego-grasping, clinging at the self, the  self of  persons,   and  so  forth.
That is what we need to get rid of.

Can we  get  rid  of  our  suffering  just  by  attending  initiations?  No,
obviously not.  Just  by  taking  initiations,  you  can  get  rid  of  your
suffering? No. We like to scramble here and  there  and  everywhere  looking
for  empowerments,  but  still  nothing  happens.   and  Sstill   there   is
suffering. This is because we have not targeted the  root  of  the  problem:
our ego-grasping, clinging to a self,  and  our  grasping  at  the  self  of
persons. In order to overcome suffering, we have to overcome  this  grasping
at the self of persons. The only way to do this so and the  only  method  is
to realisze selflessness. To realisze selflessness, we have to  meditate  on
selflessness. Before we can meditate on selflessness, we have  to  find  out
what selflessness is. You have to learn and study what selflessness is.

Do you see the process nowor not? Only when  then  you  understand  this,  .
oOnly then will you see how important it is to study tenets. Therefore  Yyou
have to see the point for yourself. No matter how you think about  it,  from
whatever angle, the conclusion is still  the  same:;  Yyou  have  to  learn.
There must be education, learning,  and then reflection.

At the end of the day, Iif what you do not want is suffering,  if  what  you
want is freedom from suffering, and liberation from samsara,  then  this  is
the  one  and  only  way.  In  particular,  you  have  to  learn  about  the
selflessness. Before you can even meditate on it, , you have to  learn  what
selflessness is. Only then can you  can  cultivate  your  the  understanding
during meditation. Through meditation, that definitely you will be  able  to
reduce the afflictions.  In so doing, definitely you will be able to  reduce
your suffering and misery.

It is very important to gain an understanding  of  selflessness  before  you
can meditate on it. But even gaining such an understanding is  not  an  easy
feat. Even just to gain that, it is not an easy  feat.  It  is  very,   very
difficult.

In my case, I have to teach. I find it extremely  difficult  to  teach  this
topic. Although I do read different texts and  different  commentaries,  but
it is still very difficult to be able to summarisze and  put  them  together
in some coherent form, that  “the view is definitely  this  and  not  that”.
Sometimes, I even wonder whether I am presenting the right thing or  not.  I
do get the  find  eeling  thatit   is  very  difficult  because  it  is  not
straightforward and it is not easy. Even  just  delineating  to  settle  the
view, to say what is and what is not, in technical  language,  to  delineate
the view “say what is and what is not”  that  is  really  very  challenging.
Forget about realiszations ing for the time being. ,  Eeven  just  to  being
able to explain what exactly is and what is not,  that  in  itself  is  very
challenging and very difficult.

According to the MWS, just think about our own experience. H, how do  things
appear to us? We do not question those appearances. them, isn’t it? We  just
take them as they are, that that is how these objects are in reality. as  it
is. This is how the object in reality is. (Ven  Gyurme:  I  mean  in  simple
English. I am not talking about the technical translation,  otherwise  there
is no point.)  We bBasically we  accept what appears to us. That is  is  how
the object exists. There is nothing beyond what appears to us. That  is  the
object. We take that to be the final object, and the final  reality,  or  in
philosophical technical llanguage, the final mode  of  the  abiding  of  the
object.

According to the MWS, they said if this is how  phenomena  really  exist  in
reality, , and if this is how they really existed  in  reality,  that  would
means that:
• - thatthe  object exists in the way it appears,
• - that the object is ultimately established,
• - the that object is truly established.

If things and events existed in the way they  appear,  we  do  not  question
them, and we take it as that is how the things exist, that is  the  ultimate
way and the only way  how  it  exists.  That  means  that  object  is  truly
established, it is established in the way  it  appears  to  us,  and  it  is
ultimately established. If you accept that,  then you have a  problem.  Why?
Because Then that phenomenon would have to exist in the  perspective  of  an
ultimate awareness. ifIf phenomena existed in  the  way  they  appear,  they
would be ultimately truly established and  truly  established.  ,  and  they
would be ultimately established. If that is  the  case,   that  would  means
that e phenomenaon would have to exist in the  perspective  of  an  ultimate
awareness.

Specifically, Wwhat is this ultimate awareness? It is   the  awareness  that
posits an ultimate truth. , and Sspecifically  it  is  the  wisdom  directly
perceiving emptiness. If phenomena existed in the way that they it  appears,
in short, they would  have  to  exist  in  the  perspective  of  the  wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness.

So, aAccording to the MWS,  when  they  we  think  about  it  and  think  it
through, they said that phenomena are not truly established,  phenomena  are
not ultimately established. This is just the general  position  rocedure  of
the MWS.
In the MWS, there are two divisions. The ultimate or  the  highest  view  is
that of the the CMWS. Their explanation is even more subtler.  According  to
the final view of , the ultimate/the  highest school, the CMWS asserts  that
they say that everything is mere name and their . It existence is is  merely
imputed by mind.

I thought to say all these.  I hope thought what I have said today might  be
of benefits. It is natural that people may wonder why we  are  studying  all
this. ese. You feel disconnected, right? Why we  must  we  learn  about  the
selflessness of persons, the selflessness of phenomena,  and so forth?

I hope thought what I said today might be helpful. But So you have to  think
it through again. You Ggo through that process from the  beginning  and  try
to relate it to what you are studying to your  own  mind.  When  we  say  we
meditate, what aredo  we meditatinge on? Meditation  basically  means  going
through our own mind. We have to do it by  it  by  ourselves  with  our  own
power. For example, Tthinking along the lines of what I  have  talked  about
today, starting  from the beginning, and  checking  it  against   them  with
your own experience.

 In order for us to be attached or upset, does the “I”‘I’ have to come  into
the picture or not? When the “‘I”’ comes into the picture, how does it  lead
to our all these emotional involvements, how does it lead to  such as  anger
and , attachment?

Then think about how phenomena other than the “‘I”’ appear to us? When  they
appear to us as pleasant or unpleasant, how do we get emotionally  involved?
When we are emotionally involved and through that,  do we get upset or ,  do
we get attached? If we are able to counteract that kind of  grasping,   will
it lead to a reduction in our afflictions? These  are  some  of  the  things
that we have to think about for ourselves. When we  say  meditate,  this  is
meditation. Whaty else is there?

For now, if if you can just think about of whwhaatt I have just said  today,
it is kind of llike an outlines, something for you to  think  about  and  to
meditate on on your own and meditate on. Do your own discovery.

So far, in terms of the selflessness  of  phenomena,  we  have  only  talked
about the  emptiness  of  subject  and  object  as  as  different  entities.
Basically there is no external object, and everything is the  projection  of
the mind. That is relatively straight forward and is quite easy.
What about the other aspects of the MOS? For eExample, how phenomena do  not
exist as the naturally bases of engagement or referent of names?  Even  just
to say that, even just to explain that, it is  so  difficult.  So,  this  is
something maybe I will do in the next lesson. I will try.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong
