Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L16 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.767712
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 16                         Date: 25th April 2013

In Lama Tsongkhapa’s masterpiece, The Essence of Eloquence, he  states  that
other-powered natures are empty of  imputational  natures.  Je  Rinpoche  is
referring to the three natures:
1. Other-powered natures
2. Thoroughly established natures
3. Imputational natures

Other-powered natures
I talked before about other-powered natures. One way of  understanding  them
is that other-powered natures refer to those phenomena that  are  under  the
control or influence of their own causes  and  conditions.  In  that  sense,
they are other-powered.

When we look at the divisions of other-powered natures, there are:
1. Pure other-powered natures
2. Impure other-powered natures[1]

What  are  impure  other-powered  natures?  They   refer   mainly   to   the
contaminated  appropriated  physical  and  mental  aggregates,   i.e.,   our
contaminated existents  that are under the control of  their  causes,  karma
and afflictions.

If you remember the four seals that attest to a  particular  doctrine  being
Buddhist, the second seal says, “All contaminated phenomena are  miserable.”
Our contaminated existents, the contaminated body and mind,  are   miserable
and in the nature of suffering. Why? Because they are other-powered and  are
under  the  control  of  their  own  causes  and   conditions,   karma   and
afflictions. Because  our  contaminated  appropriated  physical  and  mental
aggregates are under the control of karma and  afflictions,  therefore  they
are in the nature of suffering.

We can think about this teaching and apply it  to  our  practice.  First  we
gain an understanding of other-powered natures in general. Then  we  use  an
illustration, i.e., our contaminated existents or contaminated  appropriated
physical and  mental  aggregates.  When  you  are  able  to  see  that  your
contaminated appropriated physical and mental aggregates  are  other-powered
natures,  being  under  the  control  or  influence  of   your   karma   and
afflictions, then you can see that they are in the nature of suffering.

When we say our contaminated appropriated  physical  and  mental  aggregates
are other-powered natures, it means that we have no freedom  whatsoever.  We
have to experience our contaminated  existents  because  we  are  under  the
control of our karma and afflictions. There is no independence  and  freedom
because they are other-powered natures.

By having and focussing on these contaminated existents,  they  act  as  the
bases for us to generate  all  the  afflictions—anger,  attachment,  and  so
forth—and  due  to  that,  we  accumulate  karma,  we  experience  problems,
unhappiness, and suffering. In other words, we experience samsara.

When we focus  on  these  impure  other-powered  natures,  our  contaminated
appropriated body and mind, acting as  the  bases  for  the  afflictions  to
arise,  when  anger  or  attachment  arises,  we  should  examine  our   own
experience of how these contaminated existents  present  themselves  to  us.
They present themselves to us in a particular way and what we have to do  is
to examine  whether  that  presentation  or  that  appearance  accords  with
reality or not. We have to check whether this is an accurate  representation
of reality. Is that how our contaminated appropriated body and mind exist?

According to the MOS, for example, based on  our  own  experience,  when  we
think of our contaminated appropriated body and mind, we have an  appearance
of an external body and mind, something that is of a separate  or  different
entity or nature from the mind. They are not in the entity of the  mind.  So
there is an appearance of an external contaminated body and mind.

Although this is how the body and mind  present  themselves  to  us—this  is
what appears to  us—according  to  the  perspective  of  the  MOS,  such  an
appearance is false because that is not how  the  body  and  mind  exist  in
reality. Although they  appear to be external objects,  in  fact,  the  body
and mind are not external objects. Of course the MOS have many of their  own
reasons for saying external objects do not exist. This  is  one  example  of
how,  according  to  the  MOS,  there  is  a  disparity  between   how   our
contaminated body and mind appear to us  and  how  they  actually  exist  in
reality.

The MOS says that things appear to us  to  exist  separately,  as  different
entities from the  mind.  This  is  how  external  objects  appear.  However
although  there  are  such  appearances,  this  is  not  how  things  exist.
According to the MOS, there are no external objects. If there  are  external
objects, then these objects should exist as the bases for applying the  term
“this or that” from the side of the objects.

“This or that” phenomenon does not exist as the basis for applying the  term
“this or that” phenomenon  from  the  side  of  the  object.  If  there  are
external objects, then phenomena would, from the side of the object, be  the
bases for applying the term “this and that” and this would have  nothing  to
do with a conceptual consciousness imputing them to be so.

Therefore for the MOS, “this or that”  phenomenon  that  is  the  basis  for
applying the term “this or that” exists as something that is  imputed  by  a
conceptual consciousness. It does not exist from the side of the  phenomenon
itself. It is only an appearance to the  mind.  We  are  not  talking  about
“this or that” phenomenon itself.  We  are  talking  about  “this  or  that”
phenomenon that is the basis for applying the term “this or that.”  That  is
only an appearance to the  mind,  i.e.,  it  is  only  an  imputation  by  a
conceptual consciousness.

There are many examples of other-powered natures. When  you  can  understand
that “this or that” other-powered nature that is the basis for applying  the
term “this or that” exists as a mere imputation and not  from  the  side  of
the  object,  then  it  is  helpful  for  managing  and  dealing  with   the
afflictions because,  suddenly, one of the bases  for  the  arising  of  the
afflictions disappears.

Other-powered natures are the conditions  for  us  to  be  upset  or  become
attached. We need to understand that  these  other-powered  natures—whatever
the object in question may be—that cause  us  to  be  upset  or  emotionally
involved are only the bases for applying  the  term  “this  and  that.”  The
bases for applying the term “this and that” are not coming from the side  of
the objects but rather they are merely imputations by the mind.

When you think  about  impure  other-powered  natures,  in  particular,  our
contaminated body and mind, you can see that our  contaminated  appropriated
physical and mental aggregates are empty of the  imputational  nature  which
is the object of negation.

An object that exists by way of its own character as the basis for  applying
the term “this or that,” e.g., a form existing by way of its  own  character
as the basis for applying the term “form” is an imputational nature.
• Furthermore it is a non-existent imputational nature.
• It is also the object of negation.
• The emptiness of form existing by way of its own character  as  the  basis
  of applying the term “form” is a thoroughly established nature.

What then is the purpose of the presentation  of  the  three  natures—other-
powered  natures,   thoroughly   established   natures,   and   imputational
natures—in the MOS?

The  purpose  of  presenting  the  three  natures  is  to   arrive   at   an
understanding of emptiness, the thoroughly  established  nature.  The  whole
point  of  arriving  at  the  presentation  of  the   ultimate   nature   of
reality—emptiness—is because it is the antidote to an  apprehension  of  the
self.  Therefore  a  thoroughly  established  nature  is  an   other-powered
nature’s being empty of its imputational nature.

In the explanation that I have just given, an other-powered  nature  is  the
object, the basis of inquiry. An illustration of  other-powered  natures  is
our contaminated body and mind that are the bases upon which we  are  trying
to establish emptiness but our contaminated body and mind is not emptiness.
• Other-powered natures such as our contaminated body and mind are empty  of
  imputational natures.
•  The  emptiness  that  is  an  other-powered  nature’s  emptiness  of   an
  imputational nature is the thoroughly established nature.

If an other-powered nature’s emptiness of  an  imputational  nature  is  the
thoroughly established nature, then we have to  find  out  what  exactly  an
imputational  nature  is.   In  order   to   fully   understand   thoroughly
established natures, we have  to  understand  what  exactly  is  the  other-
powered nature’s emptiness of imputational nature. What exactly then  is  an
imputational nature? If you don’t understand  that,  you  cannot  understand
what the thoroughly established nature is. The object of  negation  here  is
the imputational nature.

By using form as an example, the imputational nature  is  form  existing  by
way of its own character as the basis for  applying  the  term  “form.”  The
emptiness of such a form is the thoroughly established nature.

What I explained so far is the main reason why there  is  this  presentation
of the three characteristics—other-powered natures,  thoroughly  established
natures, and imputational natures. Our contaminated body and mind are other-
powered natures. Due to our contaminated body and mind being our objects  of
focus, often we are upset or we become attached. This brings many  problems,
suffering, and unhappiness.

What is the evolution of our being upset, angry, or attached that  leads  to
many other problems? When we get upset or become attached, our  contaminated
body and mind appear to us to exist in a  particular  way.  The  problem  is
that we believe in  and  completely  trust  that  appearance.  This  is  our
situation.

For example, we may conceive that this contaminated body is  very  beautiful
and pleasant. There is a conceptual consciousness conceiving that.  When  we
focus on the body, it is possible to conceive that it is very beautiful  and
pleasant. The question is: how does the body appear in  the  perspective  of
the conceptual consciousness conceiving of a beautiful  body?  According  to
the MOS, this body that  is  the  basis  for  the  conceptual  consciousness
conceiving of a beautiful body does not exist from its own side.

We are not referring to the body here per se and we are not saying that  the
body does not exist from its own side. We are saying that the body  that  is
the basis for the conceptual consciousness conceiving of  a  beautiful  body
does not exist by way of its own character. According to the  MOS,  although
that is the reality, in the perspective  of  this  conceptual  consciousness
conceiving of a  beautiful  body,  this  body  that  is  the  basis  of  the
conceptual consciousness conceiving of a beautiful  body  appears  to  exist
independent of the conceptual consciousness. Such a body does not exist  and
it is the object of negation. It is an imputational nature.

As I mentioned in the previous lesson, at the very least,  you  have  to  be
able to say the terms correctly, whether you know  their  meanings  or  not.
You should be able to say, for example, “the form existing  by  way  of  its
own character as the basis of applying the term  “form”  to  the  conceptual
consciousness apprehending form is the imputational  nature.  The  emptiness
of that is the thoroughly established nature.” It is very simple.

Khen Rinpoche: It is good to memorise these terms. In  the  monastery,  when
we debated or went to class, we could not take our texts along. We were  not
allowed to bring along our texts.

For example, one had to debate for two hours on this  subject.  If  one  had
not memorised the text, then there is no way one could debate.  How  is  one
to discuss anything? One must be able to discuss something.

In the monastery, we really put in so much effort to memorise the  words  of
the texts. It  takes  a  lot  of  time.  At  that  time,  I  memorised  Lama
Tsongkhapa’s masterpiece, the Essence of  Eloquence  Distinguishing  between
the Definitive and the Interpretative. That text is quite  long.  The  words
were also very difficult to memorise because there were many  similar  words
all the time. I think it took me more than one year to  memorise  the  whole
text of about 115 pages. If it were in  English,  the  length  of  the  text
would be doubled, i.e., 230 pages.

Every one in the monastery would put in  so  much  effort  to  memorise  the
texts because if you were to  go  to  debate  and  you  don’t  remember  the
relevant quotations, then it is very difficult to debate.

On the basis of understanding and knowing  the  words  clearly—for  example,
“form existing by way of its own character as the basis for  the  conception
of form, that is the imputational nature. The emptiness of form existing  by
way of its own character as the basis for the  conception  of  form  is  the
thoroughly established nature”— then you can start to see their meaning.

To reiterate, when we talk about  other-powered  natures,  specifically  the
impure other-powered natures, what we are concerned about is our  suffering,
our  contaminated  existents,  and  our  contaminated  body  and  mind.  Our
contaminated body and mind do not exist in the way they appear  to  us.  For
example,  our  contaminated  body  and  mind  appear  as  external  objects.
According to the MOS, although they appear as external objects, this is  not
how they exist in reality.

The contaminated body and mind are not external objects. The body  and  mind
can be the conceived objects of a conceptual consciousness focussing on  the
body  and  mind.  The  body  and  mind  are  the  bases  for  a   conceptual
consciousness conceiving of the body and mind. But this  is  something  that
is posited from the side of the conceptual consciousness, not from the  side
of the body and mind. Therefore, due to this reason, there are  no  external
objects. Objects  that  are  the  basis  of  conception  by  the  conceptual
consciousness are not established from the side of the objects  but  by  the
power of the conceptual consciousness.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: What is the object of negation  here?  What  is
the imputational nature?

(Student attempts to answer)

“Form existing by way of its own character as the  basis  for  applying  the
term “form” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending form”—what  I  have
just said is the object of negation that is the imputational nature.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: Does form existing by way of its own  character
as the basis for applying the term “form” exist or not?

You should be able to answer straightaway, “Form existing by way of its  own
character as the basis for applying the term “form” does not exist.”

• First, you must be  able  to  say,  “Form  existing  by  way  of  its  own
  character as the basis for applying the term “form”.
• When you can say that, then the next thing you should be able to  say  is,
  “Form existing by way of its own character as the basis  of  applying  the
  term “form” does not exist.”

Only then can you start to question, “Why doesn’t such  a  form  exist?  Who
says that? What is the reason that it  cannot  exist?”  Only  then  can  you
begin to see the difference between the assertions of the SS and the MOS.
• The SS says that a form that is the basis for  applying  the  term  “form”
  does exist by way of its own character.
• The MOS says, “No.  Such  a  form  does  not  exist  by  way  of  its  own
  character.”

What are the reasons for their different position?  Both  sides  have  their
own reasons. Let us  imagine  that  there  is  a  young  boy  called  Tashi.
According to the MOS:
• Tashi the person exists.
• Tashi exists by way of his own character.
• Tashi is also truly established because Tashi is an other-powered  nature.



The SS holds the same position:
• Tashi exists.
• Tashi exists by way of his own character.
• Tashi is truly established.

Tashi is a person. Tashi is an other-powered  nature.  In  the  MOS,  other-
powered natures are necessarily established by way of their  own  character.
That means  Tashi necessarily exists by way of his own character.  So  Tashi
is not merely imputed by  thought.  Why?  Because,  according  to  the  MOS,
“existing by way of its own character” means “not merely imputed by  thought
but existing from its own side.” [2]

The name “Tashi” refers to the person, Tashi, who exists by way of  his  own
character. But the factor of the name  or  the  expression,  “Tashi”  is  an
imputation. It is not Tashi the person.

Khen Rinpoche: Mui Cheng (name of  a  student)  is  a  person.  That  is  no
question about that. See Yong (name of student) is also a person.  There  is
no doubt about that either. I am just using different names.

When we say “Tashi,” what is expressed is not the actual Tashi. Although  we
are referring to the person, Tashi,  the  name  itself,  “Tashi,”  expresses
something that is not Tashi. That is merely imputed.
• Tashi, as a person, exists by way of his own character. He is  not  merely
  imputed by mind.
• But the thing that is expressed by the name “Tashi” is merely imputed  and
  does not exist by way of his own character
• The Tashi who is the basis for conceiving  of  the  name  “Tashi”  to  the
  conceptual consciousness conceiving Tashi does not exist by way of his own
  character.

Khen Rinpoche: I hope to leave more imprints on you all.

The  Tashi  who  is  the  basis  for  conceiving  Tashi  by   a   conceptual
consciousness  does not exist from the side of  the  actual  Tashi  himself.
This is not an uncommon mode of subsistence of Tashi. If Tashi  exists  from
his own side, by way of his own character, as the  basis  for  applying  the
name “Tashi,” then you will have problems as it will lead  to  some  logical
fallacies.

We impute the name “Tashi” onto a basis of designation, a set  of  body  and
mind, “This is Tashi.” The name “Tashi” is referring  to  something.  It  is
engaging with an object.  Now  you  need  to  think  about  the  process  of
engagement that occurs when the name “Tashi” engages with its object. [3]

When you say the name “Tashi,” it refers to the object,  the  actual  Tashi.
Is the process of engagement coming from the side of the term “Tashi” or  is
it coming from the side of the  basis  of  designation,  the  object,  i.e.,
Tashi himself?

The name “Tashi” is  engaging  with  the  object,  the  actual  Tashi.  This
process of engagement is coming from the side of the name itself,  not  from
the side of the object, i.e., Tashi himself. If the name  “Tashi”  referring
to the object, the actual Tashi, is coming from the side of the object  then
you will have problems. Because if the name “Tashi” is coming from the  side
of the object, then whoever sees the object, i.e., Tashi  the  person,  will
know it is Tashi without even being told what his name is.

The very fact that the name “Tashi” is referring to the actual person  Tashi
is coming from the side of the name itself, not from the side of the  actual
person Tashi. The name “Tashi” engaging with the  object—the  actual  person
Tashi—is  due  to  the  power  of  the  name  itself  and   the   conceptual
consciousness  conceiving  Tashi,  not  from  the  side  of  the  basis   of
designation, the actual person Tashi.

The actual person Tashi exists  from  his  own  side,  by  way  of  his  own
character. You have to differentiate between these two—the name “Tashi”  and
the actual person Tashi. We are not talking about the same thing:
• The person Tashi exists from his own side.
• But the name “Tashi” referring to the person  Tashi  is  coming  from  the
  side of the name, not from side of the actual person Tashi.

Let us use the example of a thief. The thief exists from his  own  side  and
exists by way of his own character as a  real  thief.  But  the  ability  or
power of the term “thief” to refer to the actual thief is  coming  from  the
side of the term “thief” itself, not  from  the  side  of  the  object,  the
actual thief.  If the power of the term  “thief”  referring  to  the  actual
thief is coming from  the  side  of  the  object,  i.e.,  the  actual  thief
himself, instead of coming from the side of the term  itself,  then  whoever
sees the object will be able to see that person to be a  thief.  That  means
the term or name  does not exist by way of its own character, from  its  own
side, as the basis of engagement for the term or name.

When we say a form does not exist by way of its own character as  the  basis
for applying the term “form,” you have to think about how  the  term  “form”
engages its object.

Does the term “form” engages its object, form,  through  the  power  of  the
term “form” or by power of the actual object itself? The  very  term  “form”
engaging with its object, form—this engagement with the actual  object—,  is
coming from the side of the term “form.”

We have spent two to three lessons talking about this. It is  difficult  but
it is  important that we understand these assertions of the  MOS.  Not  only
do the MOS assert the non-existence of external objects. Basically, the  MOS
is saying that  things  and  events  do  not  exist  by  way  of  their  own
characters as the bases  for  the  conceptual  consciousness  conceiving  of
those phenomena.

Question: The person, Tashi, who exists from its own side, is that person  a
gross object or an external object?

Answer: In order to answer that  question,  you  have  to  sort  out  a  few
things. When we say Tashi exists by way of his own character, doesn’t  Tashi
exist? But is Tashi the body or is Tashi the mind? We have  not  even  begun
to look at this.

This is a most important question: Who is Tashi? Is Tashi  the  body  or  is
Tashi the mind? Everyone is trying to find the imputed object. When  we  say
“Tashi,” Tashi exists. Tashi is an imputed object.

With the exception of the CMWS, the highest school, everyone else says  that
the imputed object, in this case, Tashi, can be found when you look for  it.
They all say that the imputed object when sought can  be  found.  What  does
this mean? It means  that  at  the  end  of  your  investigation,  you  will
definitely be able to find something that you can point to  and  say,  “This
is Tashi!”

The CMWS, on the other hand, says that no matter how you look, you will  not
be able to find the imputed object. The CMWS says that the  imputed  object,
when sought, cannot be found. There is nothing that you can point to as  the
object. This is the view of the highest school. It is very difficult.

Everyone else is saying, “No. Definitely when you look for the  object,  you
will be able to find it. There must be something  that  you  can  point  to,
“This is the object.”  If you cannot point to something that is the  object,
then how can you say it exists? That is their position.

So, in the first place, you must be able to figure out  who  or  what  Tashi
is.

Who is Tashi? From the MOS’s point of view:
• for those proponents who assert  that  there  are  eight  consciousnesses,
  Tashi is the mind-basis-of-all. They say that that  is   the  person,  the
  “I”, the self; and
• for those proponents of the MOS who assert only six consciousnesses,  they
  assert that it is the mental consciousness.

Basically Tashi is not the body. Whether it is the mind-basis-of-all or  the
mental consciousness, the point is, it is  the  mind  that  is  the  person.
Since Tashi is not the body, how can we talk about Tashi as a gross object?

Khen Rinpoche: You have to think about this a lot!.

Question: What is the meaning of (1) existing from  its  own  side  and  (2)
existing by way of its own character?

Answer: Let us look at the difference between existing  from  its  own  side
and existing by way of its own character from the perspective of the MOS.

According to the MOS, when you search for the imputed  object  and,  if  you
are able to find it, then the object exists from its own side. According  to
the MOS, everything exists from  its  own  side  whether  it  is  an  other-
powered, thoroughly established nature, or imputational  nature.  Everything
exists from its own side because everything can be found when you  look  for
it. That is the meaning of existing from its own side.

What about existing (or being established) by  way  of  its  own  character?
From the perspective of the MOS, existing by way of its own character  means
this: that object cannot exist as  merely  being  posited  by  a  conceptual
consciousness. There is something from the side  of  the  object,  something
peculiar to the object. In philosophical terms,  it  has  its  own  uncommon
mode of subsistence. It is established through  its  own  uncommon  mode  of
subsistence without being merely imputed by thought—that is the  meaning  of
existing by way of its own character from the MOS perspective.

If we use other-powered natures as an example, other-powered natures do  not
exist through being merely imputed  by  the  conceptual  consciousness,  but
rather other-powered natures come about through the  causes  and  conditions
that are  their own uncommon mode of subsistence. Other-powered natures  are
established by their own uncommon mode of subsistence. This means  that  for
other-powered  natures,  they  are  established  by  their  own  causes  and
conditions, from the side of the causes and conditions.  According  to  MOS,
they are not established merely through being labelled.

Question:  According the MOS, does “existing by way of  its  own  character”
the same as “truly existent” and “truly established” in the chart[4]?

Khen Rinpoche: They all mean the same thing.

That is enough about this topic. We will move on and  try  to  complete  the
MOS. From your own side, you have to read  and  think  about  it  but  as  a
class, we have to move on.



Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong
-----------------------
[1] Cutting Through Appearances, pg. 263
[2] Refer to chart, Meaning of terms used to describe the mode of  existence
of phenomena in the Mahayana schools.
[3] “Natural base of engagement for the term (or name)”  is also  translated
as “existing by way of its own character as the basis for applying the  term
(or name).”
[4] Refer to the chart, Mode of Existence  of  Phenomena  according  to  the
Four Buddhist Tenets.

