Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L7 upload2.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.627397
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 7                            Date: 21st March 2013

Now we are studying tenets. As you  know,  for  the  various  proponents  of
Buddhist tenets, starting from the Proponents of the Great  Exposition,  the
Proponents of Sutra, the Proponents of Mind Only, and the Proponents of  the
Autonomy Middle Way, and the Consequence Middle  Way,  all  of  them  assert
that the apprehension of a self, the  ego-grasping,  is  the  basis  of  all
suffering and problems. This ego- grasping or  apprehension  of  a  self  is
essentially a mistaken mind, i.e.,  a  mind  that  apprehends  the  self  of
person or the  “I”  to  exist  in  a  way  that  contradicts  reality.  This
apprehension of a self of persons is the root or  source  of  all   problems
and suffering.

The GES all the way up to the AMWS have their  own  particular  presentation
of what constitutes  the  selflessness  of  persons.  As  discussed  in  the
previous lesson, there are:
1. the coarse selflessness of persons
2. the subtle selflessness of persons

Although we  are  not  permanent  and  the  self,  person,  or  “I”  is  not
permanent,  we  believe  and  apprehend  ourselves  to  be   permanent   and
unchanging. We can tell this from our own experiences. We  believe  that  we
would never change. Also from our own experiences, we  can  tell  that  this
acts as the basis for the arising of the afflictions such  as  strong  anger
and strong attachment.

This is a very strong belief, that we will never  change  and  that  we  are
permanent. This is  called  the  apprehension  of  permanence,  grasping  at
things that are impermanent to be permanent. For example, we think  that  we
will live forever or, at the very least, we will live for a very long  time,
perhaps for a  hundred years. This is the coarse apprehension of  permanence
and, based on this, it gives rise to all kinds of afflictions.

We believe we will live for a very long time,  for  hundreds  of  years,  or
even forever. We believe that things are unchanging and will  always  remain
static. The basis for such an apprehension  of  permanence  comes  from  the
innate belief that there is a person that is able to stand  on  its  own,  a
self-sufficient person.

According to the GES all the way up to the AMWS, these  tenets  assert  that
the subtle apprehension of  a  self,  i.e.,  the  apprehension  of  a  self-
sufficient substantially existent person, is the root of  samsara.  That  is
the root  of  all  the  problems  and  sufferings.  In  order  to  eradicate
suffering, we must eradicate  the  root  of  all  the  suffering,  the  ego-
grasping, and the apprehension of a self-sufficient  substantially  existent
person.

The way to do that is to generate the wisdom realising the  selflessness  of
persons. This is what we are trying to do here. Gaining an understanding  of
what we have just discussed is very important.

Now we are talking about what constitutes  an  apprehension  of  a  self  of
persons. The GES all the way up to the AMWS agree that:
• The coarse apprehension of a self is  the  apprehension  of  a  permanent,
  unitary, and independent self.
• The subtle  apprehension  of  a  self  is  the  apprehension  of  a  self-
  sufficient substantially existent self.
These two forms of grasping of the self of persons (or apprehensions of  the
self of persons) are different. One is coarse, the other subtle. We need  to
have a good  understanding  of  these  two  different  minds:  How  do  they
apprehend their respective objects? What is their mode of apprehension?

What I am going to say is not new as we  have  discussed  this  before.  You
should put effort into paying attention. When  you  try  to  pay  attention,
then your understanding of this subject will become better.

When we talk about the self, person, or “I,” we are talking about  the  same
thing.
• There is the belief that the self is permanent.
• There is the belief that the self is unitary.
• There is the belief that the self is independent.
There is such a self: a permanent, unitary, and independent self.  There  is
an  apprehension believing in this  and  this  apprehension  is  called  the
coarse apprehension of a self of persons.

This apprehension of a coarse  self  of  persons  is  a  mind.  What  is  it
apprehending and what is it grasping at? This coarse apprehension of a  self
of persons apprehends the self, person,  or  “I”  to  be  permanent,  to  be
unitary, and to be independent.

When  this  particular  mind  apprehends   the   permanent,   unitary,   and
independent self:
• It apprehends such a self to be of a different entity from  the  body  and
  mind.
• It apprehends such a self to be  completely  unrelated  to  the  body  and
  mind, i.e., completely separate and different from the body and mind.

It is said in many treatises that  such  an  apprehension  of  a  permanent,
unitary, and independent self is an intellectually  acquired  affliction.  A
mind that conceives the person to be permanent,  unitary,  and  independent,
i.e., the conception of a soul or atman  is  intellectually  acquired.  This
means it is formed through thinking.

Wherever you look in the great  treatises,  they  all  state  that  such  an
apprehension  of   a   permanent,   unitary,   and   independent   self   is
intellectually acquired. Having said that, we have to think, “Why is such  a
mind intellectually acquired? Why is it not natural? Why is it said to be  a
mental construct, something that comes about through thinking?”
Then there is the subtle apprehension of a self of persons.  What  is  that?
It is an apprehension of a self-sufficient  substantially  existent  person.
How does this mind apprehend the person? Such a mind  conceives  the  person
to be self-sufficient, i.e., able to stand on its own, without the  need  to
rely on and is  independent of the body and mind. Rather it apprehends  this
person to be the owner or controller of the body and mind.

This belief in an “I” that does not rely on the body  and  mind,  yet  is  a
controller of the body and mind, is  an  innate  belief,  i.e.,  it  is  not
taught but occurs naturally.  From the viewpoint  of  this  conception,  the
aggregates or the body and mind are dependent on and controlled by the  self
or “I.”

This subtle apprehension of a self that we call an apprehension of  a  self-
sufficient substantially existent person, how does this mind work  and  what
is it grasping at? What is it  apprehending?  It  is  apprehending  a  self,
person, or “I” that exists as the owner or controller of the body and  mind.
This self is not dependent on  the  body  and  mind.  This  particular  mind
apprehends the self or “I,” thinking, “I don’t have to depend or rely on  my
body and mind. Rather I am the owner or controller of my body and  mind.  My
body and mind are controlled by and depend on me.”

This is totally unlike the previous apprehension of  a  permanent,  unitary,
and independent self that apprehends the body and mind to  be  a  completely
different entity from and totally unrelated to the self of persons.  In  the
case  of  the  apprehension  of  a  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
person, it is not like that. It does not apprehend the person or “I”  to  be
of a completely different entity from the body and mind.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting somewhere? Nearer the Aljunied MRT?  I  don’t
know how to make it easier than that. Does the reference text have  anything
on this that is clearer? Did you find anything there? Or is it the same?

Question: Can I confirm that this innate apprehension of a  subtle  self  of
persons  is  not  separate  from  the  aggregates  because   it   has   some
relationship with the aggregates but it is  independent  of  the  aggregates
because it is the owner of the aggregates? It has these two  qualities:  (1)
not separate from the aggregates but (2) independent of them.

Answer: This mind,  the  apprehension  of  a  self-sufficient  substantially
existent person, apprehends the “I” as not relying on  the  body  and  mind.
That means it is independent.

Student: Yes. Being the owner, it is not relying on them  and  therefore  it
is independent. At the same time, however,  it  is  not  separate  from  the
aggregates. This is different  from  the  coarse  apprehension  of  self  of
persons where the self is seen to be totally separate from the aggregates.

Khen Rinpoche: In the case of the previous  apprehension,  the  “I”  is  not
completely unrelated to the body and mind. In the case of  the  apprehension
of the self-sufficient substantially existent person, the aggregates or  the
body and mind are (1) dependent on the “I” and (2)   are  objects  owned  by
the “I.”

Student: In Tuesday’s class, the teachings were that the “I”  is  not  of  a
separate entity from the aggregates. It is  independent  of  the  aggregates
because it is a controller of the aggregates. It is not  a  separate  entity
because it is not totally unrelated  with  the  aggregates.  There  is  some
relationship. Therefore it is not totally separate from the aggregates,  but
it is independent of the aggregates  because  it  is  a  controller  of  the
aggregates. The aggregates are dependent on the “I.” That means this  subtle
self of persons is both (1) not separate from the aggregates as well as  (2)
independent of the aggregates at the same time.

Khen Rinpoche:  The previous apprehension (the coarse  apprehension  of  the
self of persons), that mind apprehends the aggregates and the person  to  be
of separate and different entities.

In the case of this particular apprehension (the subtle apprehension of  the
self of persons), there isn’t such a manner of apprehension.

• What does the  apprehension  of  a  self-sufficient  substantially  person
  apprehends? It apprehends a person.
• How does it apprehend a person? It  apprehends  a  self-sufficient  person
  that is not reliant on the body and mind.

Such a mind is called the apprehension of  a  self-sufficient  substantially
existent person. There is  an  innate  form  of  such  a  mind  that  arises
naturally without it being taught. But  such  an  apprehension  of  a  self-
sufficient substantially existent person is not necessarily  innate  because
there can be an  intellectually  acquired  form  of  this  apprehension.  An
apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially  person  can  arise  due  to
thinking. This is what we call an intellectually acquired apprehension of  a
self-sufficient substantially existent person.

One of the sub-schools of the GES called the Vasiputriyas  or  Followers  of
Vasiputra believe that there is  a  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
person.  That  apprehension  of  a  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
person is intellectually  acquired  because  it  is  something  that  arises
through following tenets.

These are the two apprehensions of a self of persons:
• the coarse apprehension of a self of persons
• the subtle apprehension of a self of persons
You could use also the word “grasping” which gives you the idea of  clinging
on or holding on to something. There are these two graspings at the self  of
persons.

The non-existence of these two apprehensions is the selflessness of  persons
of which there is:
• the coarse selflessness of persons
• the subtle selflessness of persons

The apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person  is  the
subtle apprehension of a self of persons. This is the root  of  samsara  and
is a wrong conception, a wrong consciousness.  When we say it is  wrong,  we
are saying  that  although  this  mind  apprehends  a  person  to  be  self-
sufficient substantially existent and such a person appears, such  a  person
does not exist. Although there is  such  an  appearance  and  grasping,  the
object that is grasped at does not exist whatsoever. We then have  to  prove
that a self-sufficient substantially existent person doesn’t exist.

In the previous lesson, we  talked  about  how  a  permanent,  unitary,  and
independent  self  does  not  exist.  Likewise  here,  with  regard  to  the
apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person, we have  to
prove that such a  person  does  not  exist  whatsoever,  although  such  an
apprehension exists.

Self-sufficient person
The great logician, Dharmakirti,  stated  this  line  of  reasoning  in  his
Pramanavartika :
• The subject, the self-sufficient person, does not rely on the  aggregates.


• Such a person does not exist naturally because it is, by nature,  not  one
  with or different from the aggregates.

The subject of enquiry here  is  the  self-sufficient  person  that  is  not
relying on the body and mind. Such a self-sufficient person does  not  exist
naturally. Why? Because  such  an  “I”  is  not  established  to  be  either
naturally  (or  inherently)  one  with  or  naturally  different  from   the
aggregates.

We have this apprehension of  a  person  that  is  self-sufficient.  Such  a
person appears to us. Although it appears, it does not exist in the  way  it
appears.

This is what we have to establish for ourselves. According to these  tenets,
anything that exists necessarily exists from its own  side.  If  this  self-
sufficient person exists, then it has to exist either as (1) inherently  one
with the aggregates or as (2) inherently different from the aggregates.

First you have to  get  what  we  have  just  stated.  Otherwise  we  cannot
continue.  We will try.

Is there such a mind, an apprehension of a self-sufficient person?  We  have
to recognise that such a mind is the root of all our problems.  It  is  said
to be a wrong consciousness.

What does this mind apprehend? It apprehends a person. It  is  grasping  and
clinging on to a person but not just any person. It  is  clinging  on  to  a
person that is self-sufficient. “Self-sufficient” means not relying  on  the
body and mind and being completely independent of the body and mind.  It  is
a controller of the body and mind. There is such a mind and there is such  a
belief.

Why is it called a wrong consciousness? It is a wrong consciousness  because
this self-sufficient “I” that is apprehended by this  mind  does  not  exist
whatsoever. This is what we are trying to establish here.

The great  logician  Dharmakirti  said  that  if  such  an  “I,”  the  self-
sufficient person, exists, then it  is  necessarily  either  inherently  one
with the body and mind or it has to be inherently different  from  the  body
and mind.

What is the subject of enquiry here? It is the  self-sufficient  person.  We
are trying to establish whether it exists or not. If it exists, it can  only
exist in two ways. These two possibilities are exhaustive. If it exists:
    • it is inherently one with the body and mind or
    • it is inherently different from the body and mind


Not inherently one with the body and mind
Is the self-sufficient person the same entity with the body and mind? No.

Why? If the self-sufficient person is of the same entity with the  body  and
mind, it would entail the fallacy that the  body  and  mind  is  also  self-
sufficient substantially existent. This means that the body and  mind  exist
without being dependent on something else. Because  they  are  of  the  same
entity with the self-sufficient person, they cannot exist with  a  different
nature.

What is the problem if  the  aggregates  are  also  self-sufficient?  If  we
assert that there is nothing wrong in saying that the  aggregates  are  also
self-sufficient like the self-sufficient person, it follows then that:
• the aggregates are permanent and
• the aggregates are not dependent on causes and conditions
This will be absurd. It is clear that the aggregates or body  and  mind  are
impermanent and are dependent on  causes  and  conditions.  Based  on  these
reasons, it follows that the self-sufficient person cannot be  of  the  same
entity with the body and mind.

Not inherently different from the body and mind
We have seen that the self-sufficient person cannot be of  the  same  entity
with the body and mind. So is the self-sufficient person a different  entity
from the body and mind? What is the problem if we were to say that the self-
sufficient person is of a different entity from the body and mind?

The self-sufficient person is not a  different  entity  from  the  body  and
mind. Why?
If the self-sufficient person is of a different entity  from  the  body  and
mind, then when you eliminate the aggregates one after  the  other,  at  the
end of eliminating all the aggregates, you should be able to  find  a  self-
sufficient person standing there on its own.

Khen Rinpoche: Okay,  this  is  just  to  leave  imprints.  Those  who  have
completed the Basic Program should understand this.  We  have  talked  about
the reasoning of one and different numerous times.

This reasoning of being either one or different is  an  important  reasoning
that is used in the topic  of  selflessness  and  emptiness.  This  line  of
reasoning comes up all the time in establishing the  view  of  selflessness.
For those of you who have heard this before, by hearing this again  now,  it
should be clearer. For those who are hearing it for the first time, then  it
is  just  leaving  imprints.  Imprints  definitely  work.  Through  hearing,
listening, reflecting, and so forth, definitely imprints  are  left  in  our
mental continua. So plant the imprints first  and  hope  the  imprints  will
ripen!

   7  Presentation of the grounds and paths

   This is explained in two parts:
1. objects of abandonment and
2. actual presentation of the grounds and paths.

   7A  Objects of abandonment[1]

   Two types of obscurations are asserted:
1. afflictive obscurations and
2. non-afflictive obscurations.

   There is no such thing as the convention  ‘obscuration  to  knowledge’[2]
   (Page 4).

According to this school, there are two types of obscurations:
• Afflictive obscurations obstruct the attainment of liberation.
• Non-afflictive obscurations refer to the obstructions to  all-knowingness.



“Obscuration to knowledge” does not exist
But in this school it says, “There  is  no  such  thing  as  the  convention
‘obscuration to knowledge.’” That means for them  the  convention  or  term,
“obscuration to knowledge,” does not exist.

We talk about the Buddha’s omniscience or all-knowing mind, i.e.,  the  mind
that perceives directly  and  simultaneously  the  modes  and  varieties  of
phenomena,  the two truths.  The GES does not believe that there is  such  a
knower,  an   omniscient   mind   that   can   perceive   every   phenomenon
simultaneously and directly in a single moment of cognition. The  GES  finds
it difficult to conceive that the Buddha is like that.

Due  to  this  belief,  in  this  school,  the  convention,  obscuration  to
knowledge or obscuration to omniscience, does not exist. I  am  not  exactly
sure whether  this  is  the  reason  that  the  convention,  obscuration  to
knowledge, does not exist in this school.

However the other schools agree that the omniscient mind directly  perceives
all phenomena in one moment as clearly as we would  perceive  a  handful  of
fruits or seeds in our palm.

The GES also asserts that the form aggregate of Buddha  is  true  suffering,
that it is just like the body  we  have.  Everyone  else  asserts  that  the
Buddha’s form aggregate is the Buddha.

   Afflictive obscurations mainly prevent the attainment of  liberation  and
   non-afflictive  obscurations  mainly  prevent  the  attainment  of   all-
   knowingness .

   Illustrations of afflictive obscurations are, for example, the conception
   apprehending the person to be self-sufficient substantially existent  and
   the three poisons that arise  due  to  the  force  of  that  [conception]
   together with their seeds (Page 4).

The conception apprehending the person to be  self-sufficient  substantially
existent is an apprehension of a self and it is an  afflictive  obscuration.
Such a conception of a self-sufficient substantially existent person is  the
basis or root from which the three mental poisons arise:  ignorance,  anger,
and attachment.

“Together with their seeds”: Seeds here refer to:
• the seeds that are placed by the conception apprehending a  person  to  be
  self-sufficient substantially existent and
• the seeds that are placed by the three mental poisons:  ignorance,  anger,
  and attachment.
All these are considered to be afflictive obscurations.


   [Illustrations of] non-afflictive  obscurations  are,  for  example,  the
   latencies (bag chags)[3] of the conception apprehending the person to  be
   self-sufficient substantially existent and the negative tendencies[4]  of
   the mind that arise due to the force of those [latencies] (Page 5).

• The seeds of the three mental poisons and the seeds of the  conception  of
  the self-sufficient  substantially  existent  person  are  posited  to  be
  afflictive obscurations.
• The latencies of  the  conception  of  the  self-sufficient  substantially
  existent person are posited to be non-afflictive obscurations.

Seeds and  latencies  (or  imprints,  predispositions)  are  different.  The
latencies of the conception apprehending the person  to  be  self-sufficient
substantially existent is planted by the conception itself.   When  we  talk
about the seed of this conception, this seed is also  planted  by  the  same
conception. What then is the difference between seeds and latencies as  both
are planted by the same conception?
• Whatever is planted, if it has the potential to arise  in  the  future  as
  that same conception (e.g. the conception apprehending a person to be self-
  sufficient substantially existent), it is called a seed. If the seed  that
  is placed by the conception apprehending the self-sufficient substantially
  existent person has the power to produce  this  conception  again  in  the
  future, then that would be called a seed.
• The latencies that are placed  by  the  conception  of  a  self-sufficient
  substantially existent person do  not  have  the  power  to  produce  this
  conception in the future. What they produce is the appearance of  a  self-
  sufficient substantially existent person but they are not able to  produce
  the conception of a self-sufficient substantially existent person.

Perhaps the analogy of an onion and the smell of the onion would help:
• There is something that is able to produce the smell of an onion  but  not
  the  onion  itself.  That  is  analogous  to  the   latencies   (imprints,
  predispositions) of the  conception  of  a  self-sufficient  substantially
  existent person.
• There is something that is able to produce  not  just  the  smell  of  the
  onion but also the onion itself. That is analogous of the seed.

What does the “negative tendencies” of the mind do? They obstruct  the  mind
from knowing its object.
When we talk about the qualities of the Buddha, it is  said  that  they  are
free from the four unknowingnesses.

• The example given in the text is that of the arhat Shariputra. He was  not
  able to tell the total number of the practices of morality that the Buddha
  had accumulated. He was not able to identify exactly each and every single
  quality of the Buddha’s mind. This factor of unknowingness is  posited  to
  be a non-afflicted obscuration and is the  factor  of  unknowingness  with
  respect to obscure phenomena.
• Another  example  has  to  do  with  distance.  Despite  being  an  arhat,
  Maudgalyayana could not see where his mother was born. His mother was born
  in a very distant place. Because of the place being too far away, he could
  not see it. That is the factor of unknowingness with respect to distance.
These two factors  of  unknowingnesses  are  posited  to  be  non-afflictive
obscurations.

• There is also the  factor  of  unknowingness  with  regard  to  time.  For
  example, in the lam-rim teachings, there is  a  story  of  how  Shariputra
  refused to ordain a particular lay person because  he  thought  that  this
  person did not have the root of virtue  to  be  ordained  and  to  achieve
  liberation. Because the Buddha is omniscient, he said, “Hundreds  of  eons
  ago, while he was a fly, he went around a stupa. For that reason,  he  has
  the root of virtue to be ordained and to achieve  liberation.”  Shariputra
  could not see that. This is the factor of unknowingness  with  respect  to
  time. This factor  of  unknowingness  is  also  an  illustration  of  non-
  afflictive obscurations.
• Another example is the unknowingness that occurs due to the  inability  to
  sort out the complexity  of  a  situation  or  the  varieties  of  objects
  involved such as the inability to sort out the details of the  past  lives
  of an individual, the different past  lives,  the  great  number  of  past
  lives, and so forth. This factor of unknowingness is with respect  to  the
  varieties of objects and the complexity of a  situation.  Another  example
  given in the text is that of a peacock’s tail that contains many different
  designs, colours, shapes, and so forth. All these are the results of their
  individual causes. One  is  unable  to  see  the  exact  causes  of  those
  individual colours, designs, and so forth.

A person is called a foe-destroyer because of having abandoned or  destroyed
the afflictions. He does not have to destroy anything else other than  that.
So there are many such factors of unknowingness in the  mental  continua  of
foe destroyers or arhats. They may not know many things. But not knowing  is
not an affliction. It is a non-afflictive obscuration.

We have  to  know,  according  to  this  school,  what  are  posited  to  be
afflictive  obscurations  and  what  are  posited   to   be   non-afflictive
obscurations.
• The afflictive obscuration prevents,  interferes  with,  and  hinders  the
  attainment of liberation.
• The non-afflictive obscuration prevents, interferes with, and hinders  the
  attainment of all-knowingness.
These are the differences in what is being obstructed. Therefore  there  are
these two obscurations.

Actual presentation of the grounds and paths
There is the convention of  the  three  vehicles  (or  yanas).  These  three
vehicles are:
1. the Hearers’ Vehicle
2. the Solitary Realisers’ Vehicle
3. the Bodhisattvas’ Vehicle

There are five paths:
1. The path of accumulation
2. The path of preparation
3. The path of seeing
4. The path of meditation
5. The path of no more learning

There are:
1. The five paths of the hearers
   • The path of accumulation of the hearers
   • The path of preparation of the hearers
   • The path of seeing of the hearers
   • The path of meditation of the hearers
   • The path of no more learning of the hearers
2. The five paths of the solitary realisers
   • The path of accumulation of the solitary realisers
   • The path of preparation of the solitary realisers
   • The path of seeing of the solitary realisers
   • The path of meditation of the solitary realisers
   • The path of no more learning of the solitary realisers
3. The five paths of the bodhisattvas
   • The path of accumulation of the bodhisattvas
   • The path of preparation of the bodhisattvas
   • The path of seeing of the bodhisattvas
   • The path of meditation of the bodhisattvas
   • The path of no more learning of the bodhisattvas


Please read the root text and see what are the fruits  of  attainment  these
respective paths.

Questions for Sunday discussion on 24th March 2013:
   1. a) Is there a difference  between  a  Buddhist  and  a  proponent  of
      Buddhist tenets?
       b) Does a proponent of Buddhist tenets necessarily have to assert  or
      accept the four seals?

   2. a) What is the difference between the two truths in this school?
    b) If it is an ultimate truth, is it necessarily partless?


 3. Is there a difference in the modes of apprehension  of  the  coarse  and
    subtle apprehensions of the self persons?

The purpose of these questions is to help you to gain an understanding of:
• the four seals
• the two truths according to the GES
• the difference between the two apprehensions of the self of persons

When you really understand the two truths and the differences  between  them
in the GES, then, by the way, you would definitely come  to  understand  the
meanings of imputed existence and substantial existence.
When you can see the difference between imputed  existence  and  substantial
existence, it makes a difference to the mind. For example, you will come  to
understand that the self of this life - not the self  in  general,  but  the
specific self or person of this  life  -  according  to  this  school  is  a
conventional truth. Therefore it is an imputed existent. Of course, when  we
talk about how the person is imputedly existent in the highest school,  then
the  meaning  is  not  the  same.  Nevertheless  you  come  to   have   some
understanding of what an imputed existent is.

This is something for you to think about: you probably have to say that  the
specific self  or  “I”  of  this  life,  not  the  self  in  general,  is  a
conventional truth. It is an imputed existent as opposed to the self or  “I”
in general, which is a substantial existent. I am  not  saying  100%  it  is
like this. Perhaps it is like this. So this  is  something  to  analyse  and
think about.

By understanding the presentation of  the  two  truths,  you  will  come  to
understand imputed and substantial  existents.  This  crucial  understanding
serves as a platform for you to appreciate and understand the  presentations
of the higher schools. Therefore the understanding of the  lower  school  is
important.

There is nothing much left for the GES. We should be able to finish this  in
the next lesson.

Question: A yogic direct perceiver realises the  selflessness  of  a  person
but it does realise the person. How then does this person actually exist?

Answer: It is very complicated. In order to talk about this, you first  have
to know that there are positive and negative  phenomena[5].  Among  negative
phenomena, there are usually two divisions:
1. non-affirming negatives
2. affirming negatives

The GES is unable to posit non-affirming negatives.  For  example,  the  GES
are unable to posit space in the way that the higher schools  can.  When  we
talk about space, it is the mere negation of obstructiveness or  obstructive
contact. The GES cannot and do not know how  to  posit  such  a  space.  For
them, if something exists,  it  is  necessarily  substantially  established.
There must be something appearing right there. There must  be  a  substance,
some substantiality that is able to perform a function.

In reality,  the  emptiness  of  a  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
person is a non-affirming negative. That means it is just  a  mere  negation
of a self-sufficient substantially existent person. The GES  does  not  know
how to posit  the  non-affirming  negative.  While  it  is  a  non-affirming
negative, for the GES, the  emptiness  of  a  self-sufficient  substantially
existent person cannot be a non-affirming negation. They do not know how  to
posit the non-existence of a self-sufficient substantially  existent  person
that is a mere negation, a non-affirming negative that does not perform  any
function. For them,  everything  that  exists  must  necessarily  perform  a
function. That is why we talk about substantial establishment.

As discussed in the previous module, the yogic  direct  perceiver  perceives
the emptiness of the self of a person through realising that the  aggregates
or body and mind are devoid of such a self. Through that,  he  realises  the
lack of such a self of persons. I think it is somewhere in the lo-rig  text:
A yogic direct perceiver  through  directly  realising  the  aggregates  are
devoid of such a self of persons implicitly  realises  the  selflessness  of
persons.

Question: That is the assertion of the Sutra School. But for  the  GES,  how
do you  explain  that  the  person  is  substantially  existent?  If  it  is
substantially existent then it can be found. My question is what is it?

Answer: In this school, substantially existent is  mutually  inclusive  with
an ultimate truth.  If  the  mind  apprehending  the  phenomenon  cannot  be
cancelled despite destroying the object or mentally separating it  into  its
parts, that makes the object in question an  ultimate  truth.  That  is  the
meaning of substantial existence.  That  means  the  mind  apprehending  the
object cannot be cancelled. But for the case of the  person  that  is  self-
sufficient substantially existent, that is a different story.





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong

-----------------------
[1] Refer to pgs. 205 – 206 in Cutting Through Appearances.
[2] JN: The term ‘cognitive  obscuration’  (shes  sgrib)  has  been  changed
throughout the text to the more familiar ‘obscuration to knowledge’.
[3]  Ven.  Gyurme:  Latencies  can   also   be   translated   as   imprints,
predispositions, or proclivities.
[4]  In  the  Lam-rim  Chenmo,  “negative  tendencies”  is   translated   as
dysfunctional tendencies.
[5] Refer to pg. 230 – 232 in Cutting Through Appearances.

