Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L9 upload.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.832436
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 9                            Date: 28th March 2013

Question: What is the meaning  of  “one  sitting”  in  terms  of  travelling
through the five paths?

Answer: One sitting literally means just that. For example, the  bodhisattva
achieves enlightenment by progressing from the heat stage  of  the  path  of
preparation all the way up to the path of no-more-learning in  one  sitting.
That means he enters meditative equipoise on the heat stage of the  path  of
preparation and, within that meditative equipoise, achieves  all  the  paths
and manifests enlightenment without arising into the subsequent  attainment,
i.e., without arising into the post-meditative session.

Student: (Inaudible)

Khen Rinpoche: You have read the story of the Buddha? How long did  he  take
to become enlightened? One year? Two months?  You read  the  Buddha’s  story
first.

Don’t worry about the Buddha. If you have to sit on that seat,  don’t  worry
about not going to the toilet because it takes just a couple  of  hours  and
occurs overnight!

Khen Rinpoche: Getting enlightened happens overnight, not one year, not  ten
years, according to the story of the Buddha.

Prior to entering meditative equipoise, the Buddha had  already  engaged  in
many practices of austerity. Then he sat under  the  bodhi  tree.  Hosts  of
maras came to disturb him. After  overcoming  them,  he  entered  meditative
equipoise. In that one meditative equipoise, he  progressed  from  the  heat
stage of the path of preparation  all  the  way  to  the  path  of  no-more-
learning within a few hours. It was an overnight thing.

Question: What is the boundary for  saying  someone  is  a  proponent  of  a
particular tenet? We are studying tenets now. Does that make  us  proponents
of tenets?

Answer: In order for us to be proponents of Buddhist  tenets,  obviously  we
need to be Buddhists and we must have  accepted  the  Three  Jewels  as  our
objects of refuge. In  the  beginning  of  this  module,  we  explained  the
meaning of tenets, i.e., it means  an established conclusion. As long as  in
your mind you accept any one of the four schools  and  think,  “Yes,  it  is
definitely like that,” and you are also able to propound to others what  you
have accepted by using logic and reasoning, perhaps then you could  be  said
to be a proponent of that school of Buddhist tenets.

If you remember in our earlier discussions, a proponent of  Buddhist  tenets
is also someone who necessarily has accepted the four seals. That means  you
have thought about the four seals and accepted them, “It is definitely  like
that.”

Question: There are  so  many  sub-schools  within  the  GES.  When  we  are
learning the tenets of the GES, may  I  assume  that  we  are  studying  the
position held by the majority of the various schools?

Answer: Although there are eighteen sub-schools within the GES, in  general,
what we have studied is the general presentation  and  is  accepted  by  the
vast majority of them.

Question: How does the nirvana without remainder exist without depending  on
a basis?

Answer: There is definitely a substance that is  the  basis  for  a  nirvana
without remainder. As you know, in the  GES,  if  something  exists,  it  is
necessarily substantially established. That means there must be a  substance
there.

However when a nirvana without remainder is actualised, the continua of  the
body and mind are severed. But we have to say that there is a  basis.   When
you achieve a nirvana without remainder, the continua of the body  and  mind
are severed, but still there is  a  nirvana  without  remainder.  A  nirvana
without remainder exists. The  question  is  how  does  it  exist?  This  is
something we need to think about.

What if we were to say that there is a substance that  is  a  non-associated
compositional factor?

Student: Is it a person?

Khen Rinpoche: The person is  gone; it is dead.

Student: I was trying to figure out what that  non-associated  compositional
factor could be. There is no person there but there  is  a  nirvana  without
remainder.

Khen Rinpoche: When you look at this from  the  GES’  fundamental  worldview
and ask what the substance for a nirvana without remainder is,  probably  we
can only say that it is a  non-associated  compositional  factor.  There  is
nothing more we can say about this.

This is just the assertion of the GES. In  reality,  the  continuum  of  the
mind in particular cannot be severed because the mind has no  beginning  and
it will have no end.

Whoever is standing there, asking questions, you  also  have  to  listen  to
what they are asking.  Otherwise  it  becomes  a  conversation  between  two
individuals. Then there  is  no  benefit.  Everybody  has  to  be  involved.
Whatever is being asked, you should have the idea that the  person  is  also
asking you and you must be able to think of an answer.

Khen Rinpoche: You must think that they are asking you, not asking  me.  Now
prepare your answer!

Question: For the bodhisattva who achieves a nirvana without  remainder,  he
has no more body or mind. How then does the GES  assert  that  a  buddha  is
able to benefit sentient beings in countless ways?

Answer: When the (hearer and solitary realiser)  arhats  achieve  a  nirvana
with remainder, they also abandon the non-afflictive obscurations, but  this
abandonment comes about, not through the force of an antidote,  but  through
the basis of the continua of body and mind having gone out of existence.

The GES asserts that a buddha’s form aggregate also ceases  to  exist  after
achieving a nirvana without  remainder  so  they  do  not  assert  a  buddha
manifesting to give teachings and benefiting sentient beings.  According  to
this school, after a buddha has passed into the nirvana  without  remainder,
you probably would have  to  say  that  what  remains  is  a  non-associated
compositional factor.

Unlike the Mahayana, the GES do not assert that,  after  the  Buddha  passed
into parinirvana without  remainder,  the  Buddha  remained,  emanating  and
doing work for sentient beings.

Question: Is there  any  difference  between  “substantially  existent”  and
“substantially  established”?  If  there  is  a  difference,  what  is   the
difference?

Answer: According to this school:
• a substantially existent is mutually inclusive with an ultimate truth.
• everything that exists is  necessarily  substantially  established,  i.e.,
  all  phenomena  are  substantially  established,  truly  established,   or
  existing by way of their own character.

In order to understand what “substantially existent” means,  you  just  have
to think about the definition  of  an  ultimate  truth.   According  to  the
definition, as long as a phenomenon is such that an  awareness  apprehending
it is not cancelled if it is  broken  up  or  mentally  separated  into  its
individual  parts,  that  phenomenon  is  an  ultimate  truth  and   it   is
substantially existent.

Question: How do we know that we are not over-negating the “I” when  we  are
meditating on the self-sufficient substantially existent  “I”  according  to
this school?

Answer: We are talking about this  from  the  perspective  of  this  school.
Whenever you want to negate the self that does not  exist,  you  first  must
identify correctly what exactly is the thing that you are negating.
• First, the most important step is to always identify correctly the  object
  of negation or the object of refutation.
• After having identified correctly the target, one has to  understand  that
  the “I” definitely exists. The question is not whether the “I”  exists  or
  not, as the “I” does exist. The question is how does the “I” exist?

The “I”  exists  but  the  object  of  negation  here,  the  self-sufficient
substantially existent person does not exist. This is what we are trying  to
understand: why is it that such  a  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
person does not exist?

According to this school, we must differentiate between:
• the “I” that exists, i.e., the substantially existent “I,” and
• the “I” that does  not  exist,  i.e.,  the  self-sufficient  substantially
  existent person.

Question: What is the difference between a hearer and a  solitary  realiser?
What is the heat stage of the path?

Answer: Perhaps the concept  of  the  difference  between  a  hearer  and  a
solitary realiser will be clearer when we reach  the  AMWS.  When  we  reach
that section and, if we have time, perhaps we can try to see the  difference
between the two.

As  for  the  four  divisions  of  the  path  of   preparation—heat,   peak,
forbearance, and supreme mundane qualities—for now it  is  enough  that  you
know that there are these four divisions. If we are to go into them  now,  I
am not sure whether there is any benefit or not.

Question:  Regarding  the  phrase,  “Propounding  the  three  times  to   be
particulars [i.e.,  instances]  of  substances,”  what  is  the  meaning  of
“substance” here?

Answer: In this context, it means any phenomenon that exists.  According  to
this school, anything that exists is necessarily substantially  established.
If it is an established  base,  it  is  necessarily  a  substance.  In  this
context, a “substance” refers to an existent.

Question: The tree is a past sprout. It will also cease to exist and  become
something else, for example, when it is burnt  to  ashes.  At  the  time  of
becoming ashes, does the past sprout still exist?

Another student: I will give  the  example  of  a  mother.  The  mother  has
already died and become a past mother. When the mother is cremated  and  her
body becomes ashes, are the ashes considered to be the past mother?

Answer: We go back to the example of the  golden  vessel,  about  the  past,
present,  and  future.  The  point  here  is  that  the  examples  serve  to
illustrate that there is a substance in the past, in  the  present,  and  in
the future.  I am not sure whether you can say that the  mother’s  substance
exists after the mother has passed away and she is no longer around.

Question: Are the modes of apprehension of these two minds the same:
1. the mind apprehending a permanent, unitary, and independent person and
2. the mind apprehending the self-sufficient substantially  existent  person
   that is intellectually acquired?

Answer: As I mentioned before, first, you have to be clear about  the  modes
of apprehension of these two minds:
• For the apprehension of a permanent, unitary, and independent  self,  what
  is the particular way that this mind apprehends the self?
• For the apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially  existent  person,
  this mind also has a particular way of apprehending the self. What is  its
  manner of apprehending the self?

Many texts  say  that  the  apprehension  of  the  permanent,  unitary,  and
independent self is the coarse  apprehension  of  a  self  and  that  it  is
intellectually acquired.

For the apprehension of a  self-sufficient  substantially  existent  person,
such a  mind can be intellectually acquired or it can be innate.

One of the  sub-schools  of  the  GES,  the  Followers  of  Vatsiputra,  the
Vatsiputriyas,  assert  a  self-sufficient  substantially  existent  person.
Their assertion is intellectually acquired because it is a result  of  their
own thinking. It is their tenet, their belief,  and  their  own  conclusion,
but nevertheless it is something that came about through  thinking,  through
the intellect. So the Vatsiputriyas’  mode  of  apprehension  of  the  self-
sufficient substantially  existent  person  is  an  intellectually  acquired
apprehension.

The  mode  of  apprehension  of  this  mind   apprehending   self-sufficient
substantially existent person is  not  exactly  the  same  as  the  mode  of
apprehension of a permanent, unitary, and independent self.

Question: If these modes of apprehension are different, why is it that  when
the person realises that the self-sufficient substantially  existent  person
does not exist, he necessarily realises that  the  self  is  not  permanent,
unitary, and independent?

Answer: When you realise the emptiness of  a  self-sufficient  substantially
existent person, you also realise the emptiness  of  a  permanent,  unitary,
and independent self.

This  is  because  the   intellectually   acquired   afflictions   are   the
abandonments of the path of seeing. Specifically they are abandoned  by  the
uninterrupted path of the path of seeing. It is at  the  uninterrupted  path
of the path of seeing that you realise the emptiness of the  self-sufficient
substantially existent person.  That  uninterrupted  path  of  the  path  of
seeing abandons the intellectually acquired afflictions.

According to the GES, there is a way of looking at the  path  of  seeing  in
terms  of  the  eight  moments  of  knowledge  and  the  eight  moments   of
forbearance. One can apply that to the afflictions of the three realms,  the
desire realms, the form, and the formless realms. The point  is  that  these
afflictions  of  the  three  realms  have  to  be  abandoned  serially,  not
simultaneously on the path of seeing.

Since in the path of seeing there are these  eight  moments  of  forbearance
and eight moments of knowledge, that means  there  are  eight  uninterrupted
paths and eight paths of release. I didn’t explain  this  in  class  because
there is too much information and there is no time. It is in  the  reference
text.[1] For those of you who are interested, you  can  read  this  on  your
own. If there is anything you do not  understand, you can  bring  it  up  in
class.

Question: Can I clarify the point that was made just now regarding the  mode
of apprehension of a permanent, unitary,  and  independent  person  and  the
mode  of  apprehension  of  the  intellectually   acquired   self-sufficient
substantially existent person. How are they apprehended differently?

Answer: Isn’t there a difference in their mode of apprehension?

What is the manner of apprehending the self by the mind that sees a self  to
be permanent, unitary, and independent? What about  the  apprehension  of  a
self-sufficient substantially existent person? How does this mind  apprehend
the self?

We are comparing these two minds: the apprehension of a permanent,  unitary,
and  independent  self   and   the   apprehension   of   a   self-sufficient
substantially existent person. First we establish that these two  minds  are
different. These two minds have their own mode  of  apprehension  and  their
objects of the mode of apprehension are also different.

Then you look at the  intellectually  acquired  affliction  and  the  innate
affliction.  In  the  case  of  the  apprehension   of   a   self-sufficient
substantially  existent  person,  there   is   an   apprehension   that   is
intellectually acquired and an apprehension that is innate.  The  difference
between these two lies in:
• whether that affliction is the result of  a  process  of  thinking,  which
  means that it is intellectually acquired, or
• whether that affliction is innate or natural.

Student: What I understood from the previous class (Lesson 6)  is  different
from this. The part about it being thought (i.e., coming from a  process  of
thinking)  was   not   mentioned.   These   modes   of   apprehension   were
differentiated by whether the person and  the  aggregates  are  of  separate
entity or not. My understanding is: if they are apprehended to  be  separate
entities,  then  that  apprehension  will   be   considered   intellectually
acquired. If they are not apprehended to be  completely  separate  entities,
then that is considered innate.

Ven Gyurme: That  was  a  comparison  between  the  intellectually  acquired
apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person  versus  the
apprehension of a permanent, unitary, and independent  self.  That  was  the
explanation for the difference between these two minds.

Question: Khen Rinpoche had explained last week the three vehicles  and  how
the three paths are traversed. It seems that, at the  end  of  those  paths,
the consciousness is severed in  all  three  instances.  A  nirvana  without
remainder  means  that  the  consciousness  is  severed.  I  am  trying   to
understand what is the point of engaging in any of  the  paths  if,  in  the
end, everything is severed? What is the point of practising then?

Answer: We must always keep in mind that our discussions here are done  from
the perspective of the GES.

There is a difference between a Mahayana  arhat  and  a  Hinayana  arhat.  A
buddha is called a Mahayana arhat that is the result of  having  accumulated
merit over three countless great eons. What does it mean to  be  a  Mahayana
arhat? It means being  all-knowing,  i.e.,  knowing  everything  because  of
having  abandoned  even  the  non-afflictive  obscurations.  This  is   very
different from a Hinayana arhat.
When one does not have  any  non-afflictive  obscurations,  that  means  one
knows everything. When one  knows  everything,  working  for  others  is  an
easier job because one can see exactly what needs to be done  to  accomplish
the welfare of sentient beings. It does not matter how long one  lives,  for
as long as one is around, one will always do one’s best to  benefit  others.
When it is time to die, then it is  finished.  That  is  the  real  nirvana,
peace, isn’t it?

Regarding the consciousness or mind going out of existence, this is  from  a
Hinayana  not  a  Mahayana  perspective.  Regarding  the  continuum  of  the
consciousness being severed at the  time  of  achieving  a  nirvana  without
remainder, this is a tenet and is not necessarily the reality.

If you think about it, it is  difficult  to  explain  using  logic  how  the
continuum of the consciousness can  be  severed?  If  you  apply  logic  and
reasoning, definitely you will see the internal contradictions. On  the  one
hand, they assert that there are past and future lives, and  then,  suddenly
…. If you apply logic, it is difficult to hold on to that position.  Because
you can find faults in this assertion,  therefore  this  is  not  the  final
view.

Question: With regard to the third seal, all phenomena are  selfless,  would
it be clearer if this is expressed as,  “phenomenon  that  is  the  self  of
person is selfless”? Because the two lower tenets do not assert the self  of
phenomena.  That  would  contradict  this  third  seal,  all  phenomena  are
selfless.

Khen Rinpoche: A senior student can answer this.

Answer by senior student: “All phenomena” here include the  objects  of  use
of such a self of person. If the self of person does not exist, the  objects
of use which include external phenomena also does not exist.

Khen Rinpoche: According to the GES and the SS,  any  phenomena  that  exist
are necessarily empty of being self-sufficient, empty of such a  self.  When
we talk about “self” in this context, it is not necessarily about a  person.
“Self” sometimes means the person, but here we are talking about  the  self,
i.e., being self-sufficient.

According to the first two tenets, all phenomena are  necessarily  empty  of
being self-sufficient. If you take “self”  to  mean  being  self-sufficient,
then there is nothing wrong in saying all phenomena are empty and  selfless.
This is how it is phrased in the third seal. There is no problem.

For the GES and the SS, when you look at a vase, they have to say  that  the
vase lacks a self. The vase is empty of self so don’t think in terms of  the
English language. “Self” is not necessarily referring to the person.

Question: A proponent of Buddhist tenets is someone who has  understood  the
four seals and accepts them to be true. Can this acceptance just be  at  the
level of a correct assumption or must it be  a  realisation,  i.e.,  at  the
very least, an inferential cognition?

Answer: I think it is  not  necessary  that  a  person  has  an  inferential
cognition of the four seals in order to qualify as a proponent  of  Buddhist
tenets. But the person must have thought  about  them  using  reasoning  and
arrive at a correct assumption.
Question: The root text states, “An example of ultimate truth is a  temporal
partless consciousness.” The word “temporal” gives rise to  a  feeling  that
it is something that arises and ceases, so how can it be an ultimate truth?

Answer: Does the smallest moment of consciousness cease  to  exist  or  not?
Can the shortest moment of consciousness go out of  existence  or  not?  Can
such a phenomenon cease to exist or not? What is the  basic  building  block
of the continuum of consciousness?

Student: This partless moment of consciousness.

Khen Rinpoche: If this partless moment of  consciousness  ceases  to  exist,
can you have consciousness in the first place?  Isn’t  consciousness  always
there?

Student: So this temporal partless consciousness is actually  findable  upon
any  consciousness,  i.e.,  it   is   the   smallest   building   block   of
consciousness? Is this temporal partless  consciousness  indivisible,  i.e.,
it cannot be divided when you search within consciousness?

Answer: Yes.

Question: In Lesson 4, it was said that a mind apprehending a  person  would
never cease. That is  why  a  person  is  an  ultimate  truth.  But  now  we
understand that a person does not exist after one has achieved arhatship  or
buddhahood without remainder. It follows then  that  the  mind  apprehending
person will cease after one has achieved  arhatship  or  buddhahood  without
remainder. Therefore a person is  a  conventional  truth  because  the  mind
apprehending it ceases to exist.

Khen Rinpoche: OK then. Next?

Question: If a partless particle is indestructible, how can  it  go  out  of
existence?  It is the same for the partless consciousness? Because the  body
and mind are built up of directionally  partless  particles  and  temporally
partless moments of consciousness, the mind apprehending them do not go  out
of existence because they are the smallest units and cannot be  mentally  or
physically  separated.  This  gives  rise  to  the  feeling  that  they  are
indestructible. But  when  the  person  achieves  arhatship,  everything  is
suddenly cut. This seems contradictory.

Ven  Gyurme  (paraphrasing):   If   the   temporal   partless   moments   of
consciousness  that  are  the  building  blocks  of  consciousness  and  the
directionally partless particles that are the building blocks of matter  are
said to be forever existing, how can consciousness  and  matter  go  out  of
existence?

Answer: That is why we are finding  out  the  faults  of  the  tenets  here.
There are such faults so don’t take them too seriously.

Question:  Is  compounded  space  permanent  or  impermanent?  What  is  the
difference between compounded space and uncompounded space?

Answer: You can take space to be that vacuity where you can see the  absence
of something there. That is compounded space.  There is  this  vacuity  that
you can see when there is nothing obstructing it. But if there is  something
that is obstructing it, you cannot see it. That vacuity that you can see  is
compounded space.
Uncompounded space is a phenomenon that  does  not  arise  from  causes  and
conditions because it is permanent and  permanent  phenomena  do  not  arise
from causes and conditions. So what exactly is  uncompounded  space?  It  is
that mere negation of obstructive contact.
• When we talk about compounded space, the space that we can  see,  that  is
  impermanent.
• When we talk about uncompounded space, that is permanent.

|Compounded space                  |Uncompounded space                |
|The vacuity that you can see from |The mere negation of obstructive  |
|the absence of something there.   |contact.                          |
|It is impermanent.                |It is permanent as it does not    |
|                                  |arise from causes and conditions. |




Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong
-----------------------
[1] Refer to page 207 – 209 in Cutting Through Appearances.

