Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L02(upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.807764
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 2                        Date: 21st February 2013

The great Kadampa masters of the past said, “All sentient beings  by  nature
have the buddha lineage.” What they are saying is that all sentient  beings,
from time without beginning, i.e., ever  since  they  came  into  existence,
have the buddha lineage or buddha nature. All  sentient  beings  always  had
this natural potential to become enlightened and to become a buddha.

Having  said  that,  however,  if  sentient  beings  do  not   possess   the
developmental lineage, they will not be able to achieve full  enlightenment.
Although all sentient beings have buddha nature since time immemorial,  from
our side, we still need to put in effort and strive to achieve results  such
as attaining a good rebirth as a human being or as a celestial being.

By nature we have the potential to achieve enlightenment. It is  there.  But
if we don’t put in the  effort,  we  would  not  achieve  enlightenment.  Of
course enlightenment is possible because  we  have  the  potential.  If  the
potential is not there in the first place, then no matter  what  we  do,  it
would be a waste of time.

All of us have the potential to become fully  enlightened  because  we  have
buddha nature within us. Likewise all of us have the potential  and  ability
to  learn and understand the teachings of the Buddha. Having said that,  how
much we get out of our studies depends on our  individual  effort.  When  it
comes to learning and studying the Buddha’s teachings,  individual  interest
and effort are very important.

The Kadampa masters gave an  analogy  of  churning  milk  in  order  to  get
butter. Although the milk is the cause of the butter, if you  do  not  churn
the milk, you will not get any butter. The  butter  is  not  going  to  come
about from its own side. The point that I am trying  to  make  is  that  you
have to put in effort from your own side. You have the  potential  to  study
and learn so all you need to do is to put in the effort.

Do you remember the definition of consciousness from  the  previous  module?
Consciousness is that  which  is  clear  and  knowing.  It  is  a  naturally
occurring phenomenon. We all have a mind that  is  clear  and  knowing.  The
mind has the ability to learn. We have to activate that mind.

I pay homage to the eminent holy beings who are in essence inseparable  from
Guru Protector Manjushri.

Here, in explaining the presentation of tenets, there are three outlines:
1. definition,
2. divisions, and
3. the meaning of each division.

1. Definition

The definition of a person  who  propounds  Buddhist  tenets  is:  a  person
propounding tenets who accepts the Three Jewels to be the final  objects  of
refuge and who does not assert any objects of refuge other than them.

2 Divisions

There are four divisions of proponents of Buddhist tenets:
   1. The Proponents of the Great Exposition (Sanskrit: Vaibhasika),
   2. The Proponents of Sutra (Skt. Sautrantika),
   3. The Proponents of Mind Only (Skt. Cittamatra) and
   4. The Proponents of the Middle Way (Skt. Madhyamika).

The first two  are  also  called  ‘the  two  schools  that  propound  [truly
existent external] objects’.

3 The meaning of each division

The explanation of the
   1. Great Exposition School,
   2. Sutra School,
   3. Mind Only School and
   4. Middle Way School (Page 1).

In the previous lesson I talked about the purpose and reasons  for  studying
tenets. There are many reasons for studying  tenets  but  one  of  the  most
important reasons for studying tenets  is  to  be  able  to  understand  the
subtle meaning of dependent-arising.

Why is it important to understand the subtle meaning  of  dependent-arising?
Lama Tsongkhapa mentioned in his Three Principles of the Path:

      Without the wisdom realising ultimate reality,
      Even  though  you  have  generated  renunciation  and  the   mind   of
      enlightenment
      You cannot cut the root cause of circling.
      Therefore, attempt the method to realise dependent-arising.


One of the main reasons why we are studying  tenets  is  to  arrive  at  the
understanding of the subtle meaning of  dependent-arising.  Lama  Tsongkhapa
said that it is very important to do so without  which  we  cannot  cut  the
root of our suffering in samsara.

In our study of tenets, we are going to look at the assertions put forth  by
the four Buddhist tenets or the four schools. All of  them  have  their  own
ways  of  presenting  selflessness  and  explaining  what  selflessness   is
exactly.

As we progress up the hierarchy of these Buddhist tenets, we will  see  that
the explanation of selflessness becomes increasingly subtler. It is only  by
seeing how the presentations of selflessness become  more  and  more  subtle
that you will be able to appreciate the subtlety of the presentation of  the
highest school. You  would  be  then  able  to  compare  their  presentation
against those of the lower schools.

Tenets in Tibetan is made up of two syllables, grub  and  mtha,  grub  mtha.
The  literal  translation  of  grub  mtha  in  English  is  “an  established
conclusion.”
• In this context, what does “established” (grub) mean? It means that it  is
  a thesis that is decided upon and established in reliance  upon  scripture
  and/or  reasoning  from  the  perspective  of  your  own  mind.  From  the
  perspective of your mind, your decision is correct  but,  in  reality,  it
  does not mean that it is correct.
• Mtha in Tibetan means a limit. In this context, it can  be  translated  as
  “conclusion,” i.e., you have concluded that it is like that.
So now we know roughly that a tenet means an established conclusion.

There are two types of persons:
1. Those whose minds have been affected by tenets.
2. Those whose minds have not been affected by tenets.

Who are those whose minds are not affected by tenets or who do not  hold  on
to any tenets?

They are people who are not interested in, who do not bother  to  find  out,
or investigate what reality is. When it comes to past and future  lives,  or
reincarnation, they are also not interested. They do not analyse  and  check
whether there are past and future lives. Rather they focus on the things  of
this life alone, i.e., what they can see and hear in this life. They do  not
really think too much about things.

Who are those whose minds have been affected by or who  are  holding  on  to
tenets?

They are people who focus not only on the affairs or happiness of this  life
but they also take an interest and put  effort  in  finding  out  about  how
things really work and what the nature of  reality  is,  i.e.  –  we  talked
about this in the last lesson -  the  basis  and  the  different  facets  of
reality.

These individuals think about and come to their own  conclusion  about  what
reality is. Based on their own conclusions, they live their  life  according
to certain principles, abandoning certain activities or  ways  of  thinking,
and cultivating certain activities and ways of thinking.

Generally speaking, there are two types of tenets:
1. Non-Buddhist tenets
2. Buddhist tenets
Pertaining to the Buddhist tenets, there are four schools.

In the first place, we have to understand the difference  between  Outsiders
and Insiders. Here we usually say non-Buddhists and Buddhists. We  Buddhists
are the Insiders. A Buddhist is someone who:
• accepts the Three Jewels to be the final objects of refuge and
• has faith in the ability of the Three  Jewels  to  protect  him  from  the
  sufferings of the lower realms and the sufferings of samsara.
In short, someone who does  not  have  that  single-pointed  conviction  and
faith in the Three Jewels is not a Buddhist.

We would like to think that Buddhism and being a Buddhist is the best  thing
in life. But just thinking that alone is not very helpful and  insufficient.
In order to see that being a Buddhist is the best thing we can be,  we  must
have an object of comparison.

In this case, with  whom  are  we  comparing  ourselves?  We  are  comparing
ourselves to the Outsiders, the non-Buddhists.  In order to see the  special
features of the Buddhist teachings and the reasons why being a  Buddhist  is
so special, we first must understand the views and the beliefs of  the  non-
Buddhists.

On the basis of understanding the views of the non-Buddhists,  we  can  then
compare their views to the views that are taught in the Buddhist  teachings.
 When we are able to see the big difference between the two,  we  will  then
be able to see the special qualities of being a Buddhist.   Only  then  will
we really start to appreciate how wonderful it is to be a Buddhist. When  we
have an understanding of the views of the non-Buddhists,  I  think  it  will
make a big difference to our minds.

In the text, there is a  definition  of  a  person  who  propounds  Buddhist
tenets. Exactly who is a person  who  propounds  Buddhist  tenets  or  is  a
proponent of Buddhist tenets?

In  order  to  understand  this,  let  us  look  at   the   three   defining
characteristics:
1. The founder/teacher
2. The doctrine
3. The view

Our own Buddhist schools have three distinguishing features:
1. The founder/teacher is the Buddha who is someone who has:
   • extinguished every single fault and
   • acquired every single good quality.
2. The doctrine is the teachings of the Buddha that are not harmful  to  any
   sentient beings.
3. In general, the view here is that there isn’t a person or  self  that  is
   permanent, unitary, and independent. People usually call such a person or
   self that is permanent, unitary, and  independent,  a  soul.  It  is  the
   Buddhist view that the  soul,  specifically  a  permanent,  unitary,  and
   independent person, does not exist whatsoever.


Another way of explaining a person who propounds Buddhist tenets is  someone
who asserts the four seals. The four seals were taught by  the  Buddha  just
before he passed away into parinirvana and they are:
1. All compounded phenomena are impermanent.
2.  All  contaminated  phenomena  are  miserable  (or  in  the   nature   of
   suffering).
3. All phenomena are empty and selfless.
4. Nirvana is peace.
Someone who accepts these four seals is  a  proponent  of  Buddhist  tenets.
Someone who does not accept these four seals is not a proponent of  Buddhist
tenets.

To summarise:
1. A Buddhist is someone who accepts the Three Jewels.
2. A proponent of Buddhist tenets is someone who, on  the  basis  of  having
   accepted the Three Jewels as their objects of refuge,  accepts  the  four
   seals.

The Four Seals
1. All compounded phenomena are impermanent
There is a profound implication  behind  this  statement.  “Compounded”  can
also be translated as composed. A composed phenomenon suggests a  phenomenon
whose existence comes into being in dependence on  the  coming  together  of
various causes and conditions. Because its existence  is  dependent  on  the
coming together of causes and  conditions,  therefore,  that  phenomenon  is
subject to change. When those causes and conditions do  not  come  together,
the phenomenon in question would not arise.

Similarly, in order for that phenomenon to go out of existence,  causes  and
conditions must  also  come  together  without  which  the  phenomenon  will
continue to exist.

When we say, “All compounded phenomena are impermanent,” it means  that  all
compounded phenomena undergo momentary  change,  i.e.,  in  each  and  every
single moment of time, they undergo change.

2. All contaminated things are miserable.
Phenomena can be divided into:
1. Contaminated phenomena
2. Uncontaminated phenomena

What do contaminated phenomena refer  to?  Here  the  word,  “contaminated,”
refers to the afflictions and  contaminated  phenomena  are  thus  phenomena
that are under the influence of afflictions. Such  phenomena  are  miserable
or in the nature of suffering. Uncontaminated phenomena, on the other  hand,
are not in the nature of suffering.

The question then is, “Can contaminated phenomena that are in the nature  of
suffering be eliminated?” This important question  leads  us  to  the  third
seal,  “All phenomena are empty and selfless.”

3. All phenomena are empty and selfless
Upon analysis, we find that all suffering arises primarily  from  anger  and
attachment. Where do anger  and  attachment  arise  from?  When  we  analyse
further, we find that anger and attachment arise from an apprehension  of  a
self.

Can this apprehension of a self be eliminated? There are two things to  look
at:
1. The self that is apprehended by a mistaken mind. In reality, does such  a
   self exist?
2. Is there an antidote to this apprehension of a self?

Through analysis, one can come to understand that an apprehension of a  self
is a wrong consciousness because it engages in its object  erroneously.  Why
is this so?  Because,  while  in  reality  there  isn’t  such  a  self,  the
apprehension of a self believes that such a self exists.

Because an apprehension of a self is a wrong  consciousness,  therefore,  in
reality, there must be another  mind  whose  mode  of  apprehension  is  the
complete opposite of that apprehension of a self.

Such a mind is referred to as the wisdom realising selflessness. The  wisdom
realising selflessness is a valid mind because in reality, there isn’t  such
a self  and  the  wisdom  realising  selflessness  realises  it  to  be  so.
Therefore it is valid mind.

The definition of a valid cogniser is a newly incontrovertible knower.
• A wrong consciousness apprehends something that does not exist to exist.
• A valid cogniser apprehends the phenomenon  in  question  in  the  way  it
  exists in reality.
A valid cogniser is the opposite of a wrong consciousness. It is  a  correct
and factually concordant mind.

So to reiterate, we have these two different minds:
1. the apprehension of a self
2. the wisdom realising selflessness.

The apprehension of a self is an erroneous mind that apprehends  its  object
erroneously. Wrong consciousnesses such as the apprehension  of  a  self  do
not  have the support of valid cognition and are a perverted way of  looking
at things. They do not have truth on their side and are therefore  unstable.


The wisdom realising selflessness is a factually concordant  mind.  The  way
it apprehends the self is exactly the  way  in  which  the  self  exists  in
reality. It accords with reality, has a valid support, and is  a  mind  that
sees truth as it is.  Therefore this valid cogniser  can  harm  and  destroy
the wrong consciousness.

The apprehension of a self is a wrong  consciousness.  It  is  an  erroneous
knower that engages in its object erroneously.  Why?  Although  there  isn’t
such a self, the apprehension of a self apprehends a self to exist.

The wisdom realising selflessness on the other hand is a  valid  mind.  Just
as there isn’t a self, the wisdom realising selflessness  realises  this  to
be so. Therefore the wisdom realising selflessness is a valid  mind  and  is
factually concordant.

When you look at  how  the  wisdom  realising  selflessness  apprehends  its
object, it apprehends its object in a way that  is  completely  opposite  to
the apprehension of a  self.  Because  that  is  so,  the  wisdom  realising
selflessness can harm the apprehension of a self.

The more we are accustomed to the understanding of  selflessness,  our  ego-
grasping or our apprehension of a self will also become  weaker  over  time.
This is something that we have to  experience  for  ourselves.  We  have  to
establish whether cultivating this wisdom realising selflessness  will  lead
to the gradual weakening of the apprehension of a self.

Assuming you know that by familiarising yourself with the  wisdom  realising
selflessness  our  ego-grasping  or  the  apprehension  of  a  self  can  be
weakened,  one can then establish logically that, with  greater  familiarity
and by increasing the power of that wisdom realising selflessness, one  will
be able to completely eradicate the apprehension of a self.

The reason why,  “All  phenomena  are  empty  and  selfless,”  is  discussed
immediately after stating that, “All contaminated phenomena are  miserable,”
is because there is a  solution.  If  there  is  no  solution,  it  will  be
pointless to focus on how contaminated phenomena are miserable.

As mentioned earlier, when you analyse and think about all our problems  and
unhappiness, they all originate from either anger or  attachment.  Why  does
anger and attachment arise in us? There must be something that  causes  them
to arise. When you analyse further, anger and attachment always arises  from
a very strong sense of a self or “I.” While we have this ego-grasping,  this
apprehension of a self, when we think about this, we can come to  understand
that this self that is apprehended by the ego  does  not  exist  whatsoever.
When we are able to develop the wisdom that sees that such a self  does  not
exist whatsoever, then one will be able  to  oppose  this  ego-grasping.  In
reducing this ego-grasping and finally eliminating  it,  one  will  overcome
all one’s problems and suffering.

It is very clear when we look at our own experiences, all our  problems  and
unhappiness arise from our mistaken way of relating to  reality,  i.e.,  our
mistaken way of looking at things and events. Among all the  numerous  wrong
and mistaken  conceptions  we  have  about  the  world  and  ourselves,  the
ultimate wrong conception is the strong belief in a self,  the  apprehension
of a self. Through thinking and analysis, we  will  gradually  come  to  see
that the apprehension of a self is the root of all the  misconceptions  that
lead to our suffering and problems.

Can this ego-grasping – this apprehension of a self - be  eradicated?  Since
the apprehension of a self is the root of all our problems and if  the  root
of all our problems and suffering can be eradicated,  then  suffering  would
no longer arise. In place of suffering comes  peace.  Therefore  nirvana  is
peace.

4. Nirvana is peace
Because all phenomena are empty and selfless, therefore  nirvana  is  peace.
When we destroy the root of all  our  problems,  our  ego-grasping  and  the
apprehension of a self, there  and  then  liberation  is  achieved.  Nirvana
means liberation, freedom from all the problems and suffering.

Nirvana is not established from  outside.  Nirvana  is  established  on  the
basis of our minds. Come the time when we eradicate  the  root  of  all  our
problems - the ego-grasping from our mind  -  there  and  then,  nirvana  is
achieved. In the absence of ego-grasping, there will be no more problem  and
sufferings.  Obviously then there is peace.
The permanent, unitary, and independent self
Selflessness means absence of a particular self. When we say  all  phenomena
are empty and selfless, what is that self that does not exist?

In the context here, such a self is accepted by  all  the  Buddhist  tenets.
The self referred to here is a permanent,  unitary,  and  independent  self.
All Buddhist tenets accept that a  self  that  is  permanent,  unitary,  and
independent does not exist whatsoever.

When you look at most of the  non-Buddhist  tenets,  the  majority  of  them
assert that there is a permanent, unitary, and  independent  self  (commonly
known as a soul).  They are  not  making  this  claim  without  thinking  it
through and believing it to be so without a reason. They do have  their  own
reasoning and their own way of looking at things.

Among  many  non-Buddhist  tenets,  there   are   some   who   also   assert
reincarnation.  These  proponents  of   non-Buddhist   tenets   who   assert
reincarnation are trying to figure out who or what is the  thing  that  goes
on from life to life. To them there must be a self that moves from  life  to
life.  Obviously they must then be able to explain what moves from  life  to
life. They are not going to say that the body is  the  self  because  it  is
clear that the body is left behind.

These proponents of non-Buddhist tenets who  assert  reincarnation  come  up
with the idea that the self or the soul that moves from life  to  life  must
be something that is unrelated to the body, i.e., completely independent  of
the body. They assert that this self/soul that moves from life  to  life  is
completely unrelated to the body and it is also unchanging.
• For them they see this self to be permanent, i.e., unchanging.
• Similarly they assert that this self is unitary, which means  that  it  is
  not constituted of parts, i.e., it is partless.
• Independent  means  that  its  existence  is  independent  of  causes  and
  conditions.
So such a self is permanent, unitary, and independent.

Why do they assert that the self is completely unrelated to the  body?  This
is because they do not know how to posit a self that has the same entity  as
the body. Therefore they come up with  the  explanation  that  the  self  is
permanent, unitary, and independent. However, according to Buddhism, such  a
self does not exist whatsoever.

As I mentioned earlier, who is a person who propounds Buddhist  tenets?  The
proponent of Buddhist tenets is:
• a Buddhist
• someone who accepts the Three Jewels to be their objects of refuge
• someone who also accept the four seals

There are four divisions of proponents of Buddhist tenets:
1. The proponents of the Great Exposition
2. The proponents of the Sutra
3. The proponents of the Mind Only
4. The proponents of the Middle Way
You must memorise these four divisions of proponents of Buddhist tenets.


Why are there four divisions of  proponents  of  Buddhist  tenets?  This  is
related to the three turnings of the Wheel of  Dharma.  From  one  point  of
view, the Buddha turned the Wheel of Dharma three times.

The proponents of Buddhist tenets can also be divided into:
• The proponents of Hinayana tenets
• The proponents of Mahayana tenets

In the first turning of the Wheel of Dharma,  the  Buddha  taught  that  all
things are truly established. You will find these teachings  in  the  tenets
of the Great  Exposition  School  (GES)  and  the  Sutra  School  (SS).  The
proponents of the GES and SS are proponents  of  the  Hinayana  tenets.  The
intended trainees for the first turning of the Wheel  of  Dharma  are  those
who are propounding the Hinayana tenets, specifically the proponents of  the
GES and SS. The  Buddha  taught  in  such  a  way  in  order  to  fit  their
dispositions.

In the second turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the  Buddha  taught  that  all
phenomena are not truly established. The intended trainees  for  the  second
turning of the Wheel of Dharma are the proponents of the Middle  Way  School
(MWS). The proponents of the MWS are proponents of the Mahayana tenets.

In the third turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the Buddha then  differentiated
between what is truly established and what is not truly established. In  the
third turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the Buddha said that:
•  thoroughly  established  natures  and  other-powered  natures  are  truly
  established
• imputed natures are not truly established
The intended trainees for the third turning of  the  Wheels  of  Dharma  are
those who propound the tenets of the Mind Only School (MOS).

When you look at this, it is likely that the followers of  the  four  tenets
already existed during the three turnings of the Wheel of Dharma.

In the explanations of the GES and SS, there is an explanation of their  way
of asserting objects and object-processors (or mind). We already  looked  at
this in the previous module when we studied the  divisions  of  objects  and
consciousnesses. Therefore, in this module, I will not go into details  with
regard to the way of asserting objects  and  object-processors.  When  there
are some pertinent points, I will bring  them  up.  Otherwise  the  emphasis
will be  on  looking  at  the  various  different  tenets,  their  views  on
selflessness and their explanations of the different paths and grounds.

The teachings will be based on the root text, so you should read  the  text.
If there is something that you are not sure of, are unclear  about,  or  you
do not understand, you should bring it up in class.

I mentioned in the previous class  that  this  topic  is  not  easy.  It  is
challenging. Besides their meanings, you  have  to  grapple  with  many  new
terminologies. But you should not lose heart. You should keep at it  and  it
will become easier as you go along. As I said, it  takes  time  so  for  the
next one, two, three months you just have to work at  it.  From  your  side,
you have to work at it and put in the effort. Read the  text,  do  not  miss
classes and participate in the discussions. If you do all this, then at  the
end of this module, you will definitely learn something.


Whatever understanding you gain will form the basis for you to  be  able  to
better appreciate the teachings of the great lamas such as His Holiness  the
Dalai Lama.  When  you  have  some  grounding  by  studying  some  of  these
subjects,  when  you  attend  His  Holiness’  teachings,  you  will   better
appreciate them as they will sound more familiar to you.

This is just one of the many reasons why we are learning tenets. We  believe
in future lives, so by studying and learning now, we will plant imprints  in
our minds. With such imprints, we will improve and get better from  life  to
life. Sooner or later, we will bring  our  understanding  and  knowledge  to
culmination and, on that basis, we will be able to generate the  experiences
and realisations of the path. Along the way, we will be  able  to  eliminate
many of our obscurations and negativities. It is a very long-term thing.  By
reminding yourself how fortunate  you  are  and  how  you  are  accumulating
virtue and merit along the way, you then generate  enthusiasm  and  joy  for
having the opportunity to engage in these studies. Therefore you  must  come
to class with enthusiasm and a sense of joy.






Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng

Edited by Cecilia Tsong






