Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L15 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.675915
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 15                         Date: 18th April 2013

Question: The Half-Eggists asserts that for the mottled colours on the  wing
of the butterfly, the individual colours cast an aspect. For the MOS,  Wwhen
the karma ripens for a consciousness apprehending  the  individual  colours,
both the object (the  colours)  and  the  subject  (the  consciousness)  are
rarise ipened simultaneously. If Thatthat  being  is  the  case,  since  the
individual  color  cast  an  aspect,  how  did  it  end  up  still  being  a
consciousness that apprehends the mottled colors instead of  the  individual
color?
hoHow is it can it be possible for multiple objects to being  cast  over  to
the consciousness aand yet there  is  only  one  consciousness  apprehending
these  objects? Since the For MOS,  they  states  that  every  time  an  the
object is cast, `simultaneously   there  is  a  subjective  aspect.  So,   I
thought was thinking tthere should be  multiple  subjective  aspects  rather
than just only one subjective aspect.

Answer: The SS asserts that consciousnesses are aspected. There  is  also  a
discussion about  the  objective  aspects  and  the  subjective  aspects  in
accordance with the Proponents  of  an  Equal  Number  of  Apprehendeds  and
Apprehenders, Half-Eggists, and Non-Pluralists in the SS.

It is just that the SS asserts external objects so , such that  the  object,
from  its  own  side,  casts  an  aspect  of  itself  to  the  consciousness
perceiving it.

The SS assert external object. They assert that the object, from  their  own
side, cast an aspect of themselves to  the  consciousness  apprehending  it.
So Tthe casting of the aspect comes from the side of the object.

However,  for the MOS, although such language is used, depending on  whether
it is translated as the aspect is cast or  is  delivered,  the  question  is
whether this casting[1] of the aspect is coming from the side of the  object
or not.

To the MOS, the aspect of the object that is cast does not come is not  from
the side of the object. , but Iit is due to the  ripening  of  a  particular
karmic seed or /propensity. So

aAlthough the terms language used may be the is the  same—  “the  aspect  is
cast or delivered—” but their  meanings are  is different.

|Sutra School                       |Mind Only School                 |
|Assert external object             |Do not assert external object    |
|Assert the object, from its own    |Assert that the aspect of the    |
|side, cast an aspect of itself to  |object that is cast is not from  |
|the consciousness apprehending it, |the side of the object, but it is|
|i.e. the casting of the aspect     |due to the ripening of a         |
|comes from the side of the object. |particular karmic seed           |

Question:  My  question  is  will  be  equally  applicable  to  the  SS.   A
consciousness apprehending the object is  supposed  to  be  generated  every
time an object is cast. , hHow is could it be possible then   that  multiple
objects are actually cast yet , so when the  consciousness  apprehending  it
supposed to be generated every time an object is cast. Then how did  it  end
up that  multiple  objects  appear  and  there  is  only  one  consciousness
apprehending the overall mottle rather than the individual colours?.

Khen Rinpoche: Of the three positions, which position is this?

Student: According to In the root text, it is the Half-Eggists but based  on
Khen Rinpoche’s  explanation  using   explained  it  from  the  otheranother
commentary, this is the position of it is from tthe Non-Pluralists.

Answer: This is one particular way of explaining the position  of  the  Non-
Pluralists position - : one consciousness is generated in many aspects.

Using the eye -consciousness apprehending  blue  as  an  example,  the  eye-
consciousness apprehending blue is just one consciousness,  but  it  is  not
just  just the blue that is appearing to the eye -consciousness.

Everything  that  is  part  of  the  collection  of  blue,   including   the
impermanence of blue, the blue being  a  product,  blue  being  impermanent,
blue being a functional thing,  and  whatever  isolates  that  may  whatever
appear  as  there  is  so  many  isolates,  they  all  appear  to  the   eye
-consciousness apprehending blue. Although everything within the  collection
of blue appears tappear to the eye-  consciousness  apprehending  blue,  but
the eye -consciousness apprehending blue is only generated in the aspect  of
blue. It is not generated into the aspect  of  the  impermanence  of  blue’s
impermanence, blue being a product,  and so forth.

Question: Using Student: Back to ththis e example of the eye-  consciousness
apprehending blue, based on the position  of  the  Proponents  of  an  Equal
Number of Apprehendeds and Apprehenders, then there  will then  be  multiple
apprehenders apprehending having the different aspects of the blue?

Ven Gyurme: There are two  positions  of  these  being  ,  either  generated
either simultaneously or serially.

Question: The MOS asserts that there are no external objects.

The Mind Only True Aspectarians  asserts  that  gross  objects  are  as  not
polluted by the latent ignorance of the mind. I am not sure if
The Mind Only False Aspectarians do not assert gross  object.  What  is  the
difference between external object and gross object?


For the MOS,  external objects  does  not  exist.  ,  but  Ddoes  the  gross
objects exist  for the MOS? exists? Does they it exist  for  both  the  Mind
Only  TTrue Aspectarians and  the  False  Aspectarians?  What  then  is  the
difference between an external object and a gross object?

Is it better to be a True Aspectarian  or  a  False  Aspectarian?  Does  the
words “ tTrue” and “fFalse” have anything to do with the right view?

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): It is gGood to be both.

The MOS: Refutation of external objects
Answer: In order to understand the  assertion  of  the  MOS  assertion  that
there areis no external objects, in the first place,  we have to  understand
what an external object is. For that, we first have to look  at  the  tenets
below the MOS.

The SS assert external objects. What is their  explanation  of  an  external
object?
They The SS assert  directionally  partless  particles.  It  is  the  coming
together of many of these directionally partless  particles  that  you  then
you have a gross form or/ object. Then Tthis  gross  object  then  can  then
acts as an  the  observed  objective  condition  for  the  production  of  a
consciousness apprehending it.

According to the SS,  there is this a ccause  and  effect  relationship.  In
the case of an eye- consciousness apprehending vase,  the  vase  must  exist
prior to the eye -consciousness apprehending it.
The vVase acts as the observed objective condition for the production of  an
eye -consciousness apprehending vase.
 So there is a sequence: tthe former the existence of the  vase  precedes  ,
and the latter the eye-consciousness apprehending it. T. Thesey two  do  not
are notcome about  simultaneously.

This is the explanation of what an external object is according to  the  SS,
but this explanation of an external object is not accepted by the MOS.
When we say that the MOS does not assert external objects, essentially  what
we are saying is tthat the MOS does not accept the explanation of the SS.

Does this mean that the MOS does not assert a vase?

The MOS do asserts that a vase  exists.  They  also  assert  that  the  eye-
consciousness apprehending the vase exists. Both the object and the  subject
do exist, but both are produced simultaneously,   i.e.,   their  arising  is
not sequential.

Both the object and subject are produced  simultaneously.  They  both  arise
from the ripening of one  karmic  imprint  or  /  predisposition.  This  one
imprint/predisposition  produces  both  the   objective   aspect   and   the
subjective aspect.


Therefore the MOS asserts that:
• B both the vase and the an eye-consciousness  apprehending  the  vase  are
  produced   simultaneously   from    the    ripening    of    one    karmic
  imprint.predisposition/imprint.
•  This one imprint/predisposition produces both the  objective  aspect  and
  subjective aspect.
• Unlike the SS, their production it is simultaneousequential.

In the first place, the MOS do not assert directionally partless  particles.
Since they If they do not  assert  directionally  partless  particles,  then
yyou cannot have a gross form that is the result of the coming  together  of
many directionally partless particles. So, Iif  there  isn’t  such  a  gross
form, then then there cannot be  a  valid  cogniszer  apprehending  such  an
object.

This is the MOS’s  refutation of ason for refuting external objects:
• According to this school, the directionally  partless  particle  does  not
  exist. .
 According to MOS, they say that directionally partless  particle  does  not
exist.

• If the directionally partless particle does not exist, s as you  (the  SS)
  claimed to exist, then how can there be a you have gross form that is  the
  result of the coming together of the many of such  directionally  partless
  particles?

• If there isn’t any such a gross form does not exist, then there cannot  be
  any valid cogniszer apprehending it. Therefore a gross form  it  does  not
  exist in the first place.
This is the MOS refutation of external object.

• In short, when the MOS  says  that  there  aren’t  any  external  objects,
  basically what they are  saying  is  that  the  external  object  that  is
  asserted by the SS does not exist.

|Sutra School                      |Mind Only School                  |
|Asserts external objects because  |Do not assert external object     |
|they assert .                     |bBecause they do not assert       |
|Because they assert directionally |directionally partless particles. |
|partless particles.               |Therefore there  isn’t any gross  |
|                                  |form and  then there cannot be any|
|The gross form is the result of   |valid cogniszer apprehending it . |
|the coming together of many       |sSo external objects does not     |
|directionally partless particles. |exist.                            |
|This gross object acts as the     |                                  |
|observed  objective condition for |                                  |
|the production of a consciousness |                                  |
|apprehending it.                  |                                  |
|For an eye -consciousness         |For an eye- consciousness         |
|apprehending a vase, the vase must|apprehending vase, both the vase  |
|exist prior to the eye            |and the eye -consciousness        |
|-consciousness apprehending it. It|apprehending vase are produced    |
|is a cause and effect             |simultan-eously from the ripening |
|relationship.                     |of one karmic                     |
|The vVase acts as the observed    |imprintpredisposition. So Tthis   |
|objective condition for the       |one imprint predisposition        |
|production of an eye -c           |produces both the objective aspect|
|con-sciousness apprehending vase. |and subjective aspect.            |

The Gross Object according to the Mind Only True Aspectarians  &  Mind  Only
False Aspectarians

The Mind Only True Aspectarians does assert gross objects.
The Mind Only False Aspectarians does not assert gross objects. To the  Mind
Only False Aspectarians, to assert gross objects is the  same  as  asserting
external objects.

So what is a gross object? What is a gross blue or gross vase?

When we think of blue, gross blue, what does it means? A gGross  blue  means
that a very vivid blue is appearing.
What about a gross vase? A gGross vase is a vase that  we  see  occupying  a
space there.

The Mind Only True Aspectarians asserts gross objects. Whether it  is  gross
blue or gross vase, they assert that the appearance of blue  as  gross  blue
and the appearance of vase as gross vase areis valid. Those  at  appearances
are is correct because, to the True Aspectarians, they it exists in the  way
they it appears.

As mentioned before, in our earlier discussion, for the for  the  Mind  Only
True Aspectarians, the mind that is apprehending blue as gross blue  is  not
mistaken with respect to thatose factors of appearance.

For the Mind Only False Aspectarians, they do not assert gross blue  because
to do so  that, that would be mean it is the same as saying that  there  are
external objects.

To Tthe Mind Only True Aspectarians, they have no  problem  with  of  saying
that the mind is not mistaken with respect to the factor of  blue  appearing
as gross blue, or the factor of vase  appearing  as  gross  vase.  To  them,
tThis at does not mean that there  is  an  external  blue  or  there  is  an
external vase. GWhat gross blue or gross  vase  is,  as  what  I  have  said
earlier:-
-  the  gross  blue  is  just  that  the  very  vivid  appearance  of   blue
appearingand gross vase is just a
- the gross vase, there is a vase that is occupying a space.

The Mind Only False Aspectarians does  not assert gross form,  gross  sound,
and so forth b. Because, for them, to  assert  that  there  is  gross  form,
gross sound,  and so forth, would be the  same  as  saying  that  there  are
external form and so forth.

If you remember, the Mind Only False Aspectarians asserts that wthe mind  is
mistaken with respect to form appearing  as  form,  and  form  appearing  as
gross form.

So for  the  Mind  Only  False  Aspectarian,  with  respect  to  the  direct
perceiver apprehending form, that direct perceiver:-
• - is mistaken with respect to the factor of appearance of  form  appearing
  as form and
• - is also mistaken with respect to form appearing as gross form.
The  Mind  Only  False  Aspectarians  asserts  that  the  direct   perceiver
apprehending form is  mistaken  with  respect  to  form  appearing  as  form
because there is an appearance of an external form.

TThhe  Mind  Only   False   Aspectarians’s   understanding   of   the   True
Aspectarians’s assertion is that what the True  Aspectarian  says  about  of
form appearing as form is form appearing as an external form.

Both the Mind Only True Aspectarians and the Mind  Only  False  Aspectarians
assert that the eye- consciousness apprehending  blue,  for  example,  is  a
mistaken consciousness, but they differ as  to  how  that  consciousness  is
mistaken and with respect to what it is mistaken with respect to.

For the Mind Only True Aspectarians,  the  eye-  consciousness  apprehending
blue is not mistaken with respect to the factor of blue appearing as blue.
But the Mind Only False  Aspectarians  assert  that  the  eye  consciousness
apprehending blue is mistaken with the factor of blue appearing as blue.

Because of this difference, then there comes  the  difference  in  asserting
about whether the blue appearing as gross blue is mistaken or not.
|Mind Only True Aspectarians       |Mind Only False Aspectarians      |
|Do Aassert gross objects.         |Do not assert gross objects       |
|                                  |because to do that, that would be |
|Using the example of blue:        |the same as saying there are      |
|Assert that the mind that is      |external objects.                 |
|apprehending blue as gross blue is|Assert that the mind is mistaken  |
|not mistaken with respect to      |with respect to form appearing as |
|thatose factors of appearance. ,  |form, and form appearing as gross |
|Blue it exists in the way it      |form.                             |
|appears.                          |                                  |
|The Ggross blue is the appearance |With respect to the direct        |
|of  vivid blue but  appearing.    |perceiver apprehending form, that |
|Tthat does not mean that there is |direct perceiver is mistaken with |
|an external blue.                 |respect to:                       |
|                                  |- the factor of appearance of form|
|                                  |appearing as form (because there  |
|                                  |is an appearance of an external   |
|                                  |form) and of                      |
|The eEye- consciousness           |- form appearing as gross form.   |
|apprehending blue is not mistaken |The eEye consciousness            |
|with respect to the factor of blue|apprehending blue is mistaken with|
|appearing as blue.                |respect to the factor of blue     |
|                                  |appearing as blue.                |

Review: “A form being empty of existing by way of  its  own  characteristics
as a basis for applying the term ‘form’”—the assertions of the  MOS  vs  the
assertions of the SS
There are two kinds  of emptinesses that is described in the MOS as  in  the
illustrations of the two selflessnesses.  (in the root text).
For example, an eye- consciousness  apprehending  blue,  although  there  is
just one consciousness, there are many ways in which objects can  appear  to
this consciousness.

To the eye-  consciousness  apprehending  blue,  there  are  many  different
appearances:-
• T- there is the appearance of blue as blue.
• T- there is an appearance of external blue as an external object. ,
• - there is an appearance of blue as the  natural  base  of  engagement  of
  blue,
• - there is the appearance of blue as the referent/basis for  applying  the
  term blue
• T- there is the appearance of blue existing by way of  its  own  character
  as the basis for applying the term “blue.”
•
There are all these different appearances to one consciousness  apprehending
blueit. All Tthese appearances are not due to just  one  karmic  imprint  or
predisposition/lalatency,  but  it  is  the  ripening  of  different  karmic
latencies.

The appearance of blue as an external object  and  the  appearance  of  blue
existing by way of its own character as the  basis  for  applying  the  term
“blue” do not exist in the way they appear. Therefore they are  the  objects
of negation or refutation.
• To this eye-consciousness apprehending  blue,  there  are  many  different
  things appearing to it, and of all the things that are just mentioned, the
  appearance of external blue is an object of negation, that is  what  needs
  to be abandoned and what need to be refuted.
•
The appearance of blue existing by way of its own  character  as  the  basis
for applying the term blue is also an object  of  negation  and  that  which
needs to be refuted.
|Objects of negation:                                                 |
|The appearance of external Bblue as an external object               |
|The appearance of Bblue existing by way of its own character as the  |
|basis for applying the term “blue”                                   |

Both the SS and the MOS assert that there is  a  blue  that  exists  as  the
basis  for  applying  the  term  “blue”  to  the  conceptual   consciousness
apprehending blue.

The SS asserts that there is a blue that exists by way of its own  character
as the basis for applying the term “blue” to  the  conceptual  consciousness
apprehending  blue.  This  blue  exists  as  its  own   uncommon   mode   of
subsistence, i.e., it exists from its own  side.  In  other  words,  the  SS
asserts that:
• blue exists by way of its own character and
• blue exists by way of its own character as  the  basis  for  applying  the
  term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.

According to the SS:-
• -blue exist by way of its own character, and
• -blue also exist by way of its own character as  the  basis  for  applying
  the term blue.

According to In the MOS:,
• -blue exists by way of its own character,
• -but blue does not exist by way of its own  character  as  the  basis  for
  applying the term “blue.” to  the  conceptual  consciousness  apprehending
  blue.
•
• Both the SS and the MOS assert that:
• - there is a blue that is the natural  base  of  engagement  of  blue,  or
  there is a blue that is the basis for applying the term blue.
•
• But tThe MOS asserts says that this the blue that is  that  is  the  basis
  for applying the term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness  apprehending
  blue  exists as (1) :
• - an imputation by a conceptual consciousness, and (2)
- it does not exist by way of its own character.

Refutation by the SS
The SS asserts that there is a blue that is the natural base  of  engagement
of blue, or there is blue that is the basis for applying the term blue.

The blue that is the basis for applying the term  blue  exists  as  its  own
uncommon mode of subsistence; that means from its  own  side.  The  SS  says
that blue, being the basis for applying the term blue, cannot  exist  as  an
imputation by conceptual thought.
The SS asserts that:
• - blue exists by way of its own character
• - blue exists by way of its own character as the basis  for  applying  the
  term blue.
This is different from the MOS.

The SS says that the blue that exists by way of its  own  character  as  the
basis  for  applying  the  term  “blue”  to  the  conceptual   consciousness
apprehending  blue   cannot   exist   as   an   imputation   by   conceptual
consciousness. The SS says that This blue that is  the  basis  for  applying
the term “blue”  has to exist by way of its own character and  therefore  is
not something that is imputed by a conceptual consciousness.

So Aaccording to the SS, if you were to say that blue does not exist by  way
of its own character as the basis for  applying  the  term  “blue,”  to  the
conceptual  consciousness  apprehending  blue,  then  iit  would  make  blue
similar to the horns of a rabbit horn because there is a conception  of  the
horns of a rabbit horn, although the  horns  of  a  rabbit  horn  does   not
exist.

What is the basis for applying the term base of engagement of  “horns  of  a
rabbit” by that conceptual consciousnesstion? It is the horns  of  a  rabbit
horn.
So, Bbecause of this, the SS asserts that:
• B-blue exists by way of its own character as the basis  for  applying  the
  term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.
• This b-that blue that exists by way of its own character as the basis  for
  applying the term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue
   cannot exist as something that is imputed by a conceptual consciousness.

|Sutra School                      |Mind Only School                  |
|Both schools assert that bBlue exists by way of its own character. , |
|Blue as the basis for applying the term blue does exist by way of its|
|own character                                                        |
|Blue exist by way of its own character,                              |
|Blue as the basis for applying the term blue does not exist by way of|
|its own character                                                    |
|Both schools assert that there is a blue that is the basis for       |
|applying the term “blue”                                             |
|to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue                    |
|The blue that is the basis for    |The blue that is the basis for    |
|applying the term blue exists as  |applying the term “blue” to the   |
|its own uncommon mode of          |conceptual consciousness          |
|subsistence.                      |apprehending blue                 |
|The Bblue that is the basis for   |does not exist by way of its own  |
|applying the term “blue” to the   |character. It -exists as merely   |
|conceptual consciousness          |imputed by an imputation by a     |
|apprehending blue :               |conceptual consciousness.,        |
|- has to exists by way of its own |- does not exist by way of its own|
|character                         |character.                        |
|- is not something that is imputed|                                  |
|by conceptual consciousness.      |                                  |

BSo blue is blue from its own side.entity. Blue being blue is not  something
that is merely imputed either by  a  conceptual  consciousnession  or  by  a
term. So blue being blue, it is from its own side, Blue is it is the  entity
or /nature of blue.

In the same way, when we analyse formWhether it is blue  or  is  form—  -the
form being form, athe form being established as form,  a  the  form  in  the
nature of form, and so forth—form is form - it is from the side of the  form
itself,  and from the side of the entity of form. Form  being  form  is  not
something that  is  merely  an  imputation  by  a  conceptual  consciousness
thought or bya term.

If form being  form  is  something  that  is  merely  imputed  either  by  a
conceptual consciousness or by a term or by thought, then  that  would  make
form no different from the horns of a rabbit horn.

So Ffor  this  reason,  for  the  SS,  using  the  example  of  whether  you
understand is blue or form, blue being blue  or  form  being  form  that  is
comes from the side of blue. , and Tthe entity of blue is like that.  It  is
not something that is just memerely imputed by  a  conceptual  consciousness
thought or by a term. For that reason, Ttherefore when if  you  think  about
blue being the a basis  for  applying  the  term  “blue,”  to  a  conceptual
consciousness apprehending blue,  that has  to  exist  by  way  of  its  own
character. It  cannot  be  merely  imputed  by  a  conceptual  consciousness
thought or by a terms. , Ootherwise that would make this e blue that is  the
basis for applying the term “blue”  similar to  a  the  horns  of  a  rabbit
horn.

According to the MOS:,
• F form exists from its own side.
• Form exists by way of its own character.
• FAlthough form exists from its own side, form exists as as the  basis  for
  applying the term “form” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending form
  .
• Although such a form  exists,  it  does  not  exist  by  way  of  its  own
  character.
• Tdoes not exist by way of its own character.
•
To the MOS, form exists from its own side, and form exists  by  way  of  its
own character. That is form.
Now we are talking about form as the basis for applying the term form.
The form that is the basis for applying the term form exists.
How does it exist?
The form as the basis for applying the term form does not exists by  way  of
its own character.
• So, in short, form does not exist by way  of  its  own  character  as  the
  basis for applying the term form.he form that is existing by  way  of  its
  own character as the basis for applying the term “form” to the  conceptual
  consciousness apprehending form does not exist.

According to MOS, form does not exist by way of its  own  character  as  the
basis for applying the term form. Although there  is  a  form  that  is  the
basis for applying the term form, but form does not exist by way of its  own
character as the basis for applying the term form.
As discussed in the last lesson, if form exists by way of its own  character
as the basis for applying the term “form,” to the  conceptual  consciousness
apprehending form, then what is the problem? In the case of a mind  thinking
about a vase, what is the  basis  of  applying  the  term  “vase”  basis  of
engagement of for this e mind?  apprehending vase? It is  the  a  flat-based
bulbous thing. Then Simply just by seeing the  flat-basesde  bulbous  thing,
the idea of a vase would arise. would come about But , but that is  not  the
case.

The cThe conceptual consciousness thought plays an important role here.
.
• First you see the a basis.
• Then a conceptual consciousness applying a term  (or  name  or  label)  to
  that basis arises, i.e., this mind imputes or  affixes  a  label  to  that
  basis.
Then there is a concept applying a term or name to that basis arises;  there
is a conceptual thought trying to label or impute it.
In the case  of  a  vase,  we  see  a  flat-based  bulbous  thing.   Then  a
conceptual consciousness conceptuality  gets  involved,  imputing  or   that
labelling ed the flat-based bulbous thing as it asa “vase.”

What is the basis for applying basis of engagement of the  term  “vase”?  It
is the flat-based bulbous thing.
This flat-based  bulbous  thing  being  the  basis  for  applying  basis  of
engagement of the term “vase”  is comesing from the  side  of  a  conceptual
consciousness. the conceptuality.
In relationship to this conceptual consciousness  ity  imputing  vase,  this
flat-based bulbous thing becomes the basis of engagement  for  applying  the
term “vase.” i.e. it becomes the basis for applying the term vase.
So theat flat-based bulbous thing being the  basis  for  applying  the  term
“vase”  is dependent on the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase.

If the flat-based bulbous thing existed by way of its own character  as  the
basis for applying the term “vase,” anybody seeing that  flat-based  bulbous
thing—without even thinking about the  concept  or  label  “vase”—should  be
able to see vase immediately because the vase is coming from its own side.


The flat-based bulbous thing is the basis for applying  the term “vase”  for
the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, but this flat-based  bulbous
thing being the basis for applying the term “vase” does not exist  from  its
own side. It does not exist by way of its own  character.  Because  if  this
flat-based bulbous thing exists by way of its own  character  as  the  basis
for applying the term “vase,” then just by seeing  that  flat-based  bulbous
thing, you should be able to see vase because it  is  coming  from  its  own
side. The term “vase” in relation to this flat-based bulbous thing  has  the
factor of being imputed by the conceptual consciousness.

If the flat-base bulbous thing does exists by way of its  own  character  as
the basis for applying the term vase, then anybody who sees  that  flat-base
bulbous thing without even thinking about the  concept  or  label  vase,  he
should be able to see vase there and then.
The flat-base bulbous thing is the basis of  engagement  of  the  conception
apprehending vase.
The flat-base bulbous thing is the basis for  applying  the  term  vase  but
this flat-base bulbous thing being the basis  for  applying  the  term  vase
does not exist from its own side/by way of its own character.
If this flat-base bulbous thing does exists by way of its own  character  as
the basis for applying the term vase then  just  by  seeing  that  flat-base
bulbous thing you should be able to see vase; because it is coming from  its
own side.
The term or expression “vase” in relation to this  flat-base  bulbous  thing
has a factor of being imputed by conceptuality.
Let us ’s take aone specific individual as an  example.  This  one  specific
individual is regarded as wise and knowledgeable. So  tThe  term  “wise”  is
applied. . The term or expression “wise” is referring to something  engaging
in that person. So Tthis  at  person  is  the  basis  for  theis  expression
“wise.” It is also the basis for the conception of a wise person.

But that very same person can be regarded as an idiot or a foolish  or  even
stupid by other people. Then Ffor those people, that person  is   the  basis
for (1)  the expression “stupidstupid” and is also the  basis  for  (2)  the
conception of that person as stupid.
So tThat person is considered wise by to some, and stupidis foolish  by   to
others. So Tthese are two different characteristics exist in  on  tthat  one
person: (1)
-there is a factor of that person being wise, and (2)
-there is a factor of that person being stupid.

But that factor of being wise or stupid does not  exist  from  the  side  of
that person.
• The person does not exist by way of his its own  character  as  the  basis
  for applying the term “stupid” for the conceptual consciousness .
• The person does not exist by way of its own character as the natural  base
  of engagement for the conception thinking that the person is stupid.
• Similarly, that person does not exist by way of its own character  as  the
  basis for applying the  term  “wise”.  for  the  conceptual  consciousness
  apprehending a wise person.
• Neither does the person exist by way of its own character as the  base  of
  engagement of the conception apprehending a wise person.

If this at person exists by way of his its own character as  the  basis  for
applying the term “stupid” and,  at the  same  time,   this  e  person  also
exists by way of his its own character as the basis for  applying  the  term
“wise,” we then it would end up with an absurd result:  position,  that  the
person is both wise and stupid at the same time.
So Ffrom this example, it is clear that this that one person does not  exist
by way of his its own character as the basis for applying the  term  “wise”,
nor neither does this e person exist by way of his its own character as  the
basis for applying the term “stupid.”.

What you have to understand is this:
• If things things and events exist by way of their  its  own  character  as
  the baseis for applying a specific terms, then what is  the  problem?  For
  example:
• - Why does form does not exist by way of its own character  as  the  basis
  for applying the term “form” ”.
• - Why form does not exist by way of its own character as the natural  base
  of engagement of the term “form” or for the conceptual consciousness  tion
  apprehending form?

This understanding can have practical applications.  For  example,  you  can
try to apply equalize this to the eight  worldly  dharmas.  You  are  either
being en praised or being en criticiszed. When you are The part of you  that
is being ppraised, you can just think that you are not a basis  existing  by
way of your its own character as the  basis  for  thate  praise.  Similarly,
when you are being criticiszed, the part of being criticized, you can  think
that you do not exist by way of your own character as the  basis  for  those
criticisms.

It is helpful to if we think about this in relation to  our  reactionhow  we
react to praise and criticism.  , because When we understand  that  we,   as
an individual, one person do not exist by way of our its  own  character  as
the basis for the praise, so that means the praise  is  merely  imputed.  So
So, when we are praised,  there is no need to be get super  excited  or  get
being carried away. Similarly, when we are criticiszed,  this  criticism  is
merely imputed by a conceptual consciousness thoughtp precisely  because  we
as a person do not exist by way of our its  own  character  as  the  natural
base of the engagement of those criticisms or hurtful words.
According to the MOS, the recipient of  the  person  who  is  receiving  the
ppraise is truly established, and the person who is giving  praise  is  also
truly established. However, the praise  itself  part  of  being  praised  is
merely imputed.

In the case of Khen Rinpoche, he exists. He is known as Geshe Chonyi. He  is
the basis of designation of the name term “Geshe Chonyi.”

• Then Tthere is a person who designates the name term “Geshe Chonyi.”  This
  e  designator,  the  person  who  designates  the  name  term,  is   truly
  established.
• Geshe Chonyi himself is also truly established.
• But the name “Geshe Chonyi” is merely imputed.
. He exists, and he is truly established, but the name that  is  imputed  as
“Geshe Chonyi” is merely imputed.
•
The fact that he is of him being Geshe Chonyi does not exist  from  its  its
own side. He is There is a however the basis of  designation.   -  him,  the
being. What is being imputed is the name title “Geshe Chonyi.”. So, him,  is
the basis of designation and the thing that is imputed is “Geshe Chonyi”.
This name term “Geshe Chonyi” does not exist from the side of the  basis  of
designation.
IIf this name term “Geshe Chonyi” exists from  the  side  of  the  basis  of
designation, then whoever sees him comes in should beshould be  able to  see
“Geshe Chonyi.”
So the factor of him being Geshe Chonyi is merely imputed  by  a  conceptual
consciousness .
and tThe factor of him being Geshe Chonyi does not exist from  the  side  of
the basis of designation.

Similarly, he is also a monk, but he does not exist by way of  his  its  own
character as the basis for applying the term “monk.”.
So He him, the self, the person iis s the basis of  designation  for  “Geshe
Chonyi,”,or “monk,” and or  “man,”,  but  the  factor  of  him  being  Geshe
Chonyi, , or the factor of him being a  monk,  and  so  forth  aries  merely
imputed. They  do  It  does  not  exist  from  the  side  of  the  basis  of
designation. What is the basis of designation? He, the  person,  “Him”,  the
“I”, the person isis the basis of designation.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  There  is  one  story.  I  was  taking  a
walking once in the Botanic Ggardens and , and after my  walk  that  I  came
out. While I was waiting at the gate for someone body to pick me  up.  There
was a foreign one tourist couple who , foreigner, came up to me  and  asked,
“: “Are you working here?” Maybe this  is  the  uniform  (referring  to  his
robes) for workers at the Botanical Gardens. They , as  they  did  not  on’t
know that theseis  were is the robescostume of a monk.

I said “No.”. They were waiting for the  tourist  bus,  and  they  asked  me
whether the bus will come here or not. I said,  “I think so, as this is  the
only place where that the  bus  will  come.”  I  was  surprised  at  shocked
myself. So Tthis shows that being a monk it does not n’t exist from  myone’s
own side.

In dependence on the basis of designation “him”, then he is known  as  monk,
he is known as “Geshe Chonyi”.
The factor of “Geshe Chonyi” or the factor of monk does not exist  from  the
side of the basis of designation.
The factor of “Geshe Chonyi” or the  factor  of  monk,  are  merely  labeled
thought.
At the end of the day Wwhat you have to understand  is,  using  form  as  an
example: w, Why does form does not exist by way of its own character as  the
basis  for  applying  the  term  “form”  for  the  conceptual  consciousness
apprehending form?

Every phenomenon has a name. Everything is known as something and ,  and  it
is called “something.”. Now we are looking at the name itself. How does  the
name of any particular object exist? Is it established from the side of  the
object itself? Is ? Is there something that is being  uncommon  or  peculiar
to the object? or Or is there some other ways of the name existing?

According to the MOS, an object is called “such- and- such.   a  name”,  and
“such and such a name” That name does not come from the side of  the  object
, but it comes from the side of a conceptual consciousness and  thought;  it
comes from the side of terminology. The MOS is trying to show  us  that  the
conceptual consciousness the thoughts and terms are more powerful. They  are
responsible for the name. The name is  not  coming  from  the  side  of  the
object, but rather it is (1) the conceptual consciousness  thought  and  (2)
the term that we impute that accounts for the name.

Whatever objects there are, say  objects one, two, three, and  or four,  and
these four objects are respectively  the  basesis  of  designation  for  the
labels,  “Object One,”, “Object Two,”, “Object Three,”  and  “Object  Four.”
These four things are the basis of  designation.  What  is  imputed?  It  is
“Oobject One,”  one,  “Oobject  Ttwo,”  “Object  object  Tthree,”  and   and
“Oobject Ffour.”
When we say “Object One,” it is referring to something. When we say  “Object
Two,” it is also referring to something, i.e.,  the  term  is  engaged  with
ing in something.  and it is referring to something. What we are  trying  to
do now is to discover how this term engages its object.

Does Is the basis of the term “Object One” comingcome  or   exist  from  the
side of designation or not?  According to the MOS, the the object one   that
has the termname “Object One” does not exist by way of its own character  as
the basis for applying the term “Object One.”. That object one that  is  the
basis for applying the term “Object One” does not exist by way  of  its  own
character  from the side of the object, the  basis  of  designation.  If  it
didoes, there will be many a lot of  logical  inconsistencies,  faults,  and
fallacies.

In short, aIn short,  according  to  the  MOS,  for  whatever  phenomena  in
question, they do not exist by  way  of  their  its  own  character  as  the
basesis for applying the names that are is given to themit.
Although things do not exist in such a way, but things appear  to  exist  in
such a way.

Imagine you see a flat-base  bulbous  thing,  and  your  eye-  consciousness
perceives a flat-based bulbous thing.
To you, that flat-based bulbous thing appears as a vase. , it  also  appears
to you as the basis of engagement of the term vase.
Theat flat-based bulbous thing appears from its own side as the  thing  that
the term “vase” is referring to and the basis for applying the term  “vase.”


Is the flat-base bulbous thing, something that is referred to  by  the  term
“vase”? Yes
When you think of vase, ‘vase’ is referring to something. So  what  you  see
is that the flat-base bulbous thing appearing to you as the thing  that  the
term “vase” is getting at.
The flat-base bulbous thing is the basis of engagement of the  term  “vase.”
It is the basis for applying the term vase.  But  how  does  the  flat-based
bulbous thing appears to you? The flat-based bulbous thing appears from  its
own side, to exist by way of  its  own  character,  as  the  thing  that  is
referred to by the term “vase” to the conceptual consciousness  apprehending
vase is referring to. This is what appears to you.


When you look at the flat-base bulbous thing, what appears to  you  is  that
there is a flat-base bulbous thing existing by way of its own  character  as
the thing that is referred to by the term vase.  That  is  what  appears  to
you.
That flat-base bulbous thing is by way of its own character,  from  its  own
side, is  the  thing  that  term  “vase”  is  referring  to.  We  have  that
appearance and this at is what the MOS  refutes.  The  MOS  says  that  that
appearance is mistaken.
So there is The an aappearance of a flat-based bulbous thing, that  is   (1)
appearing from its own  side  (2)  ,  without  being  merely  imputed  by  a
conceptual consciousness thought or term, as the thing that is  referred  to
by the term “vase.” , as the thing that is referred to by the  term  “vase,”
tThat does not exist.
The MOS refutes such appearance.  as Iit  does  not  exist  in  the  way  it
appears.

On the other hand, the SS accepts this  appearance  aat  is  valid,  because
just as the flat-based bulbous thing appears to exist  by  way  of  its  own
character as the thing that is referred to by the term “vase,”, just  as  it
appears this is how it exists.  According  to  the  Sutra  School,  that  is
valid.

The SSThey also assert external objects.  Therefore  for  them,  tthe  Sutra
School do not assert the non-existence of object and  subject  as  different
substances.


I think we will not talk anymore about this topic.  about  what  ever  being
the natural base of engagement of whatever. You get a headache. ,  I  get  a
headache.

Question: Can I confirm that to the sense consciousness apprehending blue:-
• the appearance of blue existing as the natural referent of the  term  name
  of “blue,”
• the appearance of blue existing as the natural basis se  of  applying  the
  term name “blue,” and
• the appearance of blue existing as the natural  baseis  of  engagement  of
  the term “blue,”
all exist by way of their its own character?

Answer: As Like what wwas  mentioned  earlier,  to  the  eye-  consciousness
apprehending blue, many things appear such as  the  appearance  of  blue  as
blue, the appearance of external blue as an external object,  appearance  of
blue as the basis for  applying  the  term  blue,  and  there  is  also  the
appearance of blue existing by way of its own character  as  the  basis  for
applying the term  “blue.”  All  these  appear  to  the  eye-  consciousness
apprehending blue.

Question: But isn’t it correct to say that But not everything exists in  the
way it appears just as right? Like external blue does not n’t exist  in  the
way it appears right?

Answer: Since sense consciousnesses are necessarily mistaken,  therefore  it
is clear that it does not mean that whatever  appears  to  them  necessarily
exists.

For  example,  “the  appearance  of  blue  existing  by  way  of   its   own
character.”, Yyou all must understand get what exactly what   we  have  been
are talking about. We are not talking about blue but we  are  talking  about
there is an appearance of blue existing by way of its own character  as  the
basis of applying the term “blue.” In the first place, Tthis  blue  existing
by way of its own character as the basis of applying the term “blue”  is  an
imputational nature. Not only that. It is not just an  imputational  nature,
Iit is an imputational nature that which is non-existent.

Question:  But  Ssuch  an  imputational  nature  also  applies  to  a  sense
consciousness?

Answer: Such a non-existent iImputational nature appears  also  to  a  sense
consciousness, but it does not exist in the way it appears.

Question: Can I confirm that these terms: (1) natural referent of  the  term
and (2) name, the natural base of engagement of the term, and (3) basis  for
applying the term,  they  all  base  of  applying  the  name,  and  base  of
engagement, all these three phrases refer to the same thing?

Answer: Yes, can be the same. The basis for applying the term or  the  basis
of engagement of a conception are two different phases  but  they  mean  the
same thing.
Yes, they can be taken to mean the same thing.

Question: To the conceptual  consciousness  apprehending  blue,  the  actual
object blue appears to it but the conceptual consciousness is only  able  to
realisze the meaning generality of blue? The appearing object is the  mental
image of blue?.

Ven Gyurme: What it realizes? It realizes blue.

Question: Then the appearing object is the mental image of blue?

Answer: Yes.

Question: To the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue,  the  appearing
object is the mental image of blue. It is not able  to  distinguish  between
the mental image of blue and what it realiszes,  blue.  Therefore,  this  is
the same as SS as being mistaken.

However, does the MOS assert a more subtler  mode  in  that  the  conceptual
consciousness does not realisze that the [mental image]  is  merely  imputed
by thought? Can one say that (1) the blue is the actual object  whereas  (2)
blue as the basis for applying the term  blue  is  the  mental  image  or  /
meaning generality of the object?

Ven Gyurme: These two, blue and blue as a basis for applying the  term  blue
are not the same.

Question: One is an actual object  and  one  is  the  mental  image  of  the
object, can we say that?

Khen Rinpoche: Are you referring to the eEye  -consciousness  or  conceptual
consciousness?

Student:  Conceptual consciousness.

Khen Rinpoche: Answer: For a  conceptual  consciousness  apprehending  blue,
what doesn’t it not realisze?

Student: It does not realisze that it is merely  imputing  the  term  “blue”
on to the basise.

There are three things here for  objects  of  negation  that  appears  to  a
conceptual consciousness:.
1. The object blue
2. The mental image of blue
3. The mental image  of  blue  as  being  established  by  way  of  its  own
   character.
I am saying the mental image of blue not being established  by  way  of  its
own character. The actual object blue is  established  by  way  of  its  own
character, but the mental image of blue is not established  by  way  of  its
own character, but it does not realiszed that. The thing to refute  is  that
to realize that the mental image of blue is not established by  way  of  its
own character.

Answer: The whole discussion about an object being the basis for applying  a
particular term is not just for proving  or  establishing  that  the  mental
image is imputed by thought.

What we are trying to establish is that, using the example of , in the  case
of blue: or form,:-
• - blue does not exist by way  of  its  own  character  as  the  basis  for
  applying  the  term  “blue”form,  andto   the   conceptual   consciousness
  apprehending blue.

- blue does not  exist  by  way  of  its  own  character  as  the  basis  of
engagement of the term form.
This That is what we are trying to establish.

Question: So, Iit has nothing to do  with  the  involvement  of  the  mental
image being involved?

Khen Rinpoche: Is the mental image of vase, the basis of engagement  of  the
term “vase”?

Student: For the conceptual consciousness?


Khen Rinpoche: No. The question is: Is the mental image of a vase the  basis
of engagement of the term “vase”? The flat-based bulbous thing is the  basis
of engagement, ; nnot the mental image  of  the  flat-based  bulbous  thing.
That is something to think about.

The mental image of the vase cannot be the basis for applying engagement  of
the term “vase,” because whatever is the basis for  applying  of  engagement
of the term “vase” is the vase itselfvase. It  is  nNecessarily  the   vase,
something that is there from its own side.








Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme



Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Patricia Lee



Edited by Cecilia Tsong

-----------------------
[1] In the root text, the aspect is  said  to  be  “delivered”  rather  than
“cast” as “cast” may carry the connotation that the aspect  is  coming  from
the side of the object.

