Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L26 upload.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.003027
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 26                         Date: 13th June 2013

Student: In the last class, you asked, “Is  the  inferential  cogniser  that
realises the impermanence of sound a wrong consciousness?” It  should  be  a
mistaken but but not a wrong consciousness because:
• the  impermanent  sound  appearsed  to  be  inherently  existent  to  that
  inferential cogniszer. T, therefore it is mistaken.
• But the the inferential cogniszer does realiszes  the  impermanent  sound.
  T, therefore it is not a wrong consciousness.

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Your answer is cCorrect. It  is  not  a  Not
wrong consciousness.

QuestionStudent: In the MOS, there  are  three  natures.  The  other-powered
natures comes about by causes and conditions. The imputational natures  does
not  n’t  come  about  by  causes  and  conditions.  Does  the    thoroughly
established natures come about by causes and conditions?

Answer: The tKhen Rinpoche: Thoroughly established nature is  ppermanent.  A
. A permanent  phenomenon  does  not  arise  in  dependence  on  causes  and
conditions.  PThose  phenomena  that  arise  in  dependence  on  causes  and
conditions are other-powered phenomena.

Using the analogies
We talked about the object of negation according to the  CMWS.  The  analogy
of mistaking enly a coil of rope for to be  a  snake  is  perhaps  the  best
illustration that shows how all phenomena are merely imputed by thought.

Of course, Tthere are also other examples such as using the  analogy  of  an
illusion, a mirage, and so forth. Using If we look at  tthe  example  of  an
illusory elephant that is  conjured  up  by  a  magician,  we  may  see  the
illusory elephant due to the spell that has been cast. or whatever  that  is
being used. But iIf we were  to  search  for  athe  fully  qualified  actual
elephant on the basis of that appearance of an illusory as an eelephant,  we
will not be able to point to a real elephant there.

When the analogies y such as the dream elephant or seeing a coil of rope  as
a snake is applied to the self,  or the person,  or the “I,”‘I’,   when  you
look for the “I” ‘I’ or the person on the aggregates or  among  the  basesis
of designation,  - the aggregates, - you will not be able  to  point  to  or
find the “I” ‘I’, although the “‘I”’ appears to be one with  the  aggregates
or mixed with among the aggregates.  When  So,  if  you  look  for  such  an
‘”I,”I’, you will not be able to find it.


Perhaps the most important assertion of the CMWS  is  that  all  phenomena—,
anything and everything that exists including , includes the ‘I’, the  self,
 or the person, or the “I”—, exist as merely imputed by thought. The way  to
understand how all phenomena exist  as  merely  imputed  by  thought  is  to
employ thosee analogies that were mentioned earlier.

Gaining an understanding of It is important to understand what it  means  by
merely imputed by thought means is . So gaining an understanding of this  is
very important.
We need to understand what it actually means when we say that all  phenomena
are merely imputed by thought, ; such as the “‘I”’ or  the  person  that  is
merely imputed in  dependence  upon  the  basesis  of  designation,   –  the
aggregates. For us, who do not has any understanding of the ultimate  nature
of reality – the emptiness of phenomena- so whatever we look  at  or  thinks
about, everything or all phenomena appear to the mind  as  truly  existence,
appearing as inherently existence, existing from its own side.

Distinguishing between existence and inherent existence
As we do not have any understanding of the ultimate nature of  reality,  the
emptiness of phenomena, whatever we look at or think about  appears  to  the
mind to be truly existent, inherently existent, and existing  from  its  own
side.

The most difficult thing for us is  not  being   able  to  distinguish  bthe
difference between existence  and  inherent  existence.  For  us,  Wwhatever
appears to us, the phenomena appears  as  inherently  existentce.  We  think
this is how things exist. ; iIf they exist, they  are  necessary  inherently
existentce. That is It is the most important for us thing for us to be  able
to differentiate between existence and inherently existence.

The “I” cannot be found
In his ‘Precious Garland’, Nagarjuna said y that  we  should  look  for  the
“‘I” ’ on  the  basis  of  designation.  In  this  case,  the  basis  is  of
designation is the aggregates, : the body and mind.  We  should  investigate
to see if the “I” ‘I’ is among the aggregates. As we  are  made  up  of  the
four elements, is the “I” ‘I’ or person the earth, water,  fire,   or  wind?
Or is the “I”‘I’ or person the consciousness?  We  should  also  investigate
whether to see is the “I” ‘I’ or person is the collection of  all  of  these
together.

When we think of ourselves or the “I,” ‘I’ or  the  person,  what  naturally
comes to mind is that the “I”‘I’ appears to exist from its  own  side,  from
the side of the aggregates. We don’t think about that  Tthere  is  an  “Ithe
‘I” ’ somewhere . Probably we think the ‘I’ is somewhere either on the  body
or the and mind, or both the body and mind, or , one of those things  or  it
is the collection of all theose things.  This is how the “I” ‘I’ appears  to
us. Not only that. , Wwe believe that the “I” ‘I’ is probably like that.

But Tthe question is, ; “Does the “I” ‘I’ exist  in  the  way  it  appears?”
Although it appears in such a way, will we be able to find the “I”‘I’  among
the basis of designation?

Nagarjuna encourages us to look and search for this “I,”  ‘I’,  “Is  it  the
body? Is it the mind?” and  And so forth.”.   He concluded s by saying  that
when if you look for it, at the end of the day, you would  not  be  able  to
point to the ‘I’.  You are not be able to point to the body,  or  the  mind,
or anything else for that matter where that you can say, ; “That is the  “I”
‘I’ or the person.”.

Although the “I” ‘I’ or the person appears to exist inherently,  appears  to
exist from its own side, and appears to be  findable  among  the  baseis  of
designation,  - the aggregates, i.e.,  – which is the body  and  mind,  when
but if you look for it, you will not be able to find such  an  “‘I.”I.’  The
fact that unfindability of such  an  inherently  existentce  “I”  cannot  be
found ‘I’ uwhen we pon ssearching for it shows  that  the  “I”‘I’  does  not
exist inherently.

The “I” exists!
At the end of the day, Instead  what  you  find  is  the  emptiness  of  the
inherently existent “I.”ce ‘I’. When If we you look for the “I” ‘I’  or  the
person among the basesis of designation, , and you eliminating them  es  one
by one, but still you will not be are not able  to  point  to  or  find  the
“‘I.”’.  This at will naturally lead you usto  think, ing: “If that  is  the
case, does that mean that ns the “I” ‘I’ does not exist?”  On analysis  upon
looking for the ‘I’ among the basis of designation, Aalthough at the end  of
the day you are unable to will not be able to find such an the “I,”  ‘I’  or
the person that does not mean that the “‘I” I’ is  non-existentce.  That  is
would  be  incorrect.  Obviously  the  “I”  ‘I’  do  exists.  This  can   be
established through common sense and our own experience.  and we  know  that
from our own experience. Definitely there is a  self, a  or  a  pperson,  or
“I” who  wishes to be happy and who does not want to suffer.  That  is  very
clear. Obviously there is an ‘I’. Although, at the end of the day,  you  are
unable will not be able to find the “I,” ‘I’ but that  does  not  mean  that
you have found the non-existence of the “I.”‘I’.  This  is  the  difference.
So at the end of the search, what you have not found is the ‘I,’  this  does
not mean that you have found that the  ‘I’  does  not  exist  in  the  first
place. That is different from finding  the  non-existence  of  the  ‘I.’  It
makes a difference.
It is clearly evident that we exist as an ‘I’ or  a  person  that  does  not
want to suffer. There is an ‘I’ or a person that wishes to be happy. We  all
can establish this through common sense and our  common  experience.  It  is
foolish to say the ‘I’ does not exist. Obviously the ‘I’ exist.

The question is, ; “How does the “I”‘I’ exist?”
Of course The “I” ‘I’ exists, but the “‘I”’ is:
•  not existing on or among the basesis of designation, .
• The ‘I’ is not the body or mind, and .
• The ‘I’ is nnot either the collection of the body and mind.

The “‘I”’ cannot be found on the basis of designation but yet  the  “I”  ‘I’
exists.
At the end of the day, how does the ‘I’ exist?
‘I’ exist but is not among the basis of designation.
It does not exist on the basis of designation.
It is not the basis of designation.
What The “I” does not exist inherently. The “I”  ‘I’  iis  none  other  than
that which is merely imputed or posited by the mind in dependence  upon  the
aggregates, the bases of designation.
There is nothing more to the “I” ‘I’ than that.

Sequence of realising inherent existenceother than being merely  imputed  by
thought.
‘I’ exists as that and nothing more. That is how the ‘I’ exists.
How does the ‘I’ exist?
The ‘I’ exists as that which  is  merely  imputed  in  dependence  upon  the
aggregates -the basis of designation.
The ‘I’ does not exist inherently.
The ‘I’  exists  as  that  which  is  merely  imputed  and  dependence  upon
aggregates.
For that reason, the ‘I’ is merely imputed by thought.
According to the CMWS, first when we think about the emptiness  of  inherent
existence, we should reflect on the emptiness of inherent existence  on  the
basis of the “I” ‘I’ or the person first, rather  than  thinking  about  the
emptiness of inherent existence of phenomena, other than  the  “I.”‘I.’   It
is said that it is easier to gain an initial comprehension of the  emptiness
of inherent existence when if we think about it on the basis of the “I”  ‘I’
or the person.

However this does not n’t mean  that  it  will  be  easy.  It  is  extremely
difficult to understand the emptiness of inherent  existence.  In  order  to
understand or to realisze  emptiness,  first   we  first  have  to  identify
correctly and experience  and experience what  exactly  is  the  target  and
what exactly we are you are negating, i.e., .  iIn  philosophical  technical
language, you call that the object of negation. In this  case,  in  relation
to the “I,” ‘I’, it is would be the inherently existentce “I.”‘I’.

It is very difficult tTo be able to identify and experience this it,  it  is
really  difficult.  It  is  very  difficult  because  for  us,   we   cannot
differentiate between (1) the inherently   existentce  “I”  ‘I’  that  which
does not exist at all and (2) the the  conventionally  existentce  “I”  that
‘I’ which does exist. To us,,  these two are mixed up. Therefore we find  it
very difficult  to  identify  correctly  and  experience  the  target.  What
exactly are weyou targeting at? What exactly are weyou negating?

How the other tenets assert external objects
The greatest difficulty is to differentiate  between  actual  existence  and
inherent existence. For us, Wwe think that  for anything to that exists,  it
 means it they  must  be  inherently  existentce.  We  cannot  differentiate
between these two. This is the greatest difficulty. Because this it  iis  so
difficult, therefore all the tenets everybody else starting  from  the  AMWS
and those e tenets below it   asserts that if phenomena things exist,   they
must exist inherently. Otherwise they cannot exist. With  the  exception  of
the CMWS, they assert that
Because of the great difficulty in distinguishing between  actual  existence
and inherent existence, everybody else, with  the  exception  of  the  CMWS,
believes  that  things  exist  inherently,  they  are  findable,   and   you
definitely, you  will be able to point to something that you can say is  the
object.

For most people, to To even entertain the idea  that  phenomena  things  and
events are merely imputed by the mind, for most people that means that   you
can jsimply ust make up anything  with  your  mind.  If  things  are  merely
imputed by the mind, basically, it means that you can just make up  anything
with your mind. For most vast majority of people, this it  is  an  untenable
idea.  How  can  that  be?  Definitely  there  must  be  something  about  a
phenomenon that comes from its things and events that  must  have  something
from  their  own  side,  something  that  there  is  inherently  existentce.
Therefore, with the exception of the CMWS, everyone body asserts that if  it
exists, it is necessarily inherently existentce.

The GES and the SS assert external objects. They assert  that  the  external
objects basically are findable, i.e., when  if you look for it, you will  be
able to point to something that is the external object.

But for Tthe MOS , they do not assert external objects. According  to  them,
when if you look for an the external object, you will not be  able  to  find
it. Therefore they refute the external objects.

Whether it is the assertion of the GES and the  SS  with  respect  assertion
ofto   external  objects  or  whether  it  is  the  refutation  by  the  MOS
refutation of external objects, basically theseir assertions  or  refutation
of external objects  hinges  on  whether,  from  their  view,  the  external
objects can be found or not.

The CMWS’s assertion of external objects
The CMWS asserts external objects  too  as  well.  bBut  their  reasons  for
asserting external objects is is unlike the reasons of the  the GES and  the
SS. The CMWS do not assert external objects because   for  the  reason  that
they are findable.

According to the CMWS, everything and anything that exists  can  only  exist
as merely imputed by mind and is ; they are not findable upon analysis.
Because external objects and  internal  objects,  the  apprehender  and  the
apprehended, and the object and subject exist  conventionally  or  they  (or
are conventionally existent), ce, therefore external objects can exist.  How
do  they  exist?  External   objects   exists   conventionally.   They   are
conventionally existentce. For Tthe Prasangika  or  the  CMWS,  they  assert
conventionally  existent  external  objects.   and  external   objects   are
conventionally existence.

The most difficult thing about the view of the CMWS view  is  to  understand
how things can exist as merely imputed by  thought  only.  It  is  extremely
complicated. While on the one hand,  anything  that  exists  can  eexist  as
merely imputed by the thought, but on the other hand, it does not mean  that
everything that is imputed by thought exists.  For  things  to  exist,  they
have to exist as merely imputed by thought. But  this  does  not  mean  that
anything that is merely imputed by thought exists.

Khen Rinpoche (holding up his key chain) in English: Maybe I  will  give  an
one example about myself. I have a story some stories about my key chain.

This key chain wasis  given to me by someone to me six or seven  years  ago.
The first time when I got this key chain,  I thought  that  the  “‘G”  ’(the
logo on the key chain)  is for Geshe, . This symbolising zed  Geshe  Chonyi.
I thought tThat is why they put the “‘G” ’ there.  I thought. This was  what
I believed for aAlmost for  five  to  six  years.  ,  I  believe  that  this
symbolized that. In my mind this was it is a valid belief.  But  whether  it
is that, the reality wasis not that.

How I did I  find out after five or six years? There was one at is one  nine
or ten year old  to child who ten year olds kid, he saw my key  chain.  Then
Hhe said “Oh!”  He seemsed shocked  shocked when he saw sees my  key  chain.
Then Hhe told his mother, “Oh Geshe-la has this key chain.” I  still  didn’t
know what he meant and why he was shocked.

You know why? Because this logo on the  key  chain  is  the  brand  name  of
GUCCI!. Because I didn’t know that. That was why , the child kid  was  quite
surprised that I hadve such  a this key chain.  telling to the mother.  Then
I asked the mother, “What is this  about this?” but she didn’t say  much.She
said, “No, not like that”. She didn’t say much.

 Only later after I found ind out from someone that who said  that  thisthis
is a real GUCCI key chain. After that then I hadve this  valid cognition  of
zer of a GUCCI key chain!. The idea that it symbolised Geshe Chonyi   person
is not valid. M, just my mind labelled and  made that up. It is  labeled  by
my mind, “This meansis Geshe Chonyi.”. But Wwhether it wasis true  or  notit
is not true, to my mind, it wasis true.
If y in my mind. You are someone body who knows this brand, you do  not  see
“Geshe Chonyi.” They don’t see that. At the end of the day, it  is  a  GUCCI
key chain for somebody who labelled it as a GUCCI key chain.

What I am saying here is that Here what I am saying  is  that  your  thought
really labels the object  and you believe in that labelit. In reality it  is
not that (label).  Just for oneself. So,  Oonly  later  after  I  found  out
theis (correct) label. But  that  was  one  and  alalso  labelled  by  mind,
labelled by someone. body labeled Nnow the label I have is valid. So, it  is
quite complicated.

Also last time, I mentioned the story of being at the Bbotanical   Ggardens.
It was the same thing. Same thing. When you say “monk,” also it  is  also  a
labeled.  because Iit does not n’t exist from  the  side  of  my  robes.  my
dress. Everyone who body sees me wearing theseis robes  dress  thinks  that,
““Oh, this is a monk” like it exists from its own side. But in reality,   it
doesn’t exist from its own side.

I have this name,  then after you say Geshe Chonyi, but .  Geshe  also  does
not n’t exist from its own side. You give put the  name  Khen  Rinpoche  but
this . This also does not n’t exist from its own side. I mean  Iit  is  very
clear. As mentioned, even the tourist did not person doesn’t  see  me  as  a
monk. If that is the case, how can he see , how to see Geshe, this label  of
Geshe. I, it is not possible.

Existing as merely imputed on the basis of designation
Regardless  of  the  Whatever  object  or  phenomenon  in   question,   that
phenomenon does not exist from the side  of  the  basis  of  designation.  ,
Ttheat phenomenon exists as merely imputed in dependence upon the  basis  of
designation.

At the end of the day, Iif you wereare  asked,  “How  does  that  particular
phenomenon exist?” yYou can only  say,  “It  exists  as  merely  imputed  in
dependence on its that particular basis of designation.” This is  athe  most
difficult thing to  understand.   That  is  why  Nagarjuna  said  inin   his
P‘Precious Garland’ says:,  “A being is not earth,  not  water,/  Not  fire,
not wind, not space,/ Not consciousness, and not all of them.”   The  person
and the ‘I’ is not the earth, not the water, not the fire and not the  wind.


The person is not those elements that make de up the  body.  The  person  is
also not the consciousness”.

• Does that mean that the person does not exist? No. The person exists.
How does the person exist? The person is basically a the collection  of  all
the elements and consciousness.
• What that means is that the person  is  none  other  than  that  which  is
  merely imputed in dependence upon the body  and  mind,   -  the  basis  of
  designation.

• Because the person is none other than that  which  is  merely  imputed  in
  dependence upon the basis of designation,  that means the person does  not
  exist inherently. The , the person does  not  exist  from  his/herits  own
  side.
• The conclusion is that the person is  that  which  is  merely  imputed  in
  dependence upon the aggregates, : the body and mind.

Having said that, some people may wonder and or think,  “Yesah,  the  person
is merely imputed in dependence upon the body and mind but  maybe  the  body
and mind themselves exist  inherently.”.  One  may  have  this  at  kind  of
thought. But eEven the aggregates themselves, whether it is the body or  the
the mind,,  also do not exist from their own  side.  T,  hey  do  not  exist
inherently.

Relative existences
Imagine that there are two people walking towards one and another.  As  they
walk towards one and aanother, someone body  comes  along  and  crosses  the
paths of these two people.  From the perspective of  this  person,  when  he
looks at the person on his right, what he sees is that  there  is  a  person
going towards the other person. Then when he looks to at his left, he  feels
that the other like there is a person is coming  towards  this  person.  The
fact that there is a person going and there  is  a  person  coming  is  only
posited in dependence on of the view of this person standing in the  middle.


To this e person in the middle, what he sees is athe person going  and  athe
person coming. But this coming and going is only posited in dependence  upon
the existence of these two people who are in motion or  moving.  You  cannot
posit that coming and going without depending on these two people moving.

In the texts, tThere is an example given in the text of on “the mountain  on
this side” and “the mountain on the other side”.
Whether it is “the mountain on this side” or  “the  mountain  on  the  other
side” , it is dependent on  a certain pperspective.

When If yyou are standing  on  this  mountain  here  looking  at  the  other
mountain, you call that  mountain,   “the  mountain  on  the  other  side.”.
However, if  you  wereare  standing  on  that  mountain,  there,  then  that
mountain would become “the mountain of this side.”. So, So the  mountain  of
this side and or the mountain of the other  side  are  is  relative  to  one
another.

What this ese examples shows is that there is noisn’t such a thing  as  “the
mountain of the other side” that which  exists  independently  on  its  own,
from its own side. If  there  wasis  a  real  mountain  of  the  other  side
existing from its own side as “the mountain of the other side,” then  ththat
e mountain of the other side will always be the mountain of the other  side.
It can never be “the mountain of this side”. But oObviously this is not  the
case. If you When ywere to ou stand on that mountain,  then it will  becomes
“the mountain of this side”.  The fact that it exists there is existence  as
“the mountain of the other side” is relative and is imputed.  Its  existence
as “the mountain of the other side” is relative.  Because  it  is  relative,
its existence as “the mountain of the other side” is dependent on  something
else. Therefore its existence  as  “the  mountain  of  the  other  side”  is
changeable.

Dependent origination & potential for change
According to the MWS, the main reason why we  all  can  become  bBuddhas  is
because our minds are not truly existentce. Because of  our  minds  are  not
truly existence and  therefore they it can be change. In  essence,  that  is
the main reason. This is different from the view of the MOS view.  According
to the MOS, everything is in the nature of  the  mind.  So  everything  that
exists arises due to the awakening of a predispositions  and  that  produces
the appearances of a particular objects.

But for the  MWS,  everything  and  anything  that  exists,  they  exist  as
dependently originated. All phenomena are dependently originated,  including
the mind. For that reason, all phenomena including the  mind  do  not  exist
truly or do  not  exist  inherently.  Because  of  not  existing  inherently
therefore,  when  causes  and  conditions  come  together,  change  can   be
effected.

Arising from emptiness, then you have the whole variety of  phenomena.  That
is why there is some meaning when we say that everything is  in  the  nature
of emptiness. Everything is the display  of  emptiness.  All  phenomena  are
empty  of  existing  inherently  because  all  phenomena   are   dependently
originated or dependently arisen. Because phenomena are dependently  arisen,
when certain factors come together, things do change. Then You you have  the
arising of certain phenomena and events, and you have the disintegration  or
disappearance  ing  of  certain  events  or  phenomena.  There  are   Wwhole
varieties of phenomena exist because things are  dependently  originated  or
dependently arisen.
When the necessary factors come together,  then you have the appearances  of
these whole varieties of phenomena. This shows that things  are  dependently
originated. If things are dependently originated, they cannot be  inherently
existentce. As all phenomena arise from emptiness, tSo, therefore  there  is
are some meanings to the phrases such as:
• All phenomena are the display of emptiness.
• All Things and pphenomena are the play of emptiness.
• All phenomena Things are in the nature of emptiness.

The object of negation: the inherently existent “I”According  to  the  CMWS,
they say that because all phenomena are dependently arisen,  therefore  they
are not inherently existence.

At those time Wwhen we are emotionally upset or ,  we  get  angry  or  upset
because someone pointss out our faults, criticiszes us, and  puts  us  down,
or whenat those times, for whatever reason,   we  feel  very  proud,  it  is
possible to get a glimpse of theis “I” ‘I’ appearing as to  exist  from  its
own side, appearing as inherently existentce.

At those times when the “I” is upset or hurt,
It is possible at times one can discover that the ‘I’ that is upset, the  me
that you hurt, that me or the “I” ‘I’ seems very real. so real Briefly  that
you can briefly feel that it is somewhere in  there  among  the  basesis  of
designation. , it is somewhere in there  and  Tthate  feeling   is  very  so
real. At times that Wwhen we are criticiszed,  then there is  theis  feeling
that the “I” ‘I’ feeling  very bad, low, and depressed. is  so  bad  and  so
low- the depressed kind of ‘I. At other times when  weyou  are  praised,  we
you feel this e very elevated sense of the  “I.”‘I’.    We  all  have  these
different experiences of  how  the  “I”  ‘I’  appearsing  to  be  inherently
existentce  from its own side. That It is that one, which isis   the  target
and is the thing that we need to destroy.

We talked about the object of negation:
• the thing that you are targeting at,
• the thing that you are trying to realisze that which  is  empty  and  non-
  existent ; that does not exist
• the false sense of the “I” ‘I’ whether it is a very depressed kind of  “I”
  ‘I’ or an elevated sense of the “I”‘I’.
This “I” The feel that it is somewhere inside you.  there Yyou feel you  can
almost touch and feel it. You know it is there. That is the target. That  is
the object of negation. That is the thing that we need to destroy.

When you have some experiences  of   in  identifying  correctly  this  false
sense of ‘the “I”—I’, the “I” ‘I’  that  does  not  exist  but  nevertheless
appears to be so real in either an elevated or depressed way in  emotionally
charged situations—this is the time to either being very elevated  or  being
very depressed, then at those  times  especially  when  we  are  emotionally
charged, and if you we do think about what Nagarjuna said, i.e., “y;  “Where
is this “I”‘I’? Is - the depressed ‘I’, the elevated ‘I’? Is  it  the  body?
Is it the mind?” When If you have a good understanding and if  you  do  this
it correctly,  then you will start to have athe sense of the tightness  that
is our ggrasping at the “I” that the tightness is loosening.  and yYou  feel
relieved. You start to understand that this “I” it does notn’t exist. ;  “It
is not this, it is not that”.


Whether we call it the object of  negation  or  target,   or  whatever,  the
point is, at the end of the dayessentially , it is this false sense  of  the
“I” ‘I’  that  appears  so  real  and  appears  to  be  findable  among  the
aggregates. The source of all our the problems  comes  from  feeling  either
feeling too stuck up, too full of ourselves or, at  the  other  end  of  the
spectrum,  on the other end, feeling that one  is  bad,  hopeless,  useless,
and so forth. the ‘I’ feeling that “I am so bad, I am useless and  this  and
that.” So, Aall the problems and unhappiness come from this false  sense  of
the “I.”‘I’.

   7 Presentation of the grounds and paths

   This is explained in two parts:
1. objects of abandonment and
2. actual presentation of the grounds and paths.

   7A Objects of abandonment

   The coarse and subtle conceptions of a self together with their seeds and
   the attachment and so  forth  that  arise  due  to  the  force  of  those
   [conceptions] together with their seeds are afflictive obscurations. They
   are posited  as  obscurations  that  mainly  prevent  the  attainment  of
   liberation (Pages 26 – 27).

Afflictive obscurations
[Root text: page 26~27]
7 Presentation of the grounds and paths
This is explained in two parts:
1. objects of abandonment and
2. actual presentation of the grounds and paths.
7A Objects of abandonment
The coarse and subtle conceptions of a self together with  their  seeds  and
the  attachment  and  so  forth  that  arise  due  to  the  force  of  those
[conceptions] together with their seeds are  afflictive  obscurations.  They
are  posited  as  obscurations  that  mainly  prevent  the   attainment   of
liberation.
• The conception of a coarse self of persons is the conception  of  a  self-
  sufficient substantially existent person.
• The conception of a subtle self of persons is would be the  conception  of
  a truly existentce person.
TSo,  these  two  conceptions—  -  the  conception  of   a   self-sufficient
substantially existent person and  the  conception  of  a  truly  existentce
person together with their seeds that they plant on the mind  together  with
the afflictions that arise from those seeds and conceptions— -  are  posited
to be afflictive obscurations.
What  Tthe  afflictive  obscurations  does  is   it   hinders/prevents   the
attainment of liberation from samsara so, . So, according to  the  CMWS,  in
order to achieve liberation, one must abandon themall these.

The conception of a truly existentce  person  is  not  the  only  afflictive
obscuration:.
The conception of the aggregates as truly existentce or  the  conception  of
any  other phenomenon other than the person to be as truly existentce  areis
also an afflictive obscurations.


The conception of a self  of  persons  and  the  conception  of  a  self  of
phenomena are both afflictive obscurations.
As  mentioned  in  the  previous  lesson,  tThese  two   conceptions    -the
conception of a self of person and the conception of a  self  of  phenomena-
as we saw in the previous lesson are not differentiated by their  object  of
negation.
Both these conceptions of a self of person and the conception of a  self  of
phenomena are afflictive obscurations.
Therefore they have to be abandoned for liberation to be achieved, i.e.,  in
order to achieve liberation.
iIn  order  to  achieve  liberation,  one   must   directly   realisze   the
selflessness of persons and the selflessness of phenomena.

Realising selflessness of persons is not enough

The assertion of the CMWS assertion is different from the  other  tenets  up
to starting from the Autonomists. Because Tthe Autonomists  and  the  tenets
below them everybody else asserts that,  in  order  to  achieve  liberation,
you only have to realisze the selflessness of persons. Y,  and  you  do  not
n’t need to realisze the selflessness of phenomena.
According to the CMWS, in order to achieve  liberation,  you  must  realisze
both the selflessness of persons and the selflessness of phenomena.

Why is there a difference in the position of the CMWS and the  rest  of  the
other tenets?
Why is it that the CMWS asserts that,  in order to achieve  liberation,  you
must abandon both the conception of the self of persons and  the  conception
of the self of phenomena, whereas,  according to the other tenets, you  only
need to abandon the conception of the self of persons in  order  to  achieve
liberation?
The differences in their  positions comes about merely due to what  is  they
posited to be  as the root of samsara.

ForThe  AMWS and the tenets below it, they posit that  the root  of  samsara
is to be the conception of the self of persons. According to them,  this  is
; which according to them is ignorance,  - the root of samsara. That being
For AMWS and the tenets below it, because they posit the conception of  self
of person to be ignorance which is the root  of  samsara,  if  that  is  the
case, you only need to get rid  of  that  conception  in  order  to  achieve
liberation. For that reason, Ttherefore according to these tenets,, all  you
have to do is to directly realisze the  selflessness  of  persons.  W.  With
that realiszation,  you will bewould be  able to achieve liberation.

The According to CMWS also assert that , they  also  say  ignorance  is  the
root of samsara. b But for this school, em, ignorance is not only  just  the
conception of the self of persons. Yes,  Tthe  conception  of  the  self  of
persons is ignorance  that  and  is  also  the  root  of  samsara.  But  the
conception of the self of persons arises on the basis of the  conception  of
the  self  of  phenomena,  ,  specificallyin  particular,   conceiving   the
aggregates,  - the body and mind, - to be inherently existentce.
So for Therefore for the CMWS, the CMWS, ignorance  is  posited  to  be  the
conceptions of the selves - both  the  self  of  persons  and  the  self  of
phenomena.

Therefore Iin order to achieve liberation, one must  realisze  directly  the
selflessness of persons and the selflessness of phenomena before one is  you
can  get  rid  of  ignorance.  The  assertion  that  one  must  abandon  the
conception of the self of phenomena in order  to  achieve  liberation  is  a
unique feature of the CMWS.

Obscurations to knowledge
   [Root text: page 27]
   The latencies of the conception of true  existence  and  all  factors  of
   mistaken dualistic appearance that  arise  due  to  the  force  of  those
   [latencies]  are  obscurations  to  knowledge.  They   are   posited   as
   obscurations that mainly prevent the attainment of omniscience (Page 27).

If both the conception of the self of persons  and  the  conception  of  the
self of phenomena are posited to  be  afflictive  obscurations,   then  what
remains is left to be called the knowledge  obscurations  to  knowledge  (or
knowledge obscurations):.

• What are the obscurations to knowledge? These are the  latencies  (or  the
  imprints,  or  the  predispositions)   are  placed  on  the  mind  by  the
  conception of true existence.
•  Those are posited to be the obscurations to  knowledge.  Not  only  that,
  all the mistaken dualistic appearances that arise  due  to  the  force  of
  those latencies are also posited to be the obscurations to knowledge.
So, the latencies  of  the  true  existence  and  the  factors  of  mistaken
dualistic appearances that arise due to the force  of  those  latencies  are
posited to be obscuration to knowledge. They mainly  hinder  the  attainment
of  omniscience  or  full  enlightenment.  Therefore  in  order  to  achieve
omniscience,  one must abandon the obscurations to knowledge.

The hearers and solitary realiszers  do  not  abandon  the  obscurations  to
knowledge nor are . They do not abandon them and neither  are  they  capable
of abandoning them. On
Even in the Mahayana path, the abandoning of the obscurations  to  knowledge
does not begin start untiltill   after  the  eighth  bodhisattva  ground  is
achieved. On the Mahayana path, the afflictive  obscurations  are  abandoned
when one achievesd the eighth bodhisattva  ground  (or  the  eighth  bhumi).
Only then does the abandoning of the  knowledge  obscurations  to  knowledge
start.

I will talk  a  little  bit  more  about  the  Mahayana  paths  and  grounds
according to the CMWS  maybe in the first two lessons at  the  beginning  of
the next module when we look at the “The Heart of the Perfection  of  Wisdom
Sutra”. In the first two lessons of the next module, I will talk  about  the
Mahayana  path  and  ground  according  to  the  CMWS.  Without  some  basic
understanding ofn the paths  and  grounds,   then  it  makes  things  a  bit
complicated when we look at “Thethe   Heart  of  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom
Sutra.”

   7B Actual presentation of the grounds and paths

   There is no difference in terms of superiority among the views  that  are
   the objects of meditation of the persons of all  three  vehicles  because
   all three are similar in taking the subtle selflessness  of  persons  and
   the subtle selflessness of phenomena as their main objects of  meditation
   (Page 27).
[Root text: page 27]
7B Actual presentation of the grounds and paths
There is no difference in terms of superiority among the views that are  the
objects of meditation of the persons  of  all  three  vehicles  because  all
three are similar in taking the  subtle  selflessness  of  persons  and  the
subtle selflessness of phenomena as their main objects of meditation.

Although the persons of all three vehicles do not have different objects  of
meditation,  but ththey do differ with respect to their  main  main  objects
of abandonment.


   [Root text: page 27]
   There are differences with respect to their main objects  of  abandonment
   because hearers and solitary realizers take the two conceptions of a self
   together with their seeds as their main objects of  abandonment,  whereas
   bodhisattvas take the latencies of  those  [conceptions]  as  their  main
   objects of abandonment.

   There are differences with respect to their main objects  of  abandonment
   because hearers and solitary realizers take the two conceptions of a self
   together with their seeds as their main objects of  abandonment,  whereas
   bodhisattvas take the latencies of  those  [conceptions]  as  their  main
   objects of abandonment (Page 27).

There are differences between the Hinayana  and  Mahayana  with  respect  to
their main objects of abandonment.

   The suchness that is qualified by the abandonment of the two  conceptions
   of a self together with their seeds in  the  continuum  of  a  hearer  or
   solitary realizer foe destroyer in  meditative  equipoise  is  a  nirvana
   without remainder, whereas such a suchness in the continuum of  a  hearer
   or solitary realizer foe destroyer in post-equipoise is  a  nirvana  with
   remainder (Page 27).

Nirvana without remainder and nirvana with remainder
[Root text: page 27]
The suchness that is qualified by the abandonment of the two conceptions  of
a self together with their seeds in the continuum of a  hearer  or  solitary
realizer  foe  destroyer  in  meditative  equipoise  is  a  nirvana  without
remainder, whereas such a suchness in the continuum of a hearer or  solitary
realizer foe destroyer in post-equipoise is a nirvana with remainder.
The nirvana that is in the continuum  of  a  hearer  or  solitary  realiszer
arhat (or foe destroyer) is essentially the factor  of  abandonment  of  the
afflictive obscuration, i.e., ; which  is  the  mind’s   emptiness  of  true
existence. This at suchness of the mind in the continuum of  an  this  arhat
is posited to be nirvana or the sorrowless state.
Now you know what is nirvana is.

Then Tthere is nirvana with remainder and nirvana without remainder.
 According to the CMWS, one achieves the  nirvana  without  remainder  first
followed then subsequently by the achievement of  nirvana with remainder  is
achieved..

What is nirvana  without  remainder?  Nirvana  without  remainder  is  theat
factor of abandonment of the afflictive obscurations  in  the  continuum  of
athe sSuperior in meditative equipoise.
To keep it simple, when the hearer or solitary realiszer  arhat  is  in  the
meditative equipoise directly perceiving emptiness, what he has achieved  in
his mind is a  thorough  abandonment  of  the  afflictive  obscurations.  So
Tthisat  state  of  abandonment,   while  he  is  in  meditative   equipoise
directly focusing on emptiness, is the nirvana without remainder.


Why is it that called athe nirvana without remainder?
When that arhat is in meditative equipoise  directly  perceiving  emptiness,
in that state of realiszation, all  dualistic  appearances  have  completely
subsided. This means All dualistic appearances have subsided in  that  state
of meditative equipoise, which means that no dualistic  appearances  remain.
For that reason,  it is called a nirvana without remainder.

When that arhat foe destroyer arises  from  the  mmeditative  equipoise  and
enters into post-equipoise, he still  has  the  dualistic  appearances.  The
dualistic appearances come back again. He aAlso he has  the  appearances  of
truly existentce phenomena, i.e.,  phenomena  appear  as  truly  existentce.
But

Tthis arhat has already abandoned all afflictive obscurations and .  He  has
achieved nirvana yet, .  iIn  post-equipoise,  he  has  all  these  mistaken
dualistic appearances. For that reason Ttherefore when the arhat  is  whiles
he in in post- equipoise,  that arhat in ththat e  sstate  which  is  called
nirvana with remainder.

   [Root text: page 27]
   For those of the Great Vehicle lineage who are definite in  that  lineage
   from the very beginning, the [complete]  abandonment  of  the  afflictive
   obscurations occurs simultaneously with  the  attainment  of  the  eighth
   ground, and the [complete] abandonment of the obscurations  to  knowledge
   occurs simultaneously with the actualizing of the four bodies (Page 27).

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: All right. Okay, Tthat is  the  end  of  the
tenets!.

Exam on Sunday, 23rd June 2013
As mentioned before, already, the exam is  scheduled  for  Sunday,  set  for
23rd of June at 10.30am . It is a Sunday. Let’s schedule it  to  take  place
at 10:30am in the morning.

|Exam:                    |
|23 June 2013 (Sunday) at |
|10.30am                  |


Try to study as much as possible and as much as you  are  able  to  for  the
exam as much as possible, and as much as you are able  to.  As  I  mentioned
before, the only reason for having exams is that it gives us the  reason  to
learn, and to study. That is the only reason. There at is no  other  reason.
It is the preparation and reviewing of   the  information  that  is  of  the
utmost only importance.

It is not about doing well or not doing well,  passing  or  not  passing.  I
don’t see any meaning or any point in someone who doesn’t really  study  but
comes for the  exam. Even if this personhe manages  to  pass  the  exam,   I
don’t see any meaning in that. What is the  point?  I  notice  that  do  see
there are people who just come and sit for the exam. , they  just  take  and
whatever happen happen. Even if they pass, I don’t see any great purpose  in
doing that.

Of course the choice is yours. it is your choice. I mean that  if  you  like
to do that,  you ccan come. , and No one nobody  is  stopping  you.  But  it
doesn’t fulfill any purpose in the end. What is  more  important  is  the  a
constant engagement with the materials. Whether exam or  no  exam,  Llooking
at the material, thinking about what you have learnt—that is things that  is
the thing what that matters.

Try to learn learn as much as possible. I understand it is  difficult  .  Of
course, it is difficult but learning the Buddhadharma is a  meritorious  and
thing. It is a virtuous activity. thing. It  is  a  good  thing  Eespecially
since while we all have the opportunity to do so now. We  are  so  fortunate
even justjust  to have the opportunity to even do this.  No  matter  however
well or badly we may be doing in our studies,  good or bad we are doing  but
the point is that we have the opportunity to study the Dharma. do  it.  This
It shows that we are very fortunate indeed.

As much as possible, while we are still alive,  and  when  not  stricken  we
are still not down with some serious sickness, or without facing many  major
obstacles, while there is still the opportunity, we should learn as much  as
possible.

From my side, even to teach is not an easy thing. I also find  it  difficult
but I always think that sharing  and  teaching  this  subject  helps  me  to
accumulate merits. It is something virtuous and something meritorious.  This
at is what has been keeps pt me going. Otherwise,  it  is  challenging  even
just to share or to teach these topics. e information.

Therefore as much as possible,  continue to learn and to study.  We  should,
as much as possible, to leave  imprints  in  our  minds.  It  is  also  very
important to constantly make aspirational prayers that,  from life  to  life
without a break, we will always be able to meet the teachings of the  Buddha
teachings, always to be able to hear and to able to reflect on  these  great
treatises,  and to  be  able  to  practice  theose  teachings.  It  is  very
important to meditate on  how fortunate you are even if you  are  only  able
to get a little bit of information out of this.  So   Eevery  time  you  are
able to learn a   new  word  or  some  new  concept,  you  should  feel  how
fortunate you are.

Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme



Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee



Edited by Cecilia Tsong

