Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L21 upload.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.202359
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 21                           Date: 28th May 2013

Question from Student A: In Lelesson 17, it was  mentioned  that  there  are
three types of dualistic appearance:
1. appearance of an external object
2. appearance of subject and object being different entities
3. appearance of conventional phenomena
When the  dualistic  appearance  arises,  is  it  any  one  of  these  three
appearances or all the three appearances must arise  simultaneously  to  the
mind?

Answer: Any of the three in the examples given by you can be posited  to  be
dualistic appearance. Dualistic appearance need not be all three.

Question from Khen Rinpoche (addressing Student A)’s Question:  Why  do  you
think that in order to be dualistic appearance, it must  be  all  the  three
appearances?


(Khen Rinpoche addresses  the  class):  I  have  just  said  that  dualistic
appearance can be any oof the three in the examples given by you and all  of
you all are satisfied with that. It needs not to be all three  of  them.  Do
you all understand the reason for this? Why don’t you  don’t  need  all  the
three appearances in order for it to be dualistic appearance?

This is not straightforward and is not easy. The way to learn is not  to  be
just satisfied and simply with it and accept what I say. it.   This  is  not
going to work. The way to study is to ask,  “Wwhy  is  it  like  this?   and
Wwhy is it like t that?”.  The only way to learn is to have a  a  continuous
succession of, “ questions; Why? Why? Why?”  Only then  will  you  will  get
the point.

What faults would would there be if one asserts that all  three  appearances
must be present in order for there it to be dualistic appearance?

(Student A: Could it be like this? The dualistic appearance that arises  for
an individual depends on that person’s karmic imprints. Also  there  is  one
karmic imprint for each appearance. If we were  to  assert  that  all  three
appearances are necessary to qualify as “dualistic appearance,”  that  would
mean that for every apprehension of an object, we would  need  three  karmic
imprints, instead of just onepresented her proposal).

Khen Rinpoche: The aAppearance of an  external object is  always  there.  As
Iit is being stated very clearly  that  ,  aall  sense  consciousnesses  are
necessarily mistaken. So definitely  that appearance it is there.
(Exchange with student A).

Student B: (Attempts to answer Khen Rinpoche’s question)You  mentioned  that
all three have to be present because there  is  an  appearance  of  external
object therefore  there  is  an  appearance  of  subject  and  object  being
different entities, and …..
What are the problems if all three appearances have to  be  there  in  order
for it to be dualistic appearance?: It would mean that simply  have  one  of
the three appearances will not qualify  as  dualistic  appearance.  That  is
incorrect.

(Khen Rinpoche addresses Student A): Your question was,  “I:  In  order  for
there to be dualistic appearance, do is it that all  the  three  appearances
have to appear or will  or any one of  the  three  appearances  be  enough?”
that you mentioned must be present.

My answer was, “: YYou need not to have all the three  appearances.  ;  Aany
one of those appearances can be athe dualistic appearance.”
So you need not to have all the three appearances in order for there  to  be
dualistic appearance, any one of those three you have mentioned will do.

Now my question is, “: What is are the problems  if  all  three  appearances
have to be there in order for there it to be dualistic appearance?”

Khen Rinpoche: Do you need all three appearances? Yes or no?

Student A: No.

Khen Rinpoche: Posit an illustration.

Student A: An eye consciousness apprehending blue as an external object.

Khen Rinpoche: Posit an illustration where that you just need one  of  those
three appearances and without the other two in order for it to be  dualistic
appearance?

Student A: An eye consciousness apprehending  blue  as  an  external  object
blue. The appearance  of  blue  as  an  external  object  is  the  dualistic
appearance.

Ven Gyurme: Of the three appearances, what is missing?

Student  A:  Subject  and  object  being  as  different  entities  and   the
appearance of the object as conventional phenomena.

Khen Rinpoche: If there is an appearance of  external  blue,  then  blue  is
appearing as something different from the apprehender.  T,  therefore  there
is an appearance of the apprehender and  the  apprehended,   i.e.,   subject
and object being different entities. Now which appearance is missing?

Student A: Appearance of cConventional phenomena.

Khen Rinpoche: Blue does not appear to that consciousness?

Student A: Yes, it appears. Ah …does that mean Khen Rinpoche  was  purposely
giving me the wrong answer in  the  beginning  so  that  we  can  have  this
discussion?

Ven Gyurme: The original answer given by Khen Rinpoche is correct.

Student A: Then it is back to the drawing board. I  am  thinking  along  the
lines of three karmic imprints as I explained earlier.

Khen Rinpoche: You all all accepted what was said earlier: Any of the  three
appearances in the  examples  you  gave  can  be  posited  to  be  dualistic
appearance. Dualistic appearance need not to be all three. Please  posit  an
illustration.


(Addressing Student A): Your illustration of eye consciousness  apprehending
blue actually has all the three appearances.
So your illustration is saying that if it is  dualistic  appearance,  it  is
necessary to have the three appearances. Then iIt follows then  that  if  it
is a dualistic appearance,  it has to be  all  the  three  appearances.  You
have to accept this. Then Yyour thesis is defeated!.

Student C: An illustration is: I myself Me apprehending a self.  Here  there
is no subject and object as different entities.

Ven Gyurme: The thought apprehending ‘I’.
Khen Rinpoche: Of the three appearances,  what is missingabsence?

Student C: There is nNo external object. And mMaybe no  subject  and  object
beingas different entities.

Khen Rinpoche: Why is there is no appearance  of  external  object  for  the
thought apprehending the “I”‘I’?

Khen Rinpoche: Someone come up with a better example. Come, come.

Student D: An illustration is: a mental direct perceiver  apprehending  blue
as a gross objectform,  blue.

Khen Rinpoche: Among Of the three appearances,  what is missing?

Student D: There is noNo appearance of an external object because  the  blue
asappears as  vivid blue appear to the mental consciousness.

Khen Rinpoche: Why isn’t there an appearance of an external object  to  this
mental direct perceiver apprehending blue? Isn’t there  is  a  consciousness
to which this external blue appears to?

Student D: Not necessarily.

Ven Gyurme: It follows tThen it follow that there  is  no  consciousness  to
which an external blue appears to. Why  isn’t  there  an  appearance  of  an
external object to this mental direct perceiver apprehending blue?

Student D: Because blue does exists to the MOS True Aspectarians  of MOS.…

Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that as long as there is blue,   it  will  not
appear as an external object to any consciousness?.

Student D: No, I am not saying that. When blue appears,  it  can  appear  as
the gross object, vivid form blue  or  it  can  which  could  appear  as  an
external blue. The mental consciousness apprehending  blue  as  blue  is  an
illustration of an apprehension of theis blue that is not an external  blue.
This is an illustration of dualistic appearance.

Khen Rinpoche: Is the mental direct  perceiver  apprehending  blue  a  valid
cogniszer? Isn’t the  mental  direct  perceiver  apprehending  blue  in  the
mental continuum of an ordinary being is an awareness  to  which  an  object
appears and is not ascertained? It is.The answer is yes.

We have started with the MWS and Tthere are two divisions of the MWS:
1. the AMWS
2. the CMWS
Both proponents of the AMWS and the CMWS are Pthe proponents of  the  Middle
Way. , which This means that they both do not assert refute  true  existence
even conventionally.

The difference between the AMWS and the CMWS is this:
• The AMWS asserts  existence  (or  establishment)[1]  by  way  of  its  own
  character.
• The CMWS does not assert existence  by way of its own character.

|                          |AMWS      |CMWS     |
|Truly existent            |No        |No       |
|Exist by way of its own   |Yes       |No       |
|character                 |          |         |




In order  to  fully  understand  know  tthe  difference  between  these  two
proponents of these two sub-schools of the  Middle Way, one must know:
• wwhahatt  is ttrue existence is and
• what is the meaning of “existence  by way of its own character.”

Existence by way of its own characterWithout which and just by saying  there
is a difference between these two, it is nothing.

What is establishment by way of its own character?
Existence Establishment by way of its own character means that  the  imputed
object,  when sought,  is findable. So
So when the imputed object when is  sought and  is findable,  ifindable,  it
shows  that  the  object  re  is  existsstablishment   by  way  of  its  own
character.
When the imputed object is  when sought and is not NOT  findable,  it  shows
that there isn’t object does not exist  stablishment  bby  way  of  its  own
character.

The AMWS believes that an object exists from its own side in that  when  you
point  your finger at it, at the end of the day, tthere  is  something  that
you can point to and that you can call as the object. This at  is  what  you
are looking for. So  tThere  is  an  appearance  of  such  an  object.  This
appearance is coming from the side of the  object.  The  AMWS  asserts  that
this is how things and events phenomena aexist re in reality; when you  look
for the imputed object,  you will be able to find  it.  You  can  definitely
point to it.


For the tenets of the AMWS and those below  it,  they  believe  that  things
exist from their its own  side.   and  Wwhen  the  imputed  object  is  when
sought, it  is findable. Everything exists is like that including the  which
includes the “‘I,”’, the self, or  the person, i.e., .
For the ‘I’, the self, the person, when you look for it, you should be  able
to point to something that it is the person.

According to the AMWS, the illustration of a person is would be  the  mental
consciousness.
Therefore, the person can be found. They have to think about  this  as  they
have to account ey do think about this to account  for  how  a  person  that
moves from life to life, and yet the person  is  findable.  At  the  end  of
their analysis,  day, they conclude that it is not this and it is not  that,
and it has to be the mind, specifically, . Within the mind,  it  has  to  be
the mental consciousness. Not just any consciousness but , it has to be  the
mental  consciousness.  Many  other  tenets  also  assert  that  the  mental
consciousness is the person.

It is stated very clearly in the writings of the great  master  Bhavaviveka,
the trailblazer of AMWS, . He clearly said that the mental consciousness  is
the “‘I’”,  or the self.

Now wWe are talking now about the assertions of the AMWS. AMWS say that  the
mental consciousness is the ‘I’. Do However, bear in mind  however  that  at
the end of the day, in actual reality, the mental consciousness is  not  the
“‘I” ’ according to the when we look at it from the viewpoint of the CMWS.

It  is  wrong  to  posit  that  the  mental  consciousness  is  to  be   the
illustration of the “‘I,”’, but this is the view of the AMWS’ view. This  is
because of their fundamental assertion that things exist  by  way  of  their
its own character, and  therefore, you must be able to  point  to  something
that is the phenomenon  in  question.  Since  they  you  believe  that  athe
phenomenon can be pointed to  and  can  be  found  when  sought,  then  with
regards to the “‘I,”’,  the best illustration that can be pointed to is  the
mental consciousness.

Of course Itit is an extremely difficult task to realisze what  exactly  the
“‘I,”’ or the self,  or the person is exactly. There is an  the  “‘I”’  that
wants to be happy  and there is an ‘I’ thatand  do not want to suffer.  What
exactly is this “‘I”’? It is a big question. This  is  the  main  object  of
enquiry of all the Buddhist tenets. Everyone body  is  trying  to  find  out
exactly wwhat exactly is this “‘I”’ or  the  person.  All  the  tenets  have
their own explanations for this.

Because of not understanding exactly  what  exactly  is  the  “‘I”’  or  the
person, all problems arises. Every  single  problems,  difficulty,  ies  and
hardships comes from thisthat. With a correct and  proper  understanding  of
exactly what exactly the “‘I” ’ or the person is,  these  problems  will  go
away.

True existence
The proponents of the AMWS do not assert true  existence  because  they  are
the Proponents of the Middle Way. What exactly is true existence exactly?

As discussed in the previous lesson, with the quotation from  “tThe  Descent
into Lanka Sutra”*[2] as the source, the AMWS states that  a  phenomenon  is
an existent something is an existence  because  it  appears  to  a  mind  or
awareness. the mind/ awareness.
This at is why it exists. W. Without such it appearance, ing, it  cannot  be
posited as an existent.
So Ffor the AMWS, this is the meaning of existence.

The opposite of that is this: would be if there is something that can  exist
without appearing to a mind, , that would make the  object  truly  existent.
In order for something to be an existent,  it  has  to  appear  to  a  mind/
awareness.
This is the view of the AMWS.  view. They explain that anything that  exists
has to be posited through its appearappearance ing to an  awareness. ;  nNot
just any awareness. I, it has to appear to a non-defective awareness.


* The Descent into Lanka Sutra:
All phenomena exist through appearing to consciousness,
All phenomena exist conventionally and
All phenomena do not exist ultimately
What determines whether something exists or not? If it  is  posited  through
the force of appearing to a non-defective awareness, then it is said  to  be
an existent. It has to appear to a non-defective awareness.

What is the meaning of a non-defective awareness?
A nNon-defective awareness has two features:
1.  It is a mind that is not affected by adventitious causes of error.
2.  It is not mistaken with respect to objects appearing as existing by  way
of their its own character.
In short, if it is an existent it has to be posited  through  the  force  of
appearing to a non-defective awareness.

According to the AMWS, true existence means, “ established establishment  by
way of its own uncommon mode of existence without being posited through  the
force of appearing to a non-defective awareness.”[3]

In the last lesson, we saw how the AMWS is divided into two:
1. 1. the  Sutra  Middle  Way  Autonomists  (Skt.  Sautrantika-Svatantrika-
   Madhyamika) (SMWA)
2. and
3.  2.  the  Yogic  Middle  Way  Autonomists  (Skt.   Yogacara-Svatantrika-
   Madhyamika) (YMWA).
The Yogic Middle Way Autonomists
The YMWAs are the proponents of the AMWS who haves  views  that  are  mostly
conforming with the tenets of the MOS: (1) t tenet.
hey do The YMWA do not assert external objects and (2) .they do assert self-
knowers.

Like the MOS, they do assert self-knower.
So the Proponent of the Middle Way who do not  assert  external  object  but
assert self-knower are YMWA.
|Yogic Middle Way Autonomists:   |
|Do not asserts external object  |
|Assert self-knower              |


An iIllustration of a  YMWA was would be  Shantarakshita.  He  was  a  great
Indian master who was invited tTo  Tibet  around  the  7th  or  8th  century
during the reign of King Trisong Detsen in the 8th century at the time  when
they were building Samye monastery was built. He was the one who  introduced
the  lineage  of  ordination  into  Tibet  and  .   it  It  is   said   that
Shantarakshita was the architect who who came  out  with  the  designed  the
layout design of Samye monastery.

The Sutra Middle Way Autonomists
The assertions of the A lot of SMWAs assertions mostly conforming  with  the
assertions of the Sutra School: (1) they assert .
The SMWA assert external objects but (2) they do  not  assert  self-knowers.
We could say that
In order to make that even clearer, we could say that:
The Proponents of the Middle Way  who  asserts  that  the  external  objects
exists by way of their its own character and who do not assert  self-knowers
are SMWAs.
|Sutra Middle Way            |
|Autonomists:                |
|Assert external object      |
|Do not assert self-knower   |

The trailblazer of the SMWASA is the great  Indian  master  Bhavaviveka  who
was born in South India. He became a monk and a great scholar  atin  Nalanda
monastery. It was said that he established  over  50  temples  and  thus  by
doing so, he helped to spread the teachings of the  Buddha.  He  This  great
Indian master Bhavaviveka wrote  a  commentary  on  Nagarjuna’s  Fundamental
Wisdom  that  refuteding  the  commentary  of  the   same   text   by   what
Buddhapalita, who held the view of the Prasangika .

has commented on  the  Fundamental  Wisdom.  Buddhapalita  has  Prasangika’s
view. In so doing, Bhavaviveka he established the view of  the  AMWS’  view.
From his side, he asserted said that the view of the AMWS’s view is  correct
and  that  the  view  of  the  Prasangika’s  explanation  is  incorrect.  He
Bhavaviveka  is  triedying  to  show  that  the  intention  of   Nagarjuna’s
explanations in  Fundamental Wisdom was explained was based on the  view  of
the AMWS’ view.
It is said that great master Bhavaviveka is the trailblazer of the AMWS.

The two truths
As Also mentioned in the previous lesson, the presentation of  for  the  two
truths according to the AMWS is similar to that of the MOS.

Selflessness of persons
The AMWS’s assertion of the selflessness of persons  isn  the  same  as  the
lower tenets.

Selflessness of phenomena
The YMWAs assert that:
• A form and a cogniszer apprehending that form  being  empty  of  different
  substances is the a coarse selflessness of phenomena.
• All phenomena being empty of true existence is asserted to be  the  subtle
  selflessness of phenomena.
Therefore the  YMWAs divide the selflessness of phenomena  into  coarse  and
subtle.

The YMWAs distinguishes between:
• the coarse and subtle selflessness of persons and
• the coarse and subtle selflessness of phenomena.

The difference is not made on the basis of emptiness but  .  The  difference
is made by way of the object of negation.
Having said that,  you should be able  to  explain  why,  according  to  the
AMWS, the difference between the two selflessnesses of phenomena is made  on
the basis of the object of negation and not on the basis of emptiness?

Question from Khen Rinpoche’s Question: The two  subtle  selflessnesses  are
differentiated by way of the object of negation and not by way of the  basis
of the emptiness. What are the faults  if  we  were  to  say  that  the  two
selflessnesses are differentiated by the way of the basis of emptiness?

   The two [subtle] selflessnesses are differentiated by way of  the  object
   of negation and not by way of the basis  of  the  emptiness  because  the
   refutation of the object of negation - true existence – upon the basis of
   a person is the subtle selflessness of phenomena, while the refutation of
   self-sufficient substantial existence upon the basis of a person  is  the
   subtle selflessness of persons (Page 22).
As in the text [page 22], the two subtle selflessnesses  are  differentiated
by way of the object  of  negation  and  not  byway  of  the  basis  of  the
emptiness because:
- the refutation of the object of negation  -  true  existence  –  upon  the
basis of a person is the subtle selflessness of phenomena, while
- the refutation of self-sufficient substantial existence upon the basis  of
a person is the subtle selflessness of persons.

|          |Coarse       |Subtle       |Coarse the     |Subtle the    |
|Yogic     |selflessness |selflessness |selflessness of|selflessness  |
|Autonomy  |of persons   |of persons   |phenomena      |of phenomena  |
|Middle Way|             |             |               |              |
|school    |             |             |               |              |
|          |Non-existence|Non-existence|Non-existence  |Non-existence |
|          |of a         |of a         |of object and  |of truly      |
|          |permanent,   |self-sufficie|subject being  |existent      |
|          |uni-tary, and|nt           |as             |phenophe-nomen|
|          |single and   |substantially|diffedifferent |a             |
|          |iindepen-dent|existent     |en-tities      |              |
|          |person       |person       |               |              |

The Yogic Middle Way Autonomists: the three vehicles

   7 Presentation of the grounds and paths

   According to Yogic Middle Way Autonomists  the  differences  between  the
   persons of the three vehicles are posited in  terms  of  three  different
   obscurations that are the main objects of abandonment and three different
   views that are the main objects of meditation (Page 22).

 [Root text: page 21]
7 Presentation of the grounds and paths
According to Yogic  Middle  Way  Autonomists  the  differences  between  the
persons of the three vehicles  are  posited  in  terms  of  three  different
obscurations that are the main objects of abandonment  and  three  different
views that are the main objects of meditation.
In order to clarify what  I  have  just  said,  the  next  three  paragraphs
explain how the differences between the persons of the  three  vehicles  are
posited in terms of the three obscurations.

[Root text: page 21]

   Those of the hearer lineage, having  taken  the  conception  apprehending
   [the person] to be self- sufficient substantially existent together  with
   its retinue as their main object of abandonment, through taking,  as  the
   antidote to that, the view realizing the person to be empty of being self-
   sufficient substantially existent as their  main  object  of  meditation,
   attain the small enlightenment.

   Those of the hearer lineage, having  taken  the  conception  apprehending
   [the person] to be self-sufficient substantially existent  together  with
   its retinue as their main object of abandonment, through taking,  as  the
   antidote to that, the view realizing the person to be empty of being self-
   sufficient substantially existent as their  main  object  of  meditation,
   attain the small enlightenment (Page 22).

The three vehicles are the HHearers’ Vvehicle, the SSolitary RRealiszers’  V
vehicle and the BBodhisattvas’ V vehicle.

For those of the hHearer lineage:
• The main object of  meditation  is  the  emptiness  of  a  self-sufficient
  substantially existent person.
• The main object of abandonment is  the  conception  apprehending  a  self-
  sufficient substantially existent person.
• Through meditating on the emptiness  of  a  self-sufficient  substantially
  existent person,   theyy  abandon  the  conception  apprehending  a  self-
  sufficient substantially existent person.
• Through that they achieve the small enlightenment, which is the  hHearer’s
  enlightenment.

   Those of the solitary  realizer  lineage,  having  taken  the  conception
   apprehending a form and the valid cognizer apprehending that form  to  be
   different substances as their main object of abandonment, through taking,
   as the antidote to that, the view realizing apprehenders and apprehendeds
   to be empty of  being  different  substances  as  their  main  object  of
   meditation, attain the middling enlightenment (Page 22).


For those of the sSolitary rRealiszer lineage:
• The main of object of  meditation is the emptiness of object  and  subject
  being different substances.
• The main object of abandonment is the  conception  apprehending  form  and
  the valid  cogniszer  apprehending  that  form  beingto  be  of  different
  substances.
• Through meditating on thate emptiness, they abandon this  ese  objects  of
  abandonment.
• Through that,  they achieve the   middling  enlightenment,  which  is  the
  sSolitary rRealiszer’’s enlightenment.

   Bodhisattvas, having taken the conception of true existence together with
   its latencies as their main object of abandonment, through taking, as the
   antidote to that, the view realizing all phenomena  to  be  lacking  true
   existence  as  their  main  object  of  meditation,  attain   the   great
   enlightenment (Page 22).

For those of the bBodhisattva lineage:
• The main object of meditation is the emptiness of true existence.
• The main object of abandonment is the conception of true existence.
• Through meditating on thate emptiness,   they  abandon  these  objects  of
  abandonment.
• Through that,  they achieve the great enlightenment, i.e., , which is  the
  full enlightenment.

This is the explanations by the of YMWAs. The YMWAs  assert that  there  are
differences between the person of the three vehicles and these   differences
are posited in terms of them having different obscurations  as  their   main
objects of abandonment. Therefore, there  is  a  difference  in  their  main
objects of meditation.

|The Yogic Middle Way Autonomists:                                    |
|the Three Vehicles                                                   |
|YWMA’s Explanation                                                   |


Turning of the Wwheel of Ddharma |Type of sutras  |Assertion  of  the  YMWAs
|Assertions of  the  AMWS  |  |First   |Hinayana  sutras  and  the  uncommon
Hinayana sutras |Interpretive  meaning  |Interpretative  meaning  |  |Second
|Mahayana sutras and the uncommon Mahayana sutra |Both interpretive  meaning
and  definitive  meaning  |Heart  of  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra—  -
interpretive meaning
Short, Middling and Extensive Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutras—  -  definitive
meaning | |Third  |Sutras  that  are  shared  with  both  the  Hinayana  and
Mahayana sutras.
 |Interpretive meaning |Interpretative meaning  | |
That is ’s all for the AMWS. We will complete finish the CMWS ins  the  next
few lessons.

There is nothing much of CMWS in the root text.
Question: Does the SMWAs assert partless particles?

Answer:  The  SMWAs  assert  partless  particles  but  they  do  not  assert
directionally partless particles.


According to the MWS, if  it  is  an  existent,   it  necessarily  possesses
parts. That would mean ake athe partless  particles  has   to  have  pparts,
i.e., . a pPartless particles is  are  not  partless  because  they  possess
parts. You have to think about this.

The exam will be held on Sunday, 23rd June at 10.30am.

Tenets classes will end on 13th  June, 2013. The week  following  that  will
be empty of classes.

Khen Rinpoche: Empty of classes. Full of knowledge. The meaning of exams  is
that: no exams, no knowledge. A little bit of stress is ok.


Exam date: 23 Jun 2013 (Sunday) at 10.30 am.
















Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme



Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee



Edited by Cecilia Tsong


-----------------------
[1] For the sake of consistency, “existent by  way  of  its  own  character”
will be used in these transcripts.
[2] There is a quotation from the Descent into Lanka Sutra that reads,  “All
phenomena exist through appearing to the consciousness. All phenomena  exist
conventionally and all phenomena do not exist ultimately.” (Page  5,  Lesson
20)
[3] Refer to  chart,  “Meaning  of  Terms  used  to  Describe  the  Mode  of
Existence of Phenomena in the Mahayana Schools.”

