Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L13 (Upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.722572
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 13                         Date: 11th April 2013

According to the MOS, all phenomena can be grouped  into  three  categories,
the three natures:
1. Thoroughly established nature
2. Other-powered nature
3. Imputational nature

Sometimes people get stuck at and cannot go beyond the level of words.  They
are confounded by terms such as other-powered nature. You don’t have  to  be
confused or confounded by these words. You just have to  know  exactly  what
they mean.

Other-powered nature
According to this school, other-powered nature  is  another  way  of  saying
impermanent phenomena, compounded phenomena, and composed phenomena.
Therefore, other-powered  phenomena,  impermanent  phenomena,  and  composed
phenomena are synonymous.

What is the main characteristic of such  phenomena?  Other-powered  natures,
impermanent phenomena, and composed phenomena basically refer  to  phenomena
that undergo momentary change, i.e., phenomena that change  from  moment  to
moment. This change is due to the cause that brought about  that  particular
phenomenon. Impermanent or composed phenomena are under  the  power  of  the
causes that brought them about. Hence they are called other-powered.

All impermanent phenomena are like that. They undergo momentary change.  But
why is it their  nature to undergo momentary change? Because they are  under
the control of the power of their own respective causes that  brought  about
their existence. This is the meaning of “other-powered.”  The  word  ‘other-
powered” is a way of helping  us  understand  what  exactly  impermanent  or
composed phenomena are.

Thoroughly established nature
In the context of the MOS, thoroughly established  nature  is  the  same  as
ultimate truth. Thoroughly established nature means emptiness. According  to
this school, what kinds of emptinesses are there?
• There  is  the  emptiness  of  a  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
  person.
• There is the emptiness of the subject and object as different entities.
• There is the emptiness of phenomena as  natural  bases  of  engagement  or
  referent of names.
These emptinesses are all thoroughly established natures.

In short, what is thoroughly established nature? It is emptiness.  Emptiness
of what? (1) The emptiness of the self of persons and (2) the  emptiness  of
the self of phenomena.

In the context of the MOS, emptiness is an ultimate truth. In  this  school,
thoroughly  established  nature,   ultimate   truth,   and   emptiness   are
synonymous.

Imputational nature
Imputational natures are of two types:
1. existent
2. non-existent

• Imputational natures that are existents refer to all  permanent  phenomena
  other than emptiness; for example, uncompounded space.
• Imputational natures that are non-existents  are,  for  example,  external
  objects. According to this school,  external  objects  do  not  exist.  An
  external object is an  imputation  through  the  force  of  conceptuality.
  Another example is the sky-flower. That does not exist but nevertheless it
  is imputed by conceptuality.

These are the things that you have to remember. According to  the  MOS,  all
phenomena are included in these three natures:
•  Thoroughly  established  natures  and  other-powered  natures  are  truly
  established.
• Imputational natures are not truly established.

According to this school, what is an ultimate truth?  It  is  emptiness.  If
emptiness is ultimate truth, every other phenomenon that exists would  be  a
conventional truth.  This means out of the three natures:
• Thoroughly established nature is an ultimate truth
• Other-powered nature and imputational nature are conventional truths.

|The Three Natures                                          |
|Other-powered      |Thoroughly         |Imputational       |
|pheno-mena,        |established nature,|natures are of two |
|composed           |ultimate truth, and|types:             |
|pheno-mena, and    |emptiness are      |existent (e.g.     |
|impermanent        |sy-nonymous.       |uncom-pounded      |
|phenomena are      |There are the      |space)             |
|synonym-ous.       |emptiness of the   |non-existent (e.g. |
|The main           |self of persons and|external objects)  |
|characteristic is  |the emptiness of   |It is an imputation|
|that they undergo  |the self of        |through the force  |
|mo- mentary change.|phenomena.         |of conceptuality.  |
|This change is due |                   |                   |
|to the cause that  |                   |                   |
|brought about that |                   |                   |
|particular         |                   |                   |
|phenomenon.        |                   |                   |
|truly established  |truly established  |not truly          |
|                   |                   |established        |
|Conventional truth |Ultimate truth     |Conventional truth |

Studying the tenets
We have to understand why we are learning these four tenets.  That  is  very
important. We should always link what we have learnt to the four seals  that
we talked about in the beginning of this module. The four seals attest to  a
particular doctrine being Buddhist and they stamp it to be a Buddhist path.

The four seals are:
   1. All composed phenomena are impermanent.
   2. All  contaminated  phenomena  are  miserable  (or  in  the  nature  of
      suffering).
   3. All phenomena are empty and selfless.
   4. Nirvana is peace.

In particular, let us look at the second seal:  All  contaminated  phenomena
are in the nature of suffering.

What we are all looking for is an  end  to  our  problems  and  misery.  The
question arises, “Can our misery be stopped?” The Buddhist answer  is,  “All
our misery and problems can be stopped because all phenomena are  selfless.”
This means that whether we can put an end to our suffering  or  not  depends
on whether we understand selflessness or not.

Each of the four tenets has its own presentation, but the  essence  of  what
they are trying to express is their respective ideas as to what  constitutes
selflessness, what exactly selflessness is. When you realise  that,  it  can
put an end to all your misery and problems.

What we don’t want are suffering and problems. The question is, “Can we  put
 an end to them or not?” The answer given in the teachings is this,  “If  we
realise selflessness, then we can  put  an  end  to  all  our  problems  and
suffering.”

That leads to the next question, “How does the realisation  of  selflessness
reduce and destroy our afflictions?”  That is a question we  have  to  think
about for ourselves.

What does each of the tenets say about selflessness that supposedly  is  the
antidote that will put an end to our misery? This is something  we  have  to
learn and  to  discover  for  ourselves  through  our  own  experience,  our
practice, our meditation,  and  so  forth.  We  have  to  look  at  our  own
experiences and see how it works.

You should notice by now that when we were looking at the  Hinayana  tenets,
i.e., the GES and the SS, when they talked  about  selflessness,  they  only
talked about the selflessness  of  persons.  They  do  not  talk  about  the
selflessness of phenomena.

But once we start to look at the Mahayana tenets, beginning  with  the  MOS,
on top of talking about the selflessness of persons, they  also  talk  about
the selflessness of phenomena.

What I am saying to you now is not just a delivery of a lecture.  Rather  as
I talk, you have to think about what I am saying. It is  something  for  you
to reflect and  meditate on.

In our mind we have different afflictions. We get upset, we have anger,  and
we also have desire and attachment.  Take,  for  example,  attachment.  When
attachment arises, we have to ask ourselves, by looking within, how does  it
arise? It is very clear that whenever we get emotionally  involved  with  or
attracted to an object or person, that emotional involvement always  entails
the appearance of a very attractive object or attractive person.
Similarly, when we are upset  with  some  situations  or  at  someone,  that
emotional involvement is always based on the appearance  of  something  that
is very unpleasant or bad, something you do not like.

But it is not just the appearance of an attractive  object  or  person  that
leads to you being attached and it is not  just  an  appearance  of  a  very
unpleasant situations, object, or person that upsets you. It is based  on  a
sense of the “I.”  The person looks attractive to  me.  I  find  the  person
attractive. Then you get emotionally involved. The “I” is  always  involved.
Similarly, because the person appears unpleasant or ugly to me, is not  nice
to me, you get upset, don’t you?

We don’t become attracted to an object or  person  because  that  object  or
person appears pleasant to somebody else. It  has  to  appear  pleasant  and
attractive to the “I”. Then we get emotionally involved.

Similarly, someone looking very unpleasant or bad to somebody else, that  is
not the reason for us to be upset at that person. That  person,  object,  or
situation has to appear unpleasant to me, then the “I” gets upset.

In  dependence  on  the  object  or  person  appearing  either  pleasant  or
unpleasant to me, then the “I” gets  attached  or  becomes  angry.  All  the
afflictions like anger or attachment always  arise  in  dependence  on  this
sense of “I.” Whether we  get  attached  to  or  upset  by  some  situation,
object, or person, those emotions always arise  from  within  the  sense  of
this “I.”

This means that the stronger the sense of the “I”, the more  we  think  that
this “I” is  everything,  that  it  is  most  important  or  most  precious.
Commensurate with that way of looking  at  the  “I,”  then  you  would  have
stronger attachment or stronger anger.

This is quite apparent. When you look at how your mind  works,  it  is  very
clear. We are very attached to our friends, people on my side or part of  my
group. The stronger we look at our friends in this  way,  the  stronger  the
attachment. Similarly, with regard to situations or people that we  dislike,
“This person is not on my side and is not part of my group. This  person  is
my enemy,” then again the anger will be stronger.

If we were to just relax, let go, and loosen our grip on this sense  of  the
“I” or me, if we were to allow ourselves a bit more space in the  mind  from
our own experience, definitely we will see a corresponding decrease  in  our
anger, attachment, and so forth. This is clear from our experience.  We  can
tell that this is so.

Friends do exist. Enemies do exist. My friends exist. My enemies  exist.  Of
course they exist. But while they exist, when we loosen  that  grip  on  the
“I,” the ego and give our mind more freedom and space, then  the  attachment
that usually arises in dependence on seeing or holding on to some people  as
my friends, and the anger that  usually  arises  in  dependence  on  holding
others as my enemies, will decrease. Even though they remain as friends  and
enemies, when we loosen the grip on the “I,” the  afflictions  generated  in
relation to them would decrease and not be as strong.

Just having some  idea  of  selflessness  can  really  help  to  lessen  the
afflictions such as anger and attachment.
Imagine that you walk into a jewellery shop. You may be  very  excited  when
you look at some diamond jewellery. There  is  an  appearance  of  something
very nice and based on that, it is possible for a  thought  to  arise,  “How
nice if I can have that.” Diamond jewellery is just  an  example.  Then  you
act upon that thought  and  buy  the  diamond.  Once  you  have  bought  the
diamond, it becomes yours and the “I” comes into the picture. Now it is  not
just a diamond. It becomes my diamond. You can see  the  difference  in  the
level of emotional involvement with the object, before  buying  the  diamond
and just after buying the diamond.

After the “I” comes into the picture, the attachment is  so  much  stronger.
Not only does the object look better and  more  precious  than  before,  the
attachment becomes stronger than before because the “I” has  come  into  the
picture and the diamond has now  become  my  diamond.  The  object  has  not
changed. It is still a diamond, but what has changed is that  you  have  now
become its owner. When  the  “I”  comes  into  the  picture,  the  sense  of
clinging is much stronger than  before.  What  has  changed?  Our  emotional
involvement and the “I” coming into the picture.

Then when you lose your diamond, you will also lose sleep  over  it  because
now it is your diamond. When it is not your diamond, when it was sitting  in
the shop, you do not care what happens to it. Even if  it  was  stolen,  you
would not be bothered or lose sleep over it because it is not your  diamond.
However, when it is in your  possession  and  the  “I”  has  come  into  the
picture, when you lose it, you get upset and worried.

Hinayana tenets & the selflessness of persons
In cases when there is a very strong sense of an “I,” what we  are  grasping
at is a real permanent “I.” We say that it  is  a  permanent,  unitary,  and
independent “I.” That is what we are grasping at. Also we grasp  at  a  self
that is able to stand on its own, a self-instituting and  a  self-sufficient
“I.”

In the Hinayana tenets, the GES and the SS, we talked  about  the  emptiness
of the permanent, unitary, and independent self and the emptiness of a self-
sufficient substantially existent person. We talked about how they  operate.
In these Hinayana tenets, these two kinds of self of persons do not exist.

We first have to understand  how  there  isn’t  a  permanent,  unitary,  and
independent self. On top of that, we can see for ourselves that although  it
appears, the self-sufficient substantially existent  person  also  does  not
exist. We can understand that from our own experience.  We  have  seen  that
kind  of  grasping.  Even  with  a  little  bit  of  understanding  of   the
selflessness of persons, definitely you can see a reduction in the  clinging
on to the “I.” This leads to a reduction in the afflictions, be it anger  or
attachment. Definitely we can see a reduction.

We  have  been  talking  so  much  about  meditating  on  selflessness   and
emptiness.  But what exactly is that?  It  is  for  us  to  realise  and  to
discover for ourselves that the “I” that appears to exist  in  a  particular
way does not exist whatsoever. We have to discover for ourselves,  from  our
own experience, that when we believe that there is a real  “I,”  that  there
is such a self-sufficient substantially existent person, it will lead to  an
increase in our afflictions.

We have to see why, in reality,  a  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
person does not exist.  By using logic and reasoning, when we  can  see  for
ourselves that such a person does not exist, then definitely we can see  for
ourselves a reduction in the afflictions  that  comes  along  with  it.  The
whole point of meditating on the selflessness of persons is  to  reduce  and
weaken the apprehension of a self of persons. When we reduce and weaken  the
apprehension  of  a  self  of  persons,  we  also  reduce  and  weaken   the
afflictions. When we reduce and weaken the afflictions, definitely  we  will
have fewer problems and less suffering.

We can discover this for ourselves  by  reflecting  and  meditating  on  the
selflessness of persons. Then we will discover for ourselves that  with  the
reduction in our  self-grasping,  we  will  also  see  a  reduction  in  our
afflictions such as attachment and anger. When we  have  less  grasping  and
clinging on to me, me, me, then there will be less clinging to  my  friends,
my group, my enjoyments, and so forth.  When  we  have  less  attachment  to
these things, definitely there will be less anger  as  we  often  get  upset
because of our attachment to these things.

When you look at the first two Buddhist tenets, the GES and  the  SS,  their
presentations on the selflessness of persons is like the first stage of  the
practice. It is through meditating on  and  realising  the  selflessness  of
persons that we can see a reduction in our afflictions. We have  to  realise
for ourselves how a permanent, unitary, and independent self does not  exist
and how a self-sufficient substantially existent person does not  exist.  By
seeing this for ourselves, using reasons, we will  be  able  to  reduce  our
grasping at such a self of persons. When we  reduce  our  self-grasping  and
clinging on to this mistaken identification of  the  self,  we  will  see  a
reduction in our afflictions.

Mahayana tenets & the selflessness of phenomena
Then when you come to the Mahayana tenets, starting from the MOS,  there  is
a presentation of the selflessness of phenomena. Why is  this  so?  You  can
train, in the initial stage, by meditating on the  selflessness  of  persons
that is presented in the Hinayana tenets. Through that, you definitely  will
see a reduction in the afflictions, such as anger and attachment.

Nevertheless, pleasant and unpleasant phenomena still appear  to  us.  There
are still appearances of nice things, unpleasant things,  good  people,  and
bad people. Based on these appearances, again we get  emotionally  involved.
We still get upset and we still get  attached  because  we  react  to  these
appearances  of  pleasant  and  unpleasant  phenomena.  This  is  when   the
understanding of the selflessness of phenomena comes into play.

Earlier on, in the Hinayana Tenets, there is only the  presentation  of  the
selflessness of persons that dealt with the involvement of the “I.”  It  did
not deal with the objects to which the “I” is attached or by which  the  “I”
is upset.

Here, in the presentation of the selflessness of  phenomena,  there  is  the
understanding that phenomena appear as if they were self-instituted, have  a
self, and there is some kind of identity from the  side  of  the  phenomena.
Although they appear in this way, in reality, that is not  how  they  exist.
When you combine this understanding with the earlier  understanding  of  the
selflessness of persons, then you have, in your hands, something  much  more
powerful to work with against the afflictions.

Now you have the two selflessnesses coming into play. On the one  hand,  you
have an understanding of the selflessness of persons. As described  earlier,
the self of persons does not exist in the way it appears. On  top  of  that,
you combine this understanding  of  the  selflessness  of  persons  with  an
understanding that phenomena also do not exist in the  way  they  appear  to
you, i.e., they do not  exist in the way that you believe them to exist.

So now you have an understanding  of  the  selflessness  of  persons,  i.e.,
related to yourself and the selflessness of phenomena that  you  are  either
attached to or upset at. Do you not think  that  such  an  understanding  is
much more powerful than just having  an  understanding  that  the  self  (of
persons) does not exist in the way it appears?

When we started looking at the Mahayana tenets, we started with the MOS.  On
top of the selflessness of persons, they  talk  about  the  selflessness  of
phenomena. What exactly then is the selflessness of phenomena? What are  you
meditating on here?  Basically  you  have  to  discover  for  yourself  that
phenomena do not exist in the way they appear. That is the whole point.

The MOS: Non-existence of external objects
At the end of the day, what you are trying to find out now is how  phenomena
do not exist in the way they appear. According to the  MOS,  this  is  where
the non-existence of external objects comes into play. To  meditate  on  the
selflessness of phenomena means to discover that phenomena do not  exist  in
the way they appear to us. According to the  MOS,  they  say  that  although
there is the appearance of external objects, in  reality,  external  objects
do not exist.

When something pleasant appears to  us,  we  get  attached  to  it.  We  get
attached because we think that there is something real  out  there,  outside
of the mind. There is an appearance of something out there  and  we  believe
in that appearance. Therefore we get attached. Here, according to  the  MOS,
although external objects appear, that is not how things exist.

The MOS explains that all objects, forms, and sounds that you experience  do
not exist as separate from your mind, outside of  your  mind.  Rather,  they
exist as just appearances or projections of  your  mind.  Specifically  they
are the projections of the ripening of karmic  seeds  or  imprints  in  your
mind. Due to the awakening of these karmic seeds and imprints, you have  the
appearance of these objects. That is  what  an  object  is.  So  it  is  not
something external, something outside of your mind. Therefore there  are  no
external objects.

Your experience of the appearance of a beautiful object is only due  to  the
ripening of karmic imprints in your mind. There is nothing coming  from  the
side of an object outside of your mind. According to  the  MOS,  if  we  are
able to understand that the appearance of this  beautiful  form  is  just  a
projection of my own mind—that it is just a ripening of a particular  karmic
imprint in my own mind and, other than that,  there  is  nothing  out  there
that is outside of  my  mind  and,  from  its  own  side,  a  real  external
object—this kind of world  view  definitely  will  help  us  to  reduce  our
grasping at and attachment to such an object.

Sometimes we may have very exciting dreams. We get emotionally  involved  in
the dream and we get attached to or upset by it. When we wake  up  from  the
dream and realise that it is just a dream, then whatever fear or  attachment
we may have had during the dream disappears. Sometimes even  after  we  wake
up from the dream, in the initial period, there  may  still  be  some  tense
feeling, fear, excitement or attachment to the dream.  But  after  a  while,
when you are a little bit more awake, because it  was  just  a  dream,  that
sense of emotional involvement will  fade.

Based on the world view that there is something right there outside  of  the
mind, that there is a real external object right there and  that  everything
is coming from the side of the object, whether pleasant or unpleasant,  then
our emotional involvement will be very strong. Recall then the view  of  the
MOS and follow  it  by  thinking  in  this  way:  “Although  there  is  this
appearance of a real external object right there, I understand that this  is
just a projection of my own mind. It is made up by my mind. What  I  see  is
none other than the result of the ripening of a karmic imprint in  my  mind.
It is coming from my own  mental  projection.  There  is  no  real  external
object separate from my mind.” When you can think in this way, then I  think
definitely you can see a reduction in your emotional  involvement  with  the
object, whether it be anger (or aversion) or attachment.

According to the MOS, when we come to realise that all  conventional  truths
do not exist in the way they appear  to  us,  that  there  are  no  external
objects, over time, we  will  reduce  our  clinging,  grasping,  anger,  and
attachment.

From  this,  one  can  understand  that  by  delineating  the  view  of  the
selflessness of phenomena, by understanding what that is,  you  have  a  far
more powerful tool in your hands  to  work  with  against  the  afflictions.
Besides the view of the selflessness of persons, now you  add  the  view  of
the selflessness of phenomena.  Definitely what you have  at  your  disposal
is much more powerful than just having  the  view  of  the  selflessness  of
persons.

The view of the Middle Way School
The MOS, the AMWS, and the CMWS talk about  the  selflessness  of  phenomena
but they differ as to what that selflessness of phenomena is.

According to the Middle Way School (MWS), they say that  the  way  phenomena
appear to us is not a factual or accurate representation of reality.  It  is
not true. According to the MWS, they explain that when a phenomenon  appears
to us, it appears as if that is the way the  object  actually  exists,  that
that is its very nature. We are talking here about how, in general, the  MWS
explains about how things appear to us. We are not  talking  about  reality.
According to the MWS,  when a thing appears to us, it appears as if that  is
the final or ultimate nature of that object, that there  is  nothing  beyond
that. That is what we call, in philosophical language,  the  final  mode  of
abiding of the object.

According to the MWS, how do phenomena appear to us? They appear  to  us  as
if that is their final or ultimate nature, that that  is  what  the  objects
really are. Things appear to us as if that is  how  they  exist  finally  or
ultimately. That is how things appear to us. They are real.

According to the MWS, if phenomena existed in the way  they  appear  to  us,
that would mean that the objects would have to  be  ultimately  established.
That would mean that the objects have to be truly established. That  is  the
meaning of true establishment or ultimate establishment.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting somewhere with this or not? You must  squeeze
your brain a bit.

It is not easy because we are looking at the great treatises here.  Normally
I say that receiving initiations is nothing. That is very easy. We just  sit
there but  whether  you  receive  the  initiation  or  not  is  a  different
question. You just think that you have received it.

Thinking  about  selflessness  is  much  more  challenging  than   receiving
initiations and even far more challenging than  conferring  initiations.  It
is very easy to confer initiations. I mean anyone can give  initiations  but
the difference lies in  whether the person is qualified or not.  Even  then,
it is a very easy matter of just going through the  motions  and  performing
the rituals.

It is much more challenging to present these teachings and it is  also  much
more challenging to understand these  teachings.  But  it  is  only  through
understanding these teachings that you will see a change in the  mind.  When
you think about this, these are the things  that  will  cause  the  mind  to
change. When you see the truth for yourself, you are then able to  eliminate
whatever superimpositions or wrong understandings that you  may  have.  Then
you experience the joy of such  understanding. That  is  not  something  you
can gain from an initiation.

When you sit through an initiation, you may think, “I generate great  bliss”
 and that is about it. Of course when we do  not  have  the  realisation  of
great bliss, then we cannot talk about feeling great  bliss.  On  the  other
hand, the joy that comes from learning and from seeing truths that  we  have
discovered for ourselves, that is certain to bring about some real  benefit.


I  mentioned  before  my  own  experience.  Because  I  do  not   understand
everything, I do think about the teachings. When I gain  some  understanding
of some points after I had thought about them, I feel  joy,  thinking,  “How
wonderful.” When I sit through initiations, I think there is some bliss  but
that is about it. It is difficult for me to experience the same kind of  joy
that I find from discovering the teachings for myself. I find  it  difficult
to experience that same joy when I am attending initiations.

Our own discovery of the teachings of the Buddha comes about when we  study,
learn, and think about the teachings. When we start to see  some  truths  in
them, then that joy is very different. It is only then that you really  have
some faith in the  teachings  of  the  Buddha.  It  is  amazing  and  it  is
heartfelt. That  can  only  come  about  through  discovering  the  Buddha’s
teachings by thinking about them. I don’t think it is possible to have  this
kind of feeling and this sense of discovery by sitting through  initiations.
Simply by being  present  and  receiving  the  initiation,  I  think  it  is
difficult to generate the same kind of faith in the Buddha.

Of course, I am talking about us as ordinary individuals.  Most  of  us  are
like  that.  The  exception  are  those  who  really  do  have   very   high
realisations. When they receive empowerments, it is a  completely  different
experience. We like to think we are  like  them  but  we  are  not.  We  are
ordinary individuals.

So for us, the way is to make the discovery for ourselves  through  learning
the teachings of the Buddha and then seeing its authenticity and  truth  for
ourselves. When we see that truth, the joy  that  one  experiences  is  very
different. At that time, you really start to have a  real  understanding  of
what is a buddha and generate real faith in the Buddha. For us, that is  the
only way. That is why Lama Tsongkhapa keeps on saying that  we  must  learn,
we must educate ourselves, and we must reflect about what we have learnt.
You have to think about the four seals. In particular, that what we  do  not
want  is  suffering.  All  contaminated  phenomena  are  in  the  nature  of
suffering. In order to overcome suffering, we have to  overcome  its  cause,
i.e., our ego-grasping, clinging at the self, the self of  persons,  and  so
forth. That is what we need to get rid of.

Can we  get  rid  of  our  suffering  just  by  attending  initiations?  No,
obviously not.  Just  by  taking  initiations,  you  can  get  rid  of  your
suffering? No. We like to scramble here and there looking  for  empowerments
but still nothing happens.  Still there is suffering.  This  is  because  we
have not targeted the root of the problem: our ego-grasping, clinging  to  a
self, and our grasping  at  the  self  of  persons.  In  order  to  overcome
suffering, we have to overcome this grasping at the  self  of  persons.  The
only way to do this is to realise selflessness. To realise selflessness,  we
have to meditate on selflessness. Before we can  meditate  on  selflessness,
we have to find out what selflessness is. You have to learn and  study  what
selflessness is.

Do you see the process now? Only when you understand this,  only  then  will
you see how important it is to study tenets. You have to see the  point  for
yourself. No matter how  you  think  about  it,  from  whatever  angle,  the
conclusion is still the same: You have to learn. There  must  be  education,
learning, and then reflection.

If what you do not want is suffering, if  what  you  want  is  freedom  from
suffering and liberation from samsara, then this is the one  and  only  way.
In particular, you have to learn about selflessness.  Before  you  can  even
meditate on it, you have to learn what selflessness is. Only  then  can  you
cultivate  your   understanding  during  meditation.   Through   meditation,
definitely you will  be  able  to  reduce  the  afflictions.  In  so  doing,
definitely you will be able to reduce your suffering and misery.

It is very important to gain an understanding  of  selflessness  before  you
can meditate on it. But even gaining such an understanding is  not  an  easy
feat. It is very, very difficult.

In my case, I have to teach. I find it extremely  difficult  to  teach  this
topic. Although I read different texts and  different  commentaries,  it  is
still very difficult to be able to summarise and put them together  in  some
coherent form, that the view is definitely this and not  that.  Sometimes  I
even wonder whether I am presenting the right thing or not. I find  it  very
difficult because it is not straightforward and it is not  easy.  Even  just
delineating the view, to say what is and what is not, that  is  really  very
challenging. Forget about realisations for the time being. Even  just  being
able to explain what exactly is and what is not,  that  in  itself  is  very
challenging and very difficult.

According to the MWS, just think about our own  experience.  How  do  things
appear to us? We do not question those appearances. We  just  take  them  as
they are, that that is how  these  objects  are  in  reality.  Basically  we
accept what appears to us. That is how the object exists. There  is  nothing
beyond what appears to us. We take that to be the final  object,  the  final
reality, or in philosophical language, the final  mode  of  abiding  of  the
object.

According to the MWS, if this is how  phenomena  really  exist  in  reality,
that means that:
• the object exists in the way it appears
• the object is ultimately established
• the object is truly established

If you accept that, then you have  a  problem.  Why?  Because  if  phenomena
existed in the way they appear, they would  be  ultimately  established  and
truly established. If that is the case,  that  means  that  phenomena  would
have to exist in the perspective of an ultimate awareness.

What is this  ultimate  awareness?  It  is  the  awareness  that  posits  an
ultimate  truth.  Specifically  it  is  the   wisdom   directly   perceiving
emptiness. If phenomena existed in the way that they appear, in short,  they
would have to exist in the perspective of  the  wisdom  directly  perceiving
emptiness.

So, according to the MWS,  when  they  think  it  through,  they  said  that
phenomena  are  not  truly  established,  phenomena   are   not   ultimately
established. This is just the general position  of  the  MWS.  In  the  MWS,
there are two divisions. The ultimate or the highest view  is  that  of  the
CMWS. Their explanation is even subtler. According to the final view of  the
highest school, the CMWS asserts that everything  is  mere  name  and  their
existence is merely imputed by mind.

I hope what I have said today might  be  of  benefit.  It  is  natural  that
people may wonder why we are  studying  all  this.  You  feel  disconnected,
right?  Why  must  we  learn  about  the  selflessness   of   persons,   the
selflessness of phenomena, and so forth?

I hope what I said today might be helpful. But you have to think it  through
again. Go through that process from the beginning and  try  to  relate  what
you are studying to your own mind. When we say  we  meditate,  what  are  we
meditating on? Meditation basically means going through  our  own  mind.  We
have to do it by ourselves with our own power.  Think  along  the  lines  of
what I have talked about today, starting from the  beginning,  and  checking
it against your own experience.

In order for us to be attached or upset, does the “I” have to come into  the
picture or not? When the “I” comes into the picture, how  does  it  lead  to
our emotional involvement, how does it lead to anger and attachment?

Then think about how phenomena other than the “I” appear to  us?  When  they
appear to us as pleasant or unpleasant, how do we get emotionally  involved?
When we are emotionally involved, do we get upset or do we get attached?  If
we are able to  counteract  that  kind  of  grasping,  will  it  lead  to  a
reduction in our afflictions? These are some of the things that we  have  to
think about for ourselves. When we say meditate, this  is  meditation.  What
else is there?

For now, if you can just think about what  I  said  today,  it  is  like  an
outline, something for you to think about and to meditate on  your  own.  Do
your own discovery.

So far, in terms of the selflessness  of  phenomena,  we  have  only  talked
about the emptiness of subject and object as different  entities.  Basically
there is no external object and everything is the projection  of  the  mind.
That is relatively straightforward and quite easy.
What about the other aspects of the MOS? For example, how phenomena  do  not
exist as the natural bases of engagement or referent of names? Even just  to
say that, even just to  explain  that,  it  is  so  difficult.  So  this  is
something I will do in the next lesson. I will try.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong
