Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L1 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.030771
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson; April 2005. Copyright: Glen Svensson. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tsong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 1                        Date: 19th February 2013

As said by Thethe saviourr Nagarjuna said, : “Through  the  accumulation  of
both the collections of  method  and  wisdom,  one  will  achieves  the  two
enlightened bodies,  - the Ttruth bBody and the  fForm  bBody.”.  The  final
objects of attainment of the Mahayana path are the  two  enlightened  bodies
of the Buddha - the Truth Body and  the  Form  Body.  The  final  object  of
attainment of the Mahayana path is  enlightenment  in  which  the  state  of
existence is the unification of the tTruth bBody and  the  fForm  bBody.  In
order to achieve this state of existence, that is,  -the unification of  the
tTruth bBody and the fForm bBody,  -one has to create the causes  for  doing
so..  AsAs  said earlier by Nagarjuna said, one has to  accumulate  the  two
collections:  - the collection of merit and the collection of wisdom.

In order to engage in the cultivation practice of a path  whereby  there  is
anthe  accumulation of both tthe collections of merit and the wisdom,  one’s
practice must be founded on an correct  understanding  of  what  constitutes
reality. ies is; Iin technical philosophical er language, one must  have  an
understanding of what the basis is. Specifically, Here we  are  specifically
talking about the correct understanding of the two truths:
• In order to be able to accumulate the  collection  of  wisdom,   one  must
  have a thorough understanding of the presentation of the ultimate truth.
• In order to be able to accumulate the collection of merit,  one must  have
  an understanding of the presentation of the conventional truth.
This is very important.
In essence, in order to achieve the two enlightened bodies, the  Truth  Body
and the Form Body, one must cultivates the path  which  unifies  the  method
and wisdom. In order to practice correctly the method and wisdom aspects  of
the path, one must  have  correct  understanding  of  the  basis  i.e.  what
constitutes the reality,  specifically  the  two  truths:  the  conventional
truth and ultimate truth. This is very important.
It is for this reason that  we  are  studying  the  subject  of  tTenets  is
studied. When we study  the  Ttenets,  we  are  trying  to  understand  what
constitutes reality, ies -both  the  conventional  truth  and  the  ultimate
truth.

The final view of the two truths is in accordance with the  presentation  of
the highest tenets, the Consequence Middle Way sSchool. Why then
Why do we need to  study the lower tenets of the lower schools? Because  aAn
understanding of the lower tenets will make us appreciate  and  be  able  to
understand better on  the ultimate presentation of these two truths.

Why must we have a better understanding of the conventional truth?  We  need
to understand better the the conventional truth  in  order  to  be  able  to
accumulate the collection of merit, i.e.,  i.e.to  be able to engage in  the
method aspect of the path.

As long  as  a  the  phenomenon  in  question  in  question  is  a  composed
phenomenon, its existence is dependent on causes  and  conditions.  Composed
phenomena arise from causes and conditions;  in  fact  from  the  gathering,
coming together,  and coming together  and  interplay  of  many  causes  and
conditions.

For example, in order for a sprout to  arise,  many  causes  and  conditions
must come together.  i.e. Wwe need to have  the  seed,  water,  fertiliszer,
the correct temperature,  and so forth. It is not as  if  that  one  or  two
conditions are more important than the others. All the necessary causes  and
conditions must come together. Then aAs soon as thee  necessary  causes  and
conditions come together, then we get the result,   -  the  sprout.  In  the
case of the production of  the  sprout,  we  can  see  that  the  sprout  is
dependently- arisen, that  and iits existence is due to the coming  together
of the necessary causes and conditions that were mentioned earlier.


Here we are talking about dependent- arising  on  the  level  of  causality,
i.e.,  i.e. on the level of causes and conditions.

If you can remember what we had studied in the previous  module  on  (Lorig,
for  a  )  on  how  a  consciousness,  for  example,  for  example,  an  eye
consciousness apprehending blue, to be is generated, three  conditions  must
be present:
1. The observed object condition
2. The uncommon empowering condition
3. The immediately preceding condition
Only when these three conditions come together can ,  an  eye  consciousness
apprehending blue be is generated.

When  the  causes  for  the  production  of  a  particular  phenomenon  come
together, then that phenomenon will arise. This is the result of the  coming
together of the causes and conditions.  This  is  an  irreversible  process.
and Wwe cannot do anything about it because when the causes  and  conditions
come together, they it will have their  corresponding effects.

In order for any composed phenomena to arise, all the causes and  conditions
must come together. If any of the required causes for production is  missing
- , even  just  one  or  two  conditions  -  are  missing  thate  particular
phenomenon will not arise. No one body can do  anything  about  thatit.  Not
even  the  numberless  buddhas  and  bodhisattvas  who  have  the  limitless
qualities and powers.

We all want realiszations to arise in our mind, ; be  it  a   big  or  small
realiszation. However, in order for any realiszation to arise in  our  mind,
the necessary  causes  and  conditions  must  come  together.  ;  Ootherwise
realiszations will not arise. So Iif we want realiszations,   then  we  have
to gather ensure that all the  necessary  causes  and  conditions  for  them
realization to arise. S specifically we have to understand  the  instruction
of our teachers correctly.  The  instructions  that  we  received  from  our
teachers have to hit the mark.  i.e. exactly as it is intended.

It also depends on how we go about accumulating merits and  how  we  perform
the purification practices,  i.e.,  whether our  practices  of  accumulating
merit and purifying our mind of obscurations also do hit the marks.

When If all these conditions are fulfilled – i.e.,   such  as  understanding
correctly  the teacher’s instructions then the instruction  that  will  will
make an iimpact on the mind and hit the mark, and our . The  same  goes  for
accumulation of merit and ng merits and  the  ppurification  practices  also
hitting the mark - . oOnly then will the desired realiszations will occur.

Whether If you think about how the instructions of the guru can actually  be
effective for your the mind, move your heart,  and hit  the  mark,  I  guess
that it boils down to whether you  have  devotion  towards  that  particular
guru or not or not.  When If one has single-pointed devotion  and  faith  in
the spiritual guru, even just by receiving a single piece piece of advice  ,
it will touch the heart. For some Some people, that alone  can  be  a  life-
changing experience.  just change like that  for  life.  It  boils  down  to
having faith and devotion.

When If you does  not have that such kind of devotion and  place  the  trust
in the guru from whom that you have received the instructions and  teachings
from, even if he were to teaches you  the entire Tengyur (all the  collected
teachings of the Buddha) to you and confer upon give you  many  initiations,
perhaps those ese instructions or initiations may not  have  any  impact  on
your mind and may does not move your heart at all.

One of If you look at the major outlines  of  the  Stages  of  the  Path  to
Enlightenment, (the Lam-rim Chen-mo,), one of the outlines  states  that  is
“the root of the path is , correct devotion to the virtuous friend.”   After
you have relied upon him, you then undertake that is  the  proper  graduated
training, i.e., the  that you undertake after you have relied upon him.  The
proper graduated training that you should undertake after  you  have  relied
on  him  is,  basically  the  entire  lam-rim  Lamrim,  starting  from   the
contemplation of the human  life  of  leisure  and  opportunity  up  to  the
achievement of enlightenment. All these  topics   fall  under  the  outline,
section “T‘the stages of  how  to  train  the  mind  after  relying  on  the
guru.”proper graduated training you undertake after  having  relied  on  the
guru”  and Tthis comes after the first outline,  “Tthe  root  of  the  path:
The way to rely on a spiritual teacher, correct  devotion  to  the  virtuous
friend.”

What does this indicates? This shows very clearly that if you want  all  the
realiszations that I have mentioned,   starting  from  an  understanding  of
this e human life of leisure  and  opportunity  up  to  the  achievement  of
enlightenment, it  is dependent on faith in the virtuous friend  or  /gguru.
Without that kind of devotion and faith,  then all those  realiszations  and
experiences will not arise. This is the implication.

This is my personal experience.  and I guess Aall of you can  look  at  your
own experiences. It  is  quite  an  evidentce  that  when  we  received  the
instructions or teachings from the virtuous friend/  guru  with  a  mind  of
faith,  particularly,   with  single-pointed  devotion,  even  having   just
hearing d a few couple of sentences will have a profound impact on the  mind
and move the heart. That is very clear.

Going back to the final object of  attainment  of  the  Mahayana  path,  our
final goal is the achievement of the two bodies,  -  the  tTruth  bBody  and
the  fForm  bBody.  The  achievement  of  these  two  bodies  is  completely
dependent on the generating all the realiszations of the path. In  order  to
generate all the realiszations of the path,  we need  to  ensure  that   all
the necessary causes and conditions for generating these  realiszations   to
come together. For that reason, therefore,  we need an understanding of  the
conventional  aspect  facet  of  reality,  ;   the   presentation   of   the
conventional  truth.  Therefore  we  need  an  understanding  of  dependent-
arising at the level of causality.

There are different levels of subtleeties with regards  to  the  meaning  of
dependent- arising. At the The obvious coarse level,  that we talk about  is
dependent- arising on the level  of  causality,   such  as  that  an  effect
depends on its the causes. It is through  an  understanding  of  the  coarse
meaning of dependent- arising that we come to understand what is  beneficial
and what is non-beneficial, what is virtuous and what is non-virtuous,   and
what   should   be   cultivated   or   adopted   and    what    should    be
abandoned.discarded.

If we were to  If we  just  talk  about  emptiness  right  from  the  onset,
beginning with statements such as  “Eeverything  is  empty.  ,  Tthings  are
empty of inherent existencet,”” then it would be difficult for us to  engage
in any meaningful practice of abandoning of what  is  to  be  abandoned  and
cultivating of what is to be cultivated.


But when one If one has the proper understanding of  dependent-  arising  on
the level of causality,  then our faith in karma  and the law of  cause  and
effect will increase.  With thate understanding  of  dependent-  arising  on
the level of causality, it will assist and help us in our  practice  of  the
cultivation  of  love,   and  compassion,   and  the  cultivation   of   the
altruistic intention. ; Llikewise this also applies to our  the practice  of
the  perfections.

Many of you may have heard of this before.  Je  Rinpoche,  Lama  Tsongkhapa,
once asked Manjushri, : “What is the quickest possible way to  realisze  the
subtle meaning of dependent- arising,   i.e.,   to  actualisze  the  correct
view of reality, emptiness?”

ies - emptiness.  MManjushri repliedsaid:,  “You need to do There are  three
things you need to do::-
1. Makede heartfelt request to the guru who  is   inseparable  from  youthre
   meditational deity.
2. Strive in the accumulation of merit and purify the mind of obscurations.
3. Study and analysze the great treatises.”

When If you think about of what Manjushri’s reply,   had  said,  essentially
it means that:
1. You need faith.
2. You need a lot of merit.
3. You need to purify the mind of obscurations because of  the  immeasurable
   amount of negativities obscuring the mind.
4. You have to put in effort to study, learning,   and  thinking  about  the
   meaning of the teachings.


In order for us to realisze the ultimate nature of reality, ies  -emptiness,
- then all these causes and conditions must come together.  We  cannot  have
do one and then leave out the others.

We are here to learn about the two facets of reality: ies:the   conventional
truth and the ultimate truth. What we unraveling?   We  are  unravelling  in
our mind the meaning of  dependent- arising at on all  its  levels,  ;  from
the coarse level to  its  the  most  subtlest   level:   starting  with  the
dependent- arising at  the  level  of  causality,  followed  by   dependent-
arising in terms of dependence on parts,t* and  the  dependent-  arising  in
its  the  subtlest  most  subtle  form,   of  how  things  are   dependently
designated.

Through the understanding of these facets  of  reality,ies,   one  comes  to
have a very clear understanding of what we are supposed to abandon and  what
we should be cultivating. Therefore, we should keep this in our mind   right
from the very beginning.  of

W why are we are studying this text? .  Of course it  is  for  the  goal  as
mentioned earlier - ; ultimately, it is   to  achieve  the  two  enlightened
bodies, to achieve - enlightenment. In order for us to do that, we  need  to
have a correct understanding of the  different  facets  of  realityies.  For
that purpose, we will spend times looking into  this  text.  So  wWe  should
generate this type of motivation right from  the  beginning   based  on  our
understanding of the reasons for studying this text.  all  these.   Then  we
should practisce with enthusiasm, with joy,  and with happiness.

We must be aware that during in the course of  such  an  undertaking,  doing
something like this, sometimes we will  experience  problems  and  obstacles
such as having difficulties in our work, we  may  suddenly  fall  get  sick,
and so forth. These things will do happen. When these things  occur,  happen
then it is very important to make heartfelt requests  to  the  guru  who  is
inseparable from one’s deity.


We also need to strive as much as possible in the practices of  accumulating
merits and purification ying the negativities and  obscurations  because  we
have so much negativities and obscurations. Even though  we  strive  in  our
sto studies, y but we may find the textit difficult to understand.  Then  we
have  to  work  at  taming  the  different  layers   of   obscurations   and
negativities.

At the same time,  we have to continuously reading  the  text  and  thinking
about it. From our side, we need to put effort into  for this.

The subject matter that we are going to dealing   with  is  quite  difficult
and is challenging, but if we were to get discouraged right  from  the  very
beginning,  just because we find it  difficult,   then  nothing  will  work.
Basically Wewe are the ones who are just stopping ourselves  from  learning.
out ourselves.

For those who really want to learn about tenTenets, youwe should  have  this
attitude,  “I will try my best. No matter how hard it is, I will put in  the
time and effort.”.

In order to engage in the practice of the person  of  great  capacity,  ies,
one has to a transition from the practices that are shared with  the  person
of small and medium capacities. We do not just make a jump but Wwe  have  to
move forward step by step. This is just talking about sutra.

After that one then is in the transitions  from the sutra  to  tantra.  Many
of you may have heard that tantra is the a swift path to enlightenment.  But
what makes it possible to  achieve  enlightenment  so  quickly  through  the
practice of tantra? One of the main deciding  factors  that  determines   of
whether tantra can be is a quick path  to  enlightenment  or  not  is  one’s
practice of guru devotion. That is very important in tantra  practice.   and
Tthat is where you have the practice of guru yoga. When If you  think  about
it and analysze why tantra is such a quick path  to  enlightenment,  it  all
these boils down to the practice of guru yoga.

You may also have also heard of the nNoble eEightfold pPath. The  first  one
is right view. Why is does right view is the first of the nNoble  eEightfold
pPath? This implies that whatever we do,  including  cultivating  the  paths
and so forth, is done on the basis of an understanding of what  reality  ies
is. That is the implication. In the technical philosophical language, it  is
the understanding of the basis. In layman’s language,  English,  it  is  the
understanding of what constitutes the reality. ties.

In the context of our the philosophical studies  hy  here,  we  are  talking
about the two truths - the two  facets  of  realit.ies.  When  we  have  the
correct understanding of these  two  facets  of  reality,  ies  -  both  the
conventional truth and the ultimate truth, - then whatever understanding  we
have and our judgement of  of  things  and  events,  our  judgment  and  our
understanding will always be correct because our understanding and  judgment
and understanding areis founded  on  reality.  ies  and  not  based  on  day
dreaming. We just understand realityies as  it  is.  Based  on  thate  right
view, i.e., which is the correct understanding of what constitutes  reality,
ies then our whatever thoughts  and   or  opinions  we  may  have  would  be
correct because they will be it is founded on  reality.  ies.  We  are  just
accepting an understanding of the situation as it is.

So Wwith that that kind of right view, one would also  tend  to  have  right
speech. Based on the understanding of what  constitutes  reality,  ies  then
our the speech, in terms of its the presentation and the meaning,  would  be
correct. It will be  - right speech.

Similarly, there will  be  right  action.  So  Wwith  right  view,  whatever
actions one undertakes would be correct.

 Therefore Bbased on right  view,  when  one  has  right  speech  and  right
action, then there will be right livelihood,  i.e., we will be  to  be  able
to live our the life correctly and  especially lliveing a virtuous life.

Similarly, Oone would also have a right effort. Whether  it  is  the  effort
applied to of one’s practice or whatever one undertakes does  in  life,  one
will have right effort.

One also has right mindfulness. So Wwhen  we  have  some  control  over  our
body, speech,  and mind, then it is much  easier  to  have  mindfulness  and
introspection.

With proper mindfulness  and  introspection,  then  it  is  much  easier  to
develop concentration. This ere is where right concentration comes in.

To summarisze, having a correct understanding of  the  different  facets  of
reality ies is become very important. So Iin order to have  the  right  view
of reality, ies we need to have an understanding of the different facets  of
reality.ies.    In  this  case,  we  are  referring  to  talking  about  the
conventional facet -the conventional truth. By In understanding of what  the
conventional truths are, then one has to understands dependent-  arising  on
the level of causality, ; how causes and conditions must come  together  for
athe desired effect to arise.

Based on  thate  correct  understanding  of  the  e  conventional  facet  of
realityies,  then one will be able to gradually cultivates and acquires  the
right speech and so forth, culminating in  the  achievement  of  achievement
ofright  concentration.

From this short discussion,  you can see that why  it  is  so  important  to
study, to learn, and to think about the teachings. So lLeearning,  studying,
hearing,  and reflection are very important because there  are  many  people
who do not see the value of  such  activities.  In  this  world,  there  are
mlearning and studying. Many Buddhists in this worldwho   think  that  there
is no need to study so much. Thatis is a big mistake.

As I have said before,  and when if we think about it,  the  more  we  know,
the greater the depth of our reflection. The more teachings we we have  hear
and d the teaching, the more we have study,  ied,  then  the  depth  of  our
reflection  will  increases  because  the  depth  of   our   reflection   is
commensurate with the  depth  of  our  learning.   and  Tthe  depth  of  our
meditation is in turn commensurate with the  depth  of  our  reflection.  So
Ffrom this,   you  can  see  that  how  important  are  learning,  studying,
thinking and so forth are. So you can see the  importance  of  learning  and
reflection.

Having said this, it is not that learning and  reflection  areis  not  easy.
They are challenging.  and not easy. There will be always  be   difficulties
but you need to will see the point of how important they are. Then  eit  is.
Even when with difficulties arise, you will be willing to put up  with  them
it and trying your best to overcome them to get on with it because you  have
seen its the importance of learning and reflection. .  This  advice  is  for
those who really want to learn.

Another thing to note is that this is a long- term  undertaking.  thing.  We
need to accumulate our understanding over time because we need  to  have  an
extensive knowledge. As it takes time,  ttherefore we need  to  put  in  the
time. It is not going to be accomplished just by coming to  class  oncee  or
twice,  and thinking “I will come and then I will not come.”  Then  Nnothing
will happen when you do that.

If you really want to learn, it is one important thing is that you must  try
your best not to miss the classes. You  must  come  to  class  continuously.
That is very important. Continuity is very important.


Many causes and conditions need to come be put together. On  top  of  coming
to  class  uninterruptedly,  reading  the  text  and  discussions  are  also
important.

When If we are  able to gather together all  the  abovementioned  conditions
together, even if you do not understand everything, definitely you will  get
something out of your studies.

If there is nothing happens even  after you have tried to  gather  with  all
these conditions coming together,  then we will see what needs to be done.

But if bBefore even  even  attempting  to  gather  put  together  all  these
causes and conditions - , if you do not n’t come to classes, you do not  n’t
read the text, you do not thinking about  and analysze the  teachings,   and
you do nnot comeing to for the discussions -  and you come to tell  me  that
you don’t understand,  then what am  I am gogoing to do?.

 You Llook at the external world. In order for things  and  events  to  come
about, back Going back to our the example of the sprout, even even just  for
athe sprout  to  arise,  the  necessary  causes  and  conditions  must  come
together. It is exactly the same thing for the internal world of  the  mind.
In order for the positive mental states of realiszations and experiences  to
arise, we require all the necessary conditions  to  come  together.  If  you
have understoodand what I have said today, then as much as possible  put  in
your your time and effort and try your best.

Please bring your text on the coming lesson as we will start.

*
   1. Dependent arising at the level of causality.
   2. Dependent arising at the level of dependently on parts (Because things
      made up from parts. Whole verses parts)
   3. Dependent arising at the level of dependently designated












Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng

Edited by Cecilia Tsong

Checked by Shirley Soh


