Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L11 upload.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.016657
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 11                          Date: 4th April 2013

We had looked at the two truths in accordance with the Sutra School (SS).

According to the SS, a conventional truth is a phenomenon  that  is  posited
by a conceptuality imputing it. Examples  of  conventional  truth  would  be
uncompounded space and true cessation:
• Uncompounded space is a mere negation of obstructive contact.
• True cessation is the factor of abandonment of the afflictions.
Uncompounded space and true cessation are merely imputed  by  conceptuality.
There is nothing more to these phenomena other than that.

Any other phenomenon whose existence cannot be  posited  by  the  conceptual
mind imputing it is an ultimate truth. According to  this  school,  examples
of ultimate truths would be a person, a vase, a pillar, and  so  forth.  The
existence of these objects cannot be posited  by  a  conceptuality  imputing
them.

According to the SS, a vase is  an  ultimate  truth.  This  means  that  the
vase’s existence cannot be posited merely by a conceptual mind imputing  it.
Rather the  existence  of  a  vase  can  only  be  posited  by  an  ultimate
awareness. The ultimate awareness here, in the case  of  the  vase,  is  the
direct valid cogniser apprehending vase.

What is it that posits the existence of the vase? That mind  has  to  be  an
ultimate awareness, in this  case,  a  direct  valid  cogniser  apprehending
vase. To this ultimate awareness, the way in which the vase exists  and  the
way it appears are in accord. According to this school,  just  as  the  vase
appears to exist by way of its own character, this is how  the  vase  exists
in reality.

In this school:
• An ultimate truth has to be posited by an ultimate awareness.
• A conventional truth cannot be posited by an ultimate  awareness.  It  has
  to be posited by a conventional awareness.
    o A conventional truth is posited by a conventional awareness.
    o A conventional awareness refers to a conceptual consciousness.
    o A conceptual consciousness can only posit conventional truths.
    o A conceptual consciousness is not  an  ultimate  awareness.  It  is  a
      conventional awareness.


If we think about the two truths in accordance with the definitions of  this
school, if the phenomenon in question, by nature from its own side, has  the
potential to produce an effect, it would be an ultimate truth. If not,  then
it would be a conventional truth:
• An ultimate truth has to be a composed phenomenon, a functional thing.
• A conventional truth has to be an uncomposed phenomenon.


                             1 Mind Only School


   The explanation of the Mind  Only  School  (Skt.  Cittamatra)  has  seven
   outlines, as before.

   1  Definition

   The definition of a Proponent of Mind Only is: a person propounding Great
   Vehicle tenets who does not accept external objects but does assert truly
   existent self-cognizers.

   Proponent of Mind Only (Skt. Cittamatrin), Proponent of  Cognition  (Skt.
   Vijnaptivadin), and Yogic Practitioner (Skt.  Yogacarin)  are  equivalent
   (Page 14)

You will remember that the GES and the  SS  both  assert  truly  established
external objects.

Now we have the MOS. The Proponents of Mind  Only  do  not  assert  external
objects but they do assert self-knowers, just like the Proponents of  Sutra.
On top of asserting self-knowers, the  MOS  asserts  that  self-knowers  are
truly existent.

|                             |GES        |SS           |MOS          |
|Asserts external objects     |Yes        |Yes          |No           |
|Asserts self-knowers         |No         |Yes          |Yes          |

What  exactly  is  an  external  object?  The  Proponents  of  Sutra  assert
directionally partless particles as the basis of  aggregation.  Through  the
aggregation of these particles, a gross object is  formed  that  becomes  an
object that is apprehended  by  a  sense  consciousness.  According  to  the
Proponents of Sutra, first, there must be an object, in this case,  a  gross
object or form. Only then can you have a  sense  consciousness  apprehending
it. The object comes before the subject apprehending it.  This  is  how  the
Proponents of Sutra assert that a sense consciousness apprehending  form  is
generated, i.e., it is  generated  after  the  form  itself  has  come  into
existence. A gross form comes into  existence  through  the  aggregation  of
directionally partless  particles.  This  is  the  meaning  of  an  external
object.

The Proponents of Mind Only differ greatly in  this  respect.  They  do  not
assert that first, you must have such an object existing out there and  only
then  do  you  have  the  consciousness  apprehending  it.   Therefore   the
Proponents of Mind Only, the Cittamatrins, do not accept that there is  such
a thing as an external form. There is form but it is not an  external  form.
What is form? It is none other than that which is of the  same  entity  with
the consciousness.

Khen Rinpoche: This is quite difficult to understand. Even  for  myself.  It
is not easy. It is a little complicated to explain. Sometimes it looks  like
I understand. Sometimes I also don’t understand.

We are now  talking  about  the  MOS.  The  Proponents  of  Mind  Only,  the
Cittamatrins, assert form but they do not assert that there is a  form  that
is outside the mind, i.e., that is of a different nature or entity from  the
mind. There is no external form, so to speak.

For them how does form exist? The form that they posit is a  form  that  has
the same entity as consciousness. According to the Proponents of Mind  Only,
form is none other than the  factor  of  appearance  that  appears  to  that
consciousness as form. There is no external form, i.e., a form that is of  a
different entity from the mind. The MOS does assert form  but  what  exactly
is it according to this school? According to the MOS, it is none other  than
the factor of appearances to the consciousness. Everything is in the  entity
of mind.

Illustrations that can help us understand this:
• Dream appearances: In a dream, there are  all  kind  of  appearances,  but
  those appearances in the dream are not outside of the mind. They  are  not
  separate from the dream consciousness. They are essentially mind too.
• The appearance of two moons: While in reality  there  is  only  one  moon,
  nevertheless there is the appearance of two moons  to  some  people.  That
  appearance is  not  something  that  exists  outside  of  the  mind.  That
  appearance is essentially an appearance to the mind.
• The appearance of a cup of liquid: When we see a cup of  liquid,  we  have
  the appearance of water. That appearance of water is just  the  factor  of
  appearance to the mind. There isn’t any external water out there  that  is
  of a different entity from the mind. There isn’t  a  phenomenon  that  can
  exist without depending on the mind. There are no external objects.
• It is only through the force of karma that we see there is the  appearance
  of water. According to the MOS, the appearance of water is none other than
  the factor of appearance.  There  is  no  external  water  that  is  of  a
  different entity from the mind. When a hungry ghost sees the same  cup  of
  liquid, they do not have the appearance of water. They see pus.

The MOS uses this example to prove that there are no external  objects  that
are of a different or separate entity from the mind. Because  of  that,  due
to different imprints, different beings see different things.  There  is  no
external water. What we see as water appears as nectar  to  the  gods.  That
same cup of liquid appears as molten iron to the hell beings.

When we think about this example—one cup of liquid  appearing  as  different
things to different beings—we then have to ask, “What exactly is this  water
that is appearing, according to the perspective of the  MOS?”  What  we  can
say about the water is that it is just a factor of appearance. The water  is
an appearance to the mind. There is no external water out there

We see our own home as pleasant. We see our own body as attractive.  Perhaps
we also think that our own clothing is attractive. This is what we  see,  “I
have a nice house, a nice body, a nice dress.” We have these appearances  of
a nice house, a nice body, and nice possessions. While  we  may  have  these
nice appearances, according to the MOS, there really isn’t  the  nice  house
that is appearing to us. It does not exist externally as a different  entity
from the mind. When the gods look at the house or the  body  that  we  have,
what they see is disgusting to them.

A pigsty does not have a bedroom or living room. The pigs do  everything  in
one area. That is what pigs do, but they are  quite  happy  with  that.  But
when we look at a pigsty, it is disgusting. We wouldn’t want to live  there.
We  can’t  even  stand  the  smell.  The  way  the  gods  look  at  us,  our
possessions, and our belongings is similar to how we as human beings  regard
the pigsty.

This is not straightforward. It is complicated.

We have an appearance of a nice house, a nice body. For  us,  this  is  what
exists.  You cannot say they don’t exist. They exist. It is the  same  thing
for the pigs.  There is an appearance of a nice  little  pigsty.  We  cannot
say the pigsty is not nice. To the pig, it exists  as  a  nice  pigsty.   We
cannot say that the pigs are  completely  mistaken  and  that  we  are  100%
correct.

Like the cup of liquid that appears as water to a human being and as pus  to
a hungry ghost, you cannot say that what appears to a human being  as  water
is the only truth. For us, what appears as water exists as  water.  This  is
how we regard it. But that is not the  only  truth  because,  for  a  hungry
ghost, they see the water as pus. To them, this  is  what  exists.  So  what
exists as pus or what exists as water is  none  other  than  the  factor  of
appearance to a hungry ghost and a human being respectively.

The appearance of the cup of liquid as water to a human being is due to  the
ripening of karma. Likewise when the hungry ghost sees the cup of liquid  as
pus, that appearance is also due to the ripening of a particular  karma.  In
that sense, both appearances are unmistaken.

We can talk about one individual,  for  example,  a  person.  That  person’s
enemy has a certain view of that person. That person’s friend would  have  a
different view from the enemy. Someone  who  is  a  stranger  would  have  a
completely different view of that person. This one  person  is  thus  viewed
differently by three different people. It is not as if there  are  different
objects. The same object is viewed differently by  three  different  people.
What this means is that there is no external enemy. How the enemy exists  is
that which appears to our mind.

Based on these reasons, the MOS does not accept external objects.  To  them,
external objects do not exist and everything that exists is  in  the  nature
of the mind. According to the MOS, everything arises from the  awakening  of
the latencies or imprints. When the  imprints  ripen,  one  would  have  all
these different appearances of different phenomena.  These  are  essentially
the appearances of the mind.

According to MOS, the mind is truly existent and  that  would  also  make  a
self-knower truly existent.

The Proponents of Mind Only assert  that  form  and  the  eye  consciousness
apprehending form are produced simultaneously. The production is not  serial
but simultaneous. That means both the object that  is  apprehended  and  the
subject apprehending it comes into being at the same time.

The MOS does  not  assert  any  object  that  is  separate  from  the  mind.
Everything is none other than in the nature of mind.
If everything is none other than the  mind  itself,  how  do  you  posit  an
object that is apprehended by the mind? There has to be  an  object  of  the
consciousness. How does the MOS explain this?

The Proponents of Mind Only say, “It  is  not  a  problem.”  They  give  the
example of  an illusionist conjuring up different kinds of  illusions,  such
as an illusory elephant. Although there is the appearance  of  an  elephant,
there isn’t a real elephant out there. That appearance  of  an  elephant  is
just a factor of appearance.

Nevertheless when this illusory elephant is conjured  up,  there  can  be  a
consciousness apprehending it. In this  case  it  is  an  eye  consciousness
apprehending the illusory elephant.  What  exactly  then  is  that  illusory
elephant? It  is  just  an  appearance  to  the  mind.  Although  it  is  an
appearance to the mind, nevertheless an eye  consciousness  apprehending  it
is being generated.

Another qualm is this: If external objects do not exist,  how  do  the  main
minds and the mental factors arise?

Again, the MOS says, “No  problem.”  They  use  the  example  of  a  mirage.
Although there is a mirage appearing as water, there is no real  mirage  out
there other than what is appearing to the mind.

The Proponents of Mind Only assert that external objects do not  exist.  But
for us, we believe that there are external objects. There is the  appearance
of external objects and we believe in it. If the MOS says that there are  no
external objects, how do  they  account  for  this  appearance  of  external
objects?

The MOS says that the appearance of external objects  is  due  to  the  mind
being polluted by the latencies of ignorance. According to  the  MOS,  there
are no external  objects,  but  due  to  the  mind  being  polluted  by  the
latencies of ignorance, this mistake arises.

Although there are no external objects, due to the latencies  of  ignorance,
external objects appear to the mind. This example  comes  from  the  classic
texts: the vision of falling hairs. There  is  this  appearance  of  falling
hairs when in reality there are no falling hairs. Although in reality  there
is no such thing but there is still such an appearance.

Likewise, according to the MOS, while there aren’t any external objects,  it
doesn’t mean that you cannot have the appearance  of  external  objects.  It
happens. Basically it is a mistake. This  is  something  we  have  to  think
about over and over again: What do the Cittamatrins, the Proponents  of  the
MOS, mean when they  say  that  there  are  no  external  objects  and  that
everything is in the nature of mind? What does that mean, “Everything is  in
the nature of mind”?

All the different  examples  that  I  mentioned  earlier  are  to  help  you
understand this crucial position of the MOS.

Just think  of  the  example  of  form:  how  form  appears  differently  to
different beings. For the MOS, this means that everything is the  appearance
of the mind. If there is an external form that is of a separate entity  from
the mind, then everyone who looks at it should see the same thing.

Way of asserting objects
When the MOS talks about the basis—about reality, about what exists—it  does
so in terms of the two truths:
1. Ultimate truths
2. Conventional truths

There is also a classification of phenomena, i.e., everything  that  exists,
into one of the three natures:
1. Other-powered natures
2. Thoroughly established natures
3. Imputational natures[1]

Other-powered natures
In this context, other-powered natures refer to composed phenomena. Why  are
composed  phenomena  other-powered  natures?  This   is   because   composed
phenomena/impermanent phenomena/functioning things cannot  come  into  being
by depending on themselves. They are not  self-powered.  Composed  phenomena
are created and they come into being by depending on causes and  conditions.
Therefore they are other-powered.

In connection with the MOS’s explanation of other-powered natures, you  have
to know that some proponents of the MOS assert the collections of the  eight
consciousnesses. On top of the usual six—the five sense consciousnesses  and
one mental consciousness—they add two more: the afflicted consciousness  and
the mind-basis-of-all.[2]

The mind-basis-of-all is the repository or holder of  all  the  imprints  or
predispositions that are deposited  there.  Through  the  awakening  of  the
imprints that are planted on the mind-basis-of-all, composed phenomena  come
into existence. This is how composed phenomena are other-powered.

Composed phenomena cannot exist beyond the very first moment that they  come
into being. They can remain only for as long as that first moment when  they
come into being.  They  disintegrate  in  the  very  next  moment.  Composed
phenomena do not have  the  power  to  remain  for  more  than  one  moment.
Therefore they are other-powered.

In short, other-powered natures here refer to composed phenomena.  They  are
under the power or the control of their own causes.

Thoroughly established natures

|Thoroughly Established Natures                                   |
|(synonymous with emptiness and ultimate truth)                   |
|Emptiness of a self-sufficient       |Selflessness of persons    |
|substantially existent person        |                           |
|Emptiness of the object and subject  |Selflessness of phenomena  |
|that are of different entities       |                           |


Why are they called thoroughly established natures?  This  is  because  they
will never change their aspect into  something  else.  They  are  thoroughly
established as they are.  I  am  not  talking  about  the  definition  of  a
thoroughly established nature. I am only talking about its etymology.

Imputational natures
Imputational natures are those phenomena that are imputed by the  conceptual
consciousness apprehending them. You  could  say  imputational  natures  are
those phenomena that are established as merely imputed by conceptuality.

An illustration of an  imputational  nature  would  be  uncompounded  space.
Uncompounded space is an  imputational  nature  because  uncompounded  space
does not exist by way of its  own  character.  It  is  just  the  factor  of
superimposition by conceptuality.

These three natures are thus subsumed under the two truths:
1. Ultimate truths:
   • Thoroughly established natures
2. Conventional truths:
   • Other-powered natures
   • Imputational natures

According to the MOS:
• Thoroughly established natures and other powered  natures  are  (1)  truly
  established and (2) they exist by way of their own character
• Imputational natures are (1) not truly established and  (2)  they  do  not
  exist by way of their own character.
• All three natures are (1) inherently existent and  (2)  exist  from  their
  own side.

|        |           |Ultimately  |Truly      |Establishment |Inherent  |
|Mind    |Three      |established/|established|by way of its |existence/|
|Only    |natures    |Truly       |           |own character |Existing  |
|School  |           |existent    |           |              |from its  |
|        |           |            |           |              |own side  |
|        |Other-     |Yes         |Yes        |Yes           |Yes       |
|        |powered    |            |           |              |          |
|        |natures    |            |           |              |          |
|        |Imputationa|No          |No         |No            |Yes       |
|        |l natures  |            |           |              |          |

These are the things that you have to memorise:
• The Proponent of Mind Only does not assert  external  objects  unlike  the
  Proponent of Sutra.
• The Proponent of Mind Only asserts  self-knowers  like  the  Proponent  of
  Sutra. The MOS  specifically  asserts  that  the  self-knowers  are  truly
  existent.
• The Proponent of Mind Only posits the three natures and the two truths.

  2  Divisions

  There are two divisions:[3]
1. Mind Only True Aspectarians (Skt. Satyakaravadin) and
2. Mind Only False Aspectarians (Skt. Alikakaravadin).

  The definition of a Mind Only True Aspectarian is: a  Proponent  of  Mind
  Only who asserts  that  a  direct  perceiver  apprehending  form  in  the
  continuum of an ordinary being does not engage, polluted by the latencies
  of ignorance, in the factor of its appearance as a gross form.

  The definition of a Mind Only False Aspectarian is: a Proponent  of  Mind
  Only who asserts  that  a  direct  perceiver  apprehending  form  in  the
  continuum of an ordinary being does engage, polluted by the latencies  of
  ignorance, in the factor of its appearance as a gross form (Page 14).

True Aspectarians and False Aspectarians[4]
Suggested alternative translation by Ven Gyurme:
• The definition of a Mind Only True Aspectarian is:  a  Proponent  of  Mind
  Only who asserts that the appearance as a gross form to a direct perceiver
  apprehending form in the continuum of an ordinary being is not polluted by
  the latencies of ignorance.
• The definition of a Mind Only False Aspectarian is: a  Proponent  of  Mind
  Only who asserts that the appearance as a gross form to a direct perceiver
  apprehending form in the continuum of an ordinary being is polluted by the
  latencies of ignorance.

Both Mind Only True Aspectarians and Mind  Only  False  Aspectarians  assert
that there is an appearance as a  gross  form  to  the  sense  consciousness
apprehending it. The difference is that:
• One asserts that appearance as a gross form  to  the  sense  consciousness
  apprehending it is not polluted by latencies of ignorance whereas
• the other asserts that that appearance  as  a  gross  form  to  the  sense
  consciousness apprehending it is polluted by latencies of ignorance.

True Aspectarians
For the True Aspectarians, there is this appearance of a gross  (or  coarse)
form to the sense consciousness apprehending it. How  does  this  appearance
appear? The appearance of form  appears  distant  from  the  subject,  i.e.,
there is the  appearance of an external form.

Let us take blue as an example. There is an appearance of an external  blue.
That appearance of external blue is a result of that mind being polluted  by
latencies of ignorance.

Having said that, there is also the appearance of blue as blue that  is  not
polluted by the latencies of  ignorance.  Here  we  are  talking  about  two
different things:
• The appearance of external blue is said to be polluted  by  the  latencies
  of ignorance.
• The appearance of blue  as  blue  is  said  to  be  not  polluted  by  the
  latencies of ignorance.

Furthermore, (1) The factor of appearance  of  blue  as  blue  and  (2)  the
factor of appearance of blue as a gross (coarse)  form,  these  two  factors
are not polluted by latencies of ignorance:
• The factor of appearance of blue as blue is not polluted by  latencies  of
  ignorance because blue exists as blue.
• The factor of appearance of blue as  a  gross  form  is  not  polluted  by
  latencies of ignorance because gross form also exists.
We are only talking about the True Aspectarians now.

False Aspectarians
With regard to the factor of appearance  of  an  external  blue,  the  False
Aspectarians are the same as the  True  Aspectarians  in  saying  that  that
factor of appearance is polluted by the latencies of ignorance.

The False Aspectarians are different  from  the  True  Aspectarians  in  the
sense that they assert that (1) the factor of appearance  as  blue  as  blue
and (2) the factor of appearance of blue as a gross  form  are  polluted  by
the latencies of ignorance.

The False Aspectarians are saying that blue does not exist  in  the  way  it
appears. The factor of appearance of blue as blue does not exist in the  way
it appears. This is the difference between the False Aspectarians  and  True
Aspectarians.

|           |Factor of         |Factor of          |Factor of         |
|           |appearance as     |appearance of      |appearance as blue|
|           |external blue     |blue as blue       |as a gross form   |
|True       |Polluted by       |Not polluted by    |Not polluted by   |
|Aspectarian|latencies of      |latencies of       |latencies of      |
|s          |ignorance         |ignorance          |ignorance         |
|False      |Polluted by       |Polluted by        |Polluted by       |
|Aspectarian|latencies of      |latencies of       |latencies of      |
|s          |ignorance         |ignorance          |ignorance         |

Khen Rinpoche: That is it! If you don’t understand, ask. It is  complicated.
Sometimes I also wonder whether what I said is exactly what  it  should  be.
But I try  to  base  my  explanations  on  the  texts  and  try  to  explain
accordingly.

Question: For the True Aspectarians, are the factors of appearance  of  blue
as a gross form and  blue  as  the  term  blue,  other-powered  natures  and
conventional  truths?  For  the  False  Aspectarians,  are  the  factors  of
appearance of blue as a gross form and blue as  a  term  blue,  non-existent
imputational natures?

Answer: It seems that the True Aspectarians assert gross  form  whereas  the
False Aspectarians do not assert gross form.


   According to the True Aspectarians, even though the five sense objects  –
   forms and so forth – are not external objects they are accepted to  exist
   as gross objects.

   According to the False Aspectarians, the five sense objects –  forms  and
   so forth – are not gross objects because if they were gross objects  they
   would necessarily be external objects (Page 16).

Going by this, you can say that:
• For the True Aspectarians, the factor of appearance of  blue  as  a  gross
  object  and the factor of appearance of blue as blue can be asserted to be
  other-powered nature whereas
• for the False Aspectarians, because they  do  not  assert  gross  objects,
  therefore you cannot say that they are other-powered natures.

Question: The  imputational  natures  that  are  in  the  category  of  non-
existents are subsumed under imputational natures by way  of  term  but  are
not fully qualified conventional truths. They are  not  conventional  truths
because they are non-existents. My question is why do they put it there  and
not categorised non-existents outside the category of established base?

Answer: Earlier, when I talked about the imputational natures, I  said  that
the imputational nature is a phenomenon that comes into existence  by  being
merely imputed by a conceptual consciousness. That is the explanation of  an
imputational nature that is an existent. That is not the  definition  of  an
imputational nature per se. In  general,  an  imputational  nature  is  that
which is merely imputed by a conceptual consciousness. But whatever that  is
merely imputed by the mind does not necessarily exist.

The point here is that there are:
• Imputational natures that are  existents  would  fall  under  conventional
  truths.
• Imputational nature that are non-existents would not  fall  under  any  of
  the two truths because, in the first place, they do not exist.

Phenomena that are subsumed by the two truths have to be existents.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong




-----------------------
[1] Cutting Through Appearances, pages 260 – 264.
[2]  The  collections  of  eight  consciousnesses   are   the   five   sense
consciousnesses (eye consciousness, ear consciousness,  nose  consciousness,
tongue consciousness, and body  consciousness),  the  mental  consciousness,
the afflicted consciousness and the mind-basis-of-all.
[3]  Alternatively  they  can  be  divided  into  Followers   of   Scripture
(followers of Asanga’s Treatises on the Grounds) and Followers of  Reasoning
(followers of Dharmakirti’s Seven Treatises on Valid Cognition).
[4] Cutting Through Appearances, pages 250-259.

