Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L5 upload.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.583419
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 5                            Date: 14th March 2013

(Khen Rinpoche teaches this lesson in English)

Once I was playing a game and after I didn’t do well, there  was  a  message
from the game, “If you don’t succeed, try and try again.”  If  you  want  to
study Buddhist philosophy, of course, it is not easy but if you really  have
the wish to study, then you too need to try and try again.

Not everyone can understand  the  subject  in  the  same  way.  Everyone  is
different:  different  intelligence,  different   karma,   different   mind,
different body, and different dressing. So no one can be the same.   But  if
you put in the effort, somehow you will  learn  a  little  bit  of  Buddhist
philosophy.

With regard to learning  Buddhist  philosophy,  I  want  to  mention  again,
compared to the merit from doing 100,000 prostrations and  making  extensive
offerings to all the holy objects, I think the merit from putting in  effort
and making some time to study Buddhist philosophy will be equal to that,  if
not more.

Logically speaking, I think you gain more merit by studying or  reading  the
Buddhist teachings  especially  the  philosophical  subjects.  I  think  you
create much more merit than doing 100,000 prostrations and making  extensive
offerings. By studying, you leave positive imprints on your  mind.  In  this
way you will able to meet the Buddhadharma from life to life.  You  will  be
able to practise and meditate. In  this  way,  you  will  also  be  able  to
achieve liberation. So I think studying, putting  in  effort  into  reading,
and taking part in discussions  are  extremely  important.  As  I  mentioned
before, you have to memorise  some  of  the  words  of  these  philosophical
texts.

When you think about what everyone is doing in  this  life,  whether  it  be
doing practice or doing business, if you really look deeply,  who  are  they
doing it for? Everyone is doing it for the self, the person. So there  is  a
self, a person. Because of that, we do different things to  make  this  self
happy. Definitely the self is there. It exists. If  there  is  no  self,  we
won’t be doing all these things. It all boils down to the  fact  that  there
is a self. Because of that, there is a person. Because of that,  we  do  all
sorts of things to please this self.

So with regard to thinking about the person, the self or the  “I,”  you  are
not a philosopher. You are just an ordinary person so  you  won’t  think  so
much about the self. You do things for the self but you  don’t  think  about
what kind of self is there. Normally you won’t check that out. If your  mind
is not affected by tenets, then of course you won’t think so much about  the
self.

But now we are talking about the tenets, so  now  you  need  to  think  more
deeply about this. A self, a person, or an “I” exists. There  is  the  self,
the person, or “I” who achieves liberation. There is a self,  a  person,  or
“I” who is in samsara. Who is this person? What does this person look  like?
How  does  this  person  exist?  In  tenets,  different  philosophers  think
differently  about  how  the  person  exists.  These  philosophers  can   be
Buddhists or they can be non-Buddhists. But even Buddhist  philosophers  put
forth different tenets. There are different views with regard to  explaining
the self.

When we talked about non-Buddhists, there can be  many  different  types  of
non-Buddhists. Some non-Buddhist philosophers do not  believe  in  past  and
future lives. They believe that there is just one life. Why do they  believe
this? There are reasons for  this.  These  non-Buddhists  believe  that  the
consciousness is produced by the body, i.e., the physical body produces  the
mind or consciousness.

Let us take the example of a butter lamp and  the  light  of  the  lamp.  To
them, the mind is like the light of the lamp and  the  body  is  the  butter
lamp.

Another example: a drawing or painting carved on a rock. The  mind  is  like
the drawing that is carved on the rock. The body is the rock.

The non-Buddhists’ belief is like that. Therefore, when one dies,  the  mind
also dies. The mind does not continue on because it  depends  on  the  body.
When the body dies, the mind also dies. Everything  disappears  and  nothing
continues on. Like the drawing on the rock, when the  rock  disappears,  the
drawing that is carved on the rock can no longer  be  seen.  Therefore  they
believe that there is no future life.

It is the same when you think about this scientifically. All the  minds  and
whatever kind of feelings you may have are produced by the brain.  When  the
brain is dead, all the minds also die. It all depends on the brain.

In ancient times, some non-Buddhists  also  believed  that  when  one  dies,
everything else dies. There are no past and  future  lives,  just  this  one
life. So be happy and enjoy it  while  you  are  alive.  Some  non-Buddhists
believe that.

Some non-Buddhist philosophers also  believed  that  everything  came  about
suddenly without cause. There are no causes and  conditions  for  things  to
happen. They just happen  suddenly.  These  non-Buddhist  philosophers  gave
different examples of this. One example is the  sun  rising  suddenly.  That
happens without a cause. Another example  is  the  fact  that  water  always
flows downwards. There is no cause for that. The sharpness of a  thorn  also
came about without cause.

They gave many such examples  where  causes  were  not  needed  for  certain
things to happen. They mentioned  that  people  who  engaged  in  a  lot  of
violence and killing can have long lives. There is no cause for  that.  Also
people who are stingy and miserly  can  be  rich.  The  examples  they  gave
showed that there are no causes. They do think a lot  to  be  able  to  give
such examples. While some non-Buddhists may believe in  future  lives,  they
do not believe in causes.
Then some non-Buddhists believe in future lives but they do not  believe  in
liberation. The reason for this is that when they meditate on  calm-abiding,
they are able to reduce the delusions so that they do not manifest. As  they
meditate longer, they are able to reach the form  and  formless  realms  and
attain the peak of samsara. At the peak of samsara, it  seems  as  if  there
are no more delusions in the mind. They believe  therefore  that  they  have
achieved liberation at that time. But in  reality  they  have  not  achieved
liberation. At the time of death, they are able to see where they are  going
to be reborn in the next life, such as in the animal realm, the hell  realm,
and so forth. Immediately they develop the strong  view  that  there  is  no
liberation, that it does not exist. Some of them who were rich at  the  time
of death could see that they were going  to  be  born  poor.  They  asserted
that there were no cause for that to happen.

There are  so  many  different  philosophers  with  their  different  views,
outlooks,  and different beliefs.

For Buddhists, I guess the most important thing is how to prove  that  there
are future lives, to be able to have confidence in this in the  mind.   This
topic is not easy.  The Buddhist logic is that the mind is not  produced  by
the body. The body is not the substantial cause for the mind. For  the  non-
Buddhists they assert that the body is the cause  for  producing  the  mind,
but the Buddhists says the body is not the substantial cause but is  only  a
condition for the mind to be produced.  The  physical  body  cannot  be  the
substantial cause for the mind.

Dharmakirti, an Indian pandit and Buddhist  philosopher,  debated  with  the
non-Buddhists over this issue of the body being the  substantial  cause  for
the mind.  He said that if the body is the substantial cause for  the  mind,
it follows then that a dead body should have a mind. But  that  is  not  the
case.

Dharmakirti also said  that  one’s  wisdom  and  compassion  do  not  depend
totally on the body. If wisdom and compassion are totally dependent  on  the
body, then the wisdom of a strong man will be much greater. If a  person  is
weak, his  wisdom then must also be weak as his wisdom  and  compassion  are
dependent on the body.  Dharmakirti said that this  is  not  true.  He  said
that one’s level of compassion or intelligence does not  depend  on  whether
one’s body is strong or weak. If your body is getting stronger, it does  not
mean that your wisdom is also getting better and that you are becoming  more
intelligent. If you are getting weaker, that does not  mean  that  you  have
less compassion or that you are also  becoming  less  intelligent.  In  this
way, Dharmakirti says that  one’s  wisdom  and  compassion  do  not  totally
depend on the body.

Dharmakirti then mentioned that the substantial cause of the  mind  must  be
of a similar cause, i.e., a mind must be produced by another mind. The  body
cannot produce the mind, i.e., it cannot be the substantial  cause  for  the
mind. The mind must be produced by another consciousness.

In this way, by using this logic, Dharmakirti proved  that  there  are  past
lives.   The first moment of consciousness of this life must come  from  the
past life. It must be produced by a substantial cause and a  similar  cause.
It cannot come from the body as a physical form cannot produce the mind.  It
must be a similar cause. He said it must be something else.   In  this  way,
he proved that some kind of mind of the past should be there. Otherwise,  it
is impossible to exist. There must be another cause and it  must  come  from
the past life.

That is why Buddhists assert that there is no beginning to the mind. It  has
to come from  another  mind.  Therefore  for  Buddhists,  the  mind  has  no
beginning  and our lives have no beginning. When you think about it,  it  is
the same for every impermanent phenomenon. I think  there  is  no  beginning
but instead there is some kind of continuation because  the  phenomenon  has
to be produced by a cause. Therefore everything has  no  beginning.  Do  you
agree?

There is no beginning because it has to come from some kind  of  substantial
cause. In this way, there is no  beginning  to  all  impermanent  phenomena,
such as the mind. You have to think about this. The mind  has  no  beginning
and no end. The same goes for the person, the self, or the “I.” It also  has
no beginning or end.

Some non-Buddhists do not believe in past and future lives.  But  some  non-
Buddhists do believe in past and future lives.  The  big  question  now  for
such non-Buddhists and Buddhists who believe in past  and  future  lives  is
what really moves from life to life.

The  person,  the  self,  or  the  “I”  experiences  all  the  happiness  or
suffering. Something has to continue on to the next life.  The  non-Buddhist
philosophers and almost everyone  who  believe  in  past  and  future  lives
believe that there is some kind of person, self, or “I” that  continues  on.
Normally this is called the  soul.  The  Christians,  Muslims,  and   Hindus
believe in some kind of soul. They accept that something has  to  move  from
life to life. I do not know exactly what they mean  by  that.  Maybe  it  is
like a person, a self, or maybe it is the mind.

They think a lot about what is a soul or a self and what kind of  self  that
would be. They say the five aggregates cannot be one entity  with  the  self
but must be  something  totally  separate  from  the  five  aggregates.  The
person, the self, the “I,” or the soul cannot be  of  one  entity  with  the
body but must be totally separated from the five aggregates.

For example, the soul has to be a separate  entity  from  the  aggregate  of
form, the body. The reason they believe that is  because  the  aggregate  of
form will disappear when one dies. The self does not disappear but the  form
will totally disappear during cremation when the  body  becomes  ashes.  The
self cannot disappear but it has to continue on. For this reason,  they  say
the soul cannot be of one entity with the body but must be totally  separate
from the body.

They also say that the self must be permanent because it never  changes.  It
is the same thing that continues on. The self never changes. It is the  same
soul that moves on from life to life. It  is  permanent,  i.e.,  it  doesn’t
change.

They also mentioned that the self or the  person  is  single  (or  unitary),
i.e., it does not have any parts. They  mentioned  that  the  self  pervades
every  phenomenon  and  is  everywhere.  The  self  must   be   single   and
independent.  Here,  independent  means  not   depending   on   causes   and
conditions. To them, the soul, the self, or the person should be like  that.
To account for past and  future  lives,  the  non-Buddhists  have  to  posit
something that moves from life to life. What kind  of  self  will  that  be?
That self is  permanent, single, and independent:
• When we say it is permanent, it means it does not change  from  moment  to
  moment.
• The self does not have any parts. That is why it is called single.
• Being independent, it does not depend on causes and conditions.
I think most of the non-Buddhists who  believe  in  past  and  future  lives
accept that a self that is permanent, single, and independent  exists.  They
thought a lot about what goes on from life to life and  they  conclude  that
it must be like that. In reality, whether that is true  or  not  is  another
matter. They think that is the only way. Their conclusions are like that.

Now we talk about Buddhist philosophy. All Buddhists accept past and  future
lives. When we say the self, the person, or the  “I,”  we  accept  that  the
self exists. When we say in  Buddhist  terms  that  there  is  no  self,  no
person, that there is selflessness, we have to understand what  that  means.
Here  when  we  talk  about  the  GES,  we  are  talking  about  the  coarse
selflessness of person. It is in the chart.
























A permanent, single,  and  independent  person  does  not  exist.  The  non-
Buddhists believe in such a self but  all  Buddhist  philosophers  say  that
this kind of self does not exist. The coarse self of  persons  is  the  same
for the GES, the SS, the MOS, and the  AMWS.  They  all  say  that  kind  of
person does not exist.  First you have to understand how  the  non-Buddhists
posit the self that goes from life to life and their reasons for  doing  so.
All the Buddhist tenets say that kind of self does not exist.

At the very beginning I had mentioned the  four  Buddhist  seals.  The  four
seals are:
1. All compounded phenomena are impermanent.
2.  All  contaminated  phenomena  are  miserable  (or  in  the   nature   of
   suffering).
3. All phenomena are empty and selfless.
4. Nirvana is peace.

Why do Buddhists believe that kind of self cannot be permanent? Why  doesn’t
a permanent self exist? Why doesn’t a single  self  exist?  Why  doesn’t  an
independent self exist? We have to prove that kind of self does  not  exist.

When you refer to the first seal - all compounded phenomena are  impermanent
-  when  you  talk  about  impermanence,  there  is  the  coarse  level   of
understanding of impermanence and  the  subtle  level  of  understanding  of
impermanence. When we say impermanence, it means there is momentary  change,
i.e., change  in  every  second  due  to  causes  and  conditions.  That  is
impermanence.

Now we talk about the second  seal,  all  contaminated  things  are  in  the
nature of suffering. The whole idea is this:  Impermanence  means  there  is
momentary change. All the contaminated aggregates change due to  causes  and
conditions. What are the causes and  conditions  that  cause  them  to  come
about? Contaminated phenomena come from karma and delusions.

Gang zag in Tibetan is person in English.  The  etymology  of  gang  zag  is
this: “gang” means  full of delusions  and  “zag”  means  overflowing.  That
means  we  are  full  of  delusions.  Not  only  that.  The  delusions   are
overflowing! This word is interesting. It is good to learn  the  meaning  of
gang zag.

When we say, contaminated phenomena, it means  that  they  are  produced  or
caused by karma and delusions and that they are in the nature of suffering.

The third seal is that all phenomena are empty  and  selfless.   The  Buddha
said  all contaminated phenomena are in the nature  of  suffering.  If  they
are in the nature of suffering, is there anything we can do  about  it?  The
Buddha said yes,  it  is  possible  because  all  phenomena  are  empty  and
selfless.

How is this so? If we think more deeply about this, all  our  suffering  and
pain come from attachment and anger. These  are  wrong  consciousnesses  and
are not valid minds. A wrong consciousness apprehends,  sees,  and  believes
in the object in the  wrong  way.  Because  of  that,  it  causes  pain  and
suffering.

Again when you look more deeply into how  anger  and  attachment  arise,  it
boils down to believing in an independent self or  self-grasping.  Believing
in such an independent “I,” anger and attachment arise, and  then  suffering
arises from that. It all boils down to  self-grasping,  believing  that  the
independent “I” is there. Based on that, all suffering arises.

The Buddha said that all  phenomena  are  empty  and  selfless,  so  nothing
exists independently. The self does not exist independently  but  the  self-
grasping sees and grasps at an independent “I.” Not only that,  it  believes
100% that the independent self is there. We need  to  analyse  whether  that
mind is a valid mind or a wrong mind.

The mind that believes in the independent self, is it  a  valid  mind  or  a
wrong mind? When we analyse this, the mind that believes in the  independent
“I” is a wrong consciousness. What it believes in  is  totally  opposite  to
how the self exists. In reality there is no independent  “I”  but  the  mind
totally  believes  the  independent  “I”  is  there.   So  it  is  a   wrong
consciousness.

There is an antidote for this wrong  mind,  a  mind  that  understands  that
there is no such independent “I.” That mind becomes an antidote to the  mind
that believes the independent “I” exists. When we understand that  there  is
no such independent “I” or person, then we are  able  to  reduce  the  self-
grasping mind. When we are able  to  weaken  that  mind,  logically,  it  is
possible to totally reduce this mind. Therefore liberation is possible  when
you understand that.
That is why  there  is  the  fourth  seal:  nirvana  is  peace.  Nirvana  is
possible. Here we have removed all our delusions as well as the root of  the
delusions, the self-grasping. When you are able to understand that  and  you
are able to remove all the delusions, then you will be  able  to  understand
that nirvana is peace.  When  you  don’t  have  delusions,  you  don’t  have
attachment and anger. That is when   peace in the mind starts.

When you talk about nirvana, it is not a city somewhere. Nirvana is in  your
heart. You don’t have to go to another country  to  find  it.  You  have  to
understand that nirvana is peace.

Samsara is not far away. It is in your mind  until  you  are  released  from
your delusions and karma. Your body is like a pillar and your mind  is  like
a person who is tied to the pillar with the rope  of  karma  and  delusions.
The mind is tied to the body by karma and delusions. When you  die,  another
body comes and again your mind goes there, tied to the  body  by  karma  and
delusions. Your body and  mind  are  always  bound  together  by  karma  and
delusions. The mind never lets  go  of  the  body.  That  is  why  suffering
starts. When you are not bound by karma and delusions, your  mind  is  free.
You may have your body but when your mind is free and is not bound by  karma
and delusions, you will be free of pain and  suffering.  You  are  liberated
from karma and delusions.

We have to understand the kind of wrong mind we  have  and  how  many  wrong
minds we have. Most of them believe that everything we see  is  right,  what
we believe is right, we are the best and whatever we say is  right.  One  is
like the Buddha. Everything is correct. “100% of what I see is right.”

Let us talk about permanence and how we see things. We  see  something  that
is impermanent to be permanent. We believe that. We say  it  is  impermanent
but, in reality, in our mind, we believe the impermanent  to  be  permanent.
So we have this wrong mind.

For example, the Swee Kim (name of student) we saw yesterday  and  the  Swee
Kim we see today when we come to class, we  see  him  as  exactly  the  same
person. There is no change. Not only do we see him in that way,  we  totally
believe that it is the same person, i.e., today’s Swee Kim  and  yesterday’s
Swee Kim are exactly the same. We believe that Swee Kim is permanent.

We believe the person we saw ten years ago and the person we see now  to  be
the same person. We believe it is the same person even though he  has  grown
older. But, in reality, yesterday’s Swee Kim is already gone  and  does  not
exist today.

When you divide up time, when  the  24  hours  of  yesterday  are  finished,
yesterday’s Swee Kim is gone and today’s Swee Kim starts. It  is  a  totally
different Swee Kim. It is not the same Swee Kim at all. Here  I  am  talking
about how we believe he is exactly the same person but  in  reality,  it  is
not the same person.

In the same way, we never think of the rocky mountain to be impermanent.  We
always think that it is permanent, that it will last forever, and  we  grasp
at that. When we think of this world, we also believe that.  After  billions
of years, this world has to disappear but we don’t see it in  that  way.  We
think it will always be there and that it is permanent.


When we think more deeply, this morning’s  Swee  Kim  and  this  afternoon’s
Swee Kim are different, but we believe they are totally  the  same.  We  can
talk about the Swee Kim of an hour, then we can go deeper to  the  Swee  Kim
of the seconds and so forth. They are not the same but we believe  they  are
the same. There is momentary change in every second so it is  not  the  same
Swee Kim at all but we do not  understand  that.  In  reality  Swee  Kim  is
impermanent but we believe he is permanent, the same, and always there.

When a person passes away, you say it is the end. This  is  the  coarse  and
not the subtle understanding of impermanence. Yesterday’s Swee Kim does  not
exist today. That is the coarse level of understanding of impermanence,  but
we do not understand impermanence even at this coarse level. If we  can  see
that he is not the  same  person,  that  he  keeps  on  changing  and  is  a
different person, when we really understand that, then it  will  reduce  our
attachment and  anger.  We  will  be  able  to  reduce  everything  once  we
understand that. There will be no self-grasping.

With anger, you believe that the person who harmed you two days  ago  to  be
the same person when you see him again the next day. You see him as  exactly
the same person who harmed you. To  you,  the  yesterday’s  person  and  the
today’s person who harmed you is  the  same  person.  You  never  think  the
person has changed and is a different person. When you understand  that  the
person who harmed you is gone today and is no longer there,  that  he  is  a
totally  different  person  and  not  the  same  person  at  all,  when  you
understand that coarse level of impermanence,  then  you  will  be  able  to
remove your anger and attachment.

In reality, the Swee Kim of yesterday does not exist today and today’s  Swee
Kim will not exist tomorrow. Yesterday’s Swee Kim was labeled at that  time,
yesterday. When that time is gone, that Swee Kim  does  not  exist  anymore.
Does that make sense? Not understanding that, we  believe  Swee  Kim  to  be
exactly the same person.

We are not talking about emptiness here. We are talking about  impermanence.
We are not even talking about subtle  impermanence.  We  are  talking  about
coarse impermanence. When we understand that level of  coarse  impermanence,
we will be able to reduce our anger and attachment. Here I  am  saying  that
we have this kind of belief in permanence that in reality  is  impermanence.
We all have this kind of belief in permanence. That is why what  we  believe
is not true.

We now talk about something that is by nature unclean but we believe  it  to
be 100% clean; for example, our own bodies. If we  think  about  the  causes
and conditions for how  our  bodies  come  about  and  how  they  exist,  in
reality, what we have is unclean. But how does our mind see  our  own  body?
We see our body as totally clean. When we see the bodies of others that,  in
reality, are the same kind of body, their bodies are not as  clean  as  your
body. You always believe, “I am cleaner.”

A long time ago, I mentioned comparing your own faeces with that of  others.
In reality they are no different because  when  you  eat  exactly  the  same
things,  the  same  things  should  come  out  but  the  mind  looks  at  it
differently. “My poo is not so disgusting  whereas  other  people’s  poo  is
disgusting.” This is how our mind works when  related  to  oneself.  If  you
really look at the body, you always think that your body is clean. Our  mind
believes what we see but in reality it is not true at all.
When we were at Lorong 15 (the old premises of  the  centre),  I  remembered
asking someone, “When you see your own poo, why do you think that  your  poo
is not so smelly?” Someone replied, “It is  self-cherishing.”  This  is  how
our mind works. So many wrong  kinds  of  thinking  and  wrong  beliefs.  In
reality, that is not true.

When you think about the person, immediately you believe that  the  body  is
one’s self. In reality the body is not the self and is not the  “I”  but  we
believe the body is the “I.” For example, believing the  body  is  the  “I,”
when your body hits a pillar, immediately you believe that your body is  the
person hitting the pillar, “I hit the  pillar.”  You  believe  the  body  is
one’s self.

Likewise with happy feelings, suffering feelings,  or  unpleasant  feelings.
You feel that  the  feeling  itself  is  the  person.  When  you  understand
something,  you  say,  “I  understand  something.”  It  is  the  same   with
discrimination.  When  you  discriminate  some   object,   you   think,   “I
discriminate the object.”  We have this kind of  wrong  belief.  In  reality
each of the five aggregates - form, feeling,  discrimination,  compositional
factors, and consciousness - is not the person but we believe it to be so.

When we die, the consciousness moves on to the next life. Then we think  the
consciousness is the person, the self, or the “I,” but in reality it is  not
the person, the self, or “I.” But we believe that is the self.

We have many kinds of wrong consciousnesses within our  mind  based  on  the
independent “I.” Here  we  talk  about  the  coarse  and  subtle  levels  of
selflessness,  the  selflessness  of  persons,  and  the   selflessness   of
phenomena. There are many different levels of wrong  consciousnesses  within
us. What we see and what we believe are not necessarily 100% true.  When  we
understand the four Buddhist seals, we are able to understand that  we  have
so many wrong minds and wrong beliefs.

When we understand that our mind is not 100% pure, not correct,  not  valid,
when we are able to understand this topic, then there will be  a  difference
when we practice. For instance, the  practice  of  guru  devotion.  Rinpoche
mentioned many times  that  we  should  practice  guru  devotion  for  three
months. When you understand that your mind is totally not pure and  that  we
have so many wrong minds, it will help in our practice of guru devotion  and
can be applied in meditation.

The conclusion is that we have to understand:
• Why some non-Buddhists do not believe  in  future  lives,  but  only  this
  life, and their reasons for doing so.
• For non-Buddhists who believe in past and future lives, what kind of  self
  moves from life to life? We have to understand that. The non-Buddhists who
  believe in past and future lives say that it is the permanent, single, and
  independent person that goes from life to life.
• According to Buddhist philosophy, all the Buddhist  tenets  say  that  the
  permanent, single, and independent person or self, does not exist.
• What is the problem if it is permanent? What  is  the  problem  if  it  is
  independent? What is the problem if it is single? We have to find out  and
  prove that kind of self does not exist.

We have to get some idea: first, the beliefs of the  non-Buddhists  and  how
they are not accepted by Buddhists. That is the whole idea of  studying  the
tenets.
So the coarse selflessness  of  the  person  is  the  non-existence  of  the
permanent, single, and independent person.

I stop here. I hope you understand.

Did you get some idea?

This is a review of the last class.







Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng  and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong
