Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L25 upload.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.709748
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 25                           Date: 11th June 2013

Question:  For  both  the  MOS  and  the  AMWS,  their  definitions   of   a
conventional truth indicate that a valid cogniser is required to  realise  a
conventional truth.

I thought a conventional truth is  necessarily  apprehended  by  a  mistaken
consciousness and not by a  valid  cogniser.  For  example,  in  lo-rig,  we
learnt that  an  object  is  apprehended  first  by  a  sense  direct  valid
cogniser, followed by a mental direct valid cogniser, before  proceeding  to
the conceptual consciousness that labels the object. Since  ordinary  beings
are dominated almost all the time by their conceptual  consciousnesses  that
are mistaken consciousnesses, there is hardly any valid cognition  to  speak
of. Would this not suggest that ordinary beings  are  unable  to  realise  a
conventional truth?
(Refer to audio file from 1.48 ~21.55 min)

Answer: Lo-rig is presented from the point of view of the SS.  For  example,
an eye consciousness apprehending blue is a non-mistaken consciousness.



For The the SMWAs, they also  assert ccept external objects. I  would  think
therefore that, perhaps, that they also assert that  the  eye  consciousness
apprehending blue is a non-mistaken  consciousness.  I  would  According  to
SMWA,  I  would  probably  say  that  for  the  SMWAs,    that   the   sense
consciousnesses are non-mistaken.

I think your question has to do with the definition of a conventional  truth
in relation to how a sense consciousness is  non-mistaken.  You  cannot  put
these two together. The consciousness that posits blue  is  essentially  the
eye  consciousness   apprehending   blue.   When   the   eye   consciousness
apprehendsing blue,  how  does  it  realisze  blue?  Thate  realiszation  is
accompanied by with dualistic appearance.

The  fact  The  eye  consciousness  apprehending  blue  realizes  blue.  The
realization  of  blue  is  accompanied  with  dualistic   appearance.   Just
becausethat  the realiszation of blue by an eye  consciousness  apprehending
blue is accompanied by with dualistic appearance , it does not make the  eye
consciousness apprehending blue a mistaken consciousness.  The  presence  of
the dualistic appearance does not necessarily entail that the  consciousness
is a mistaken consciousness.

Ven Gyurme: Are you  saying  that  the  eye  consciousness,  i.e.,  a  sense
consciousness,  that positing blue as a the conventional truth  is  not  the
eye consciousness apprehending blue?
Are you saying the eye consciousness apprehending blue is  not  the  positer
of blue as the conventional truth?
Are you saying the sense consciousness is not the positer of blue?

It is not necessarily to say that the eye consciousness apprehending a  vase
 vase is the consciousness that posits the vase as athe conventional  truth.

A vVase is athe conventional truth. Blue is  athe  conventional  truth.  The
reason why a vase is  a  conventional  truth  is  because  it  is  realiszed
through the subsidence  of  the  dualistic  appearance  by  a  valid  direct
perceiver that directly  realiszes  it.  The  valid  direct  perceiver  that
directly realises it is basically the main mind that  posits  the  existence
of whatever the phenomenon in question. In this case, it is a  vase  and  it
is a conventional truth.

The main mind that posits the existence of the object is  the  valid  direct
perceiver. The valid direct perceiver that directly realizes  it  refers  to
the main mind that posits the existence of that phenomenon in question,  and
in this case is the conventional truth.
What do you think is the consciousness that certifies that  d  bblue  is  as
athe conventional truth?
What is the direct  valid  cogniszer  that  directly  realiszes  blue  in  a
dualistic manner?
If you take the example of   a  vase,  then  it  is  the  eye  consciousness
apprehending a vase.
If it is blue, then it is the eye consciousness apprehending blue.
If it is a sound, then it is the ear consciousness apprehending a sound.

There is a thought thinking of blue that is induced by an eye  consciousness
apprehending blue. Theat thought that thinks of ing bblue  is  not  a  valid
cogniszer but . It is a subsequent cogniszer.  This  is  from  Here  we  are
talking in the perspective of the lower schools.

Valid cognisers

  There are two types of awarenesses:
      1. valid cognizers and
      2. non-valid cognizers.

  There are two types of valid cognizer:
      1. direct valid cognizers and
      2. inferential valid cognizers.

  Self-cognizing  direct  perceivers  are  not  asserted,   and   a   sense
  consciousness in the continuum of  a  sentient  being  is  necessarily  a
  mistaken  consciousness.  Mental   consciousnesses   and   yogic   direct
  perceivers can be either mistaken or non-mistaken (Page 25).
5 Way of asserting object-possessors
In the last lesson, we saw how  Prasangika’s  way  of  asserting  of  object
possessor is quite different in many ways from the lower tenets. As  I  have
mentioned in the  last  lesson,  according  to  the  Prasangika,  the  valid
cognizer is a knower that is infallible with respect  to  its  main  object.
Unlike the lower tenets, according to the Prasangika, a valid cognizer  need
not to be newly incontrovertible.
The Prasangika’s division of  valid  cognizer  is  the  same  as  the  lower
tenets.












(Root text page 25)
There are two types of awarenesses:
   1. valid cognizers and
   2. non-valid cognizers.
There are two types of valid cognizer:
   1. direct valid cognizers and
   2. inferential valid cognizers.
Self-cognizing  direct  perceivers   are   not   asserted,   and   a   sense
consciousness in  the  continuum  of  a  sentient  being  is  necessarily  a
mistaken consciousness. Mental consciousnesses and yogic  direct  perceivers
can be either mistaken or non-mistaken.
In the last lesson, we saw how the Prasangikas’ way of asserting of  object-
possessor is different in many ways from the lower tenets.  As  I  mentioned
in the last lesson, according to the Prasangikas:
• the valid cogniser is a knower that is  infallible  with  respect  to  its
  main object and,
•  unlike  the  lower  tenets,  a  valid  cogniser   need   not   be   newly
  incontrovertible.

The Prasangikas’ division of valid  cognisers  is  the  same  as  the  lower
tenets.

You know what a valid cognizer is, according to  the  Prasangika.  It  is  a
knower that is infallible with respect to its main object.
There are two types of valid cogniszers:
1. direct valid cogniszers and
2.
3. inferential valid cogniszers

What is a direct valid cogniszer?
A direct valid cognizer  has  the  feature  or  characteristic  of  a  valid
cognizer. On top of that, it is a knower that is infallible with respect  to
its object of the mode of apprehension.
• Direct valid cognizer It is a valid cogniszer . On top of that,  it  is  a
  valid cognizer that is not generated directly  in  dependence  on  upon  a
  sign. and
• Iit is a knower that is infallible with respect to its object of the  mode
  of apprehension.

An inferential valid cogniszer is:
•  a valid cogniszer but itthat is   is  generated  directly  in  dependence
  upon a sign and and
• it is a knower that is infallible with respect to its object of  the  mode
  of apprehension.

|Direct valid cognizer             |Inferential valid cognizer        |


• A valid cognizer
• Is a knower that is infallible with respect to its object of the  mode  of
  apprehension
• It is a valid cognizer that is not generated directly in  dependence  upon
  a sign
|A valid cognizer                       |
|Is a knower that is infallible with    |
|respect to its object of the mode of   |
|apprehension                           |
|It is a valid cognizer that is         |
|generated directly in dependence upon a|
|sign                                   |


There are three divisions of d
Direct valid cogniszers has three divisions:
1. sSense direct valid cogniszers
2. mMental direct valid cogniszers
3. yYogic direct valid cogniszers

Self-knowing direct valid cogniszers are  is not asserted.

AAs stated in the root text, “Aa sense consciousness in the continuum  of  a
sentient   being   is   necessarily   a   mistaken   consciousness.   Mental
consciousnesses and yogic direct perceivers can be either mistaken  or  non-
mistaken.”

These is isare  the  differences  between  the  Prasangikas  and  the  lower
tenets.

Mistaken and non-mistaken consciousnesses
According to the Prasangikas, a sense consciousness in the  continuum  of  a
sentient  being  is  necessarily  a  mistaken  consciousness.  While  it  is
necessarily mistaken,  it is not necessarily not a valid  cogniszer.  Thisat
means that there is a common locus between a mistaken  consciousness  and  a
valid cogniszer.

One of the fundamental assertions of the CMWS  is  that  all  phenomena  are
necessarily do not  exist  by  way  of  their  its  own  character,  whereas
everybody else, starting from the AMWS and the tenets  below  it,  they  all
assert that if something exists,  it is necessarily exists  by  way  of  its
own character.

Sense consciousnesses
According to the Prasangikas, anything and everything that  appears  to  the
sense consciousness in the continuaum of the  ssentient  beings  necessarily
appears to exist by way of its own character or  /  existing  from  its  own
side. Although phenomena things and events  appear  like  this  to  a  sense
consciousness,  but in reality,  those things and events they do  not  exist
by way of their own character / things do not existor  from their own  side.


Therefore,  according  to  the   Prasangikas,   for   that   reason,   sense
consciousnesses in  the  continuaum   of  sentient  beings  are  necessarily
mistaken.
Here we have just looking at the sense consciousness in the continuum  of  a
sentient being that is necessarily a mistaken.  That is not  all.  According
to the Prasangikas, with the exception of  the  wisdom  directly  perceiving
emptiness, all every other consciousnesses are  is mistaken because for  the
reason  that  all  those  consciousnesses,  whatever  appears  to  those  at
consciousnesses, there is always the appearance of true existencet,  or  the
appearance of things things existing  by way of their their  own  character,
or things things existing from their their own side.

Based on this explanation as to why every consciousness with  e  reason  why
the Prasangika explain every consciousness with the exception of the  wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness is a mistaken consciousness, . Based  on  this
reason you should be able to understand why, the sentence in the root  text:
“mental consciousnesses and yogic direct perceivers can be  either  mistaken
or non-mistaken” (Page 25).

.
An  Ilillustration  of  a  mistaken  mental  consciousness  is  would  be  a
clairvoyance knowing another mind. It is a mental consciousness  but  it  is
not the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness. T, therefore it is mistaken.

What is an would the illustration of a non-mistaken mental direct  perceiver
that is non-mistaken? Perhaps we can posit  an  uninterrupted  path  of  the
Mahayana such as , for example, the uninterrupted path of the Mahayana  path
of seeing. Essentially This it is the wisdom directly  realiszing  emptiness
in the continuaum of the sentient beings. It is a  mental  direct  perceiver
and it is non-mistaken.

Mental direct perceivers
In the lower tenets, mental direct  perceivers  are  necessarily  free  from
conceptuality. According to the Prasangikas,  there  can  be  mental  direct
perceivers that are conceptual consciousnesses.  An  illustration  would  be
the thought remembering  blue  that  is  induced  by  an  eye  consciousness
apprehending blue. This is a subsequent cogniser that, in this school, is  a
valid cogniser. Of the two, this is a mental direct valid cogniser  that  is
conceptual.

The object of enquiry here is the thought remembering blue that  is  induced
by an eye consciousness apprehending blue. Why is it a valid cogniser?

According to the Prasangikas, what is a valid cogniser?

According to the Prasangikas, a mental direct perceiver is  not  necessarily
free from  conceptuality.  There  are  mental  direct  perceivers  that  are
conceptual consciousnesses.

Yogic direct perceivers
A yYogic direct perceiver can be  either  mistaken  or  non-mistaken.  Yogic
direct  perceivers  are  generated  in  dependence   upon   their   uncommon
empowering condition, a  which is a concentration that ; is a union of  calm
 abiding and special insight. In this respect T his it is  the  same  aswith
the assertion of the lower tenets. Yogic direct perceiver has  its  uncommon
empowering condition which is a

With the concentration that is  ;  a  union  of  calm  abiding  and  special
insight. With that as its  the  uncommon  empowering  condition,  there  are
three types of  the yogic  direct  perceivers  can  be  of  different  types
depending on the object it realises. it take. In this school, there are:,
1.  the yogic direct  perceivers  are  realiszing  subtle  impermanencet  is
   considered to be direct perceiver.
2. Then there is a yogic direct perceivers realiszing coarse selflessness.
3.  There is also yogic direct perceivers realiszing subtle selflessness.

•   The yogic direct perceivers  realiszing  subtle  impermanencet  and  the
  yogic  direct  perceivers  realiszing  coarse  selflessness  are  mistaken
  consciousnesses., whereas
• T the yogic direct perceivers realiszing subtle  selflessness  areis  non-
  mistaken consciousnesses.
4.
• Yogic direct perceivers can be conceptual or non-conceptual.

In the lower tenet,  mental  direct  perceiver  are  necessarily  free  from
conceptuality. According to the  Prasangika,  there  can  be  mental  direct
perceiver which are conceptual consciousness.
Illustration would be the thought remembering blue that  is  induced  by  an
eye consciousness apprehending blue. This is a subsequent cognizer. In  this
school, subsequent cognizer is a valid cognizer. Of these  two,  this  is  a
mental direct valid cognizer. It is conceptual.

The object of enquiry here is the thought remembering blue that  is  induced
by an eye consciousness apprehending blue. Why it is a valid cognizer?
According to the Prasangika, what is a valid cognizer?
According to Prasangika, mental direct perceiver is not necessary free  from
conceptuality.
There are mental direct perceivers that are conceptual consciousnesses.

41.11

|Sense direct valid   |Is a mistaken        |                         |
|cogniser             |consciousness        |                         |
|Mental direct valid  |Is either mistaken or|                         |
|cogniser             |non-mistaken         |                         |
|Yogic direct valid   |Is either mistaken or|Mistaken consciousnesses:|
|cogniser             |non-mistaken         |1. Yogic direct perceiver|
|                     |                     |realising subtle         |
|                     |                     |impermanence             |
|                     |                     |2. Yogic direct perceiver|
|                     |                     |realising coarse         |
|                     |                     |selflessness             |
|                     |                     |Non-mistaken             |
|                     |                     |consciousness:           |
|                     |                     |Yogic direct perceiver   |
|                     |                     |realising subtle         |
|                     |                     |selflessness             |


   There are two types of direct valid cognizers:
1. conceptual direct valid cognizers and
2. non-conceptual direct valid cognizers.

   Illustrations of conceptual direct valid cognizers are, for example,  the
   second  moment  of  an  inferential  cognizer  realizing  sound   to   be
   impermanent  and  a  remembering  consciousness  that  is   a   factually
   concordant memory of blue generated through  being  induced  by  a  sense
   direct perceiver apprehending blue (Page 25).



If there is anything that you don’t understand or you don’t get the line  of
reasoning, you should ask immediately. The only way to see  the  differences
is to first understand, according to the Prasangikas, what a valid  cogniser
is. You also need  to  understand  what  a  direct  valid  cogniser  and  an
inferential valid cogniser are. When you  understand  their  characteristics
clearly, then you will be able to see the  differences.  You  must  not  mix
these up with what you learnt earlier. What you learnt earlier is  according
to the lower tenets. Of course  there  may  be  some  confusion  but  it  is
important to see the differences in the assertions of the Prasangikas.

   An illustration  of  a  non-conceptual  direct  valid  cognizer  is,  for
   example, a sense direct perceiver apprehending a form.
   If it is a direct valid cognizer it does not necessarily have a
   perceptible object because if it is a yogic direct perceiver it
   necessarily does not have a perceptible object. This is so because
   perceptible object and manifest object are equivalent (Page 25).


Remember from the last lesson that, in  this  school,  manifest  object  and
perceptible object are mutually inclusive. Manifest or  perceptible  objects
are those objects that  one  can  realise  directly  without  the  need  for
further thought and dependence on any reason. We experience them directly.

For example, sound is a perceptible object. The moment a sound  reaches  the
ear, you hear it. You know that it is a sound and you don’t  have  to  think
about it. When you place something sweet or sour in your mouth, you will  be
able to taste it  immediately.  You  do  not  have  to  posit  a  reason  to
experience the taste. Such objects  are  manifest  objects  and  perceptible
objects.

On the other hand, the impermanence of  sound,  the  emptiness  of  inherent
existence, and the emptiness of establishment by way of  its  own  character
are objects that you can only come to realise initially  by  thinking  about
them and by using many reasons. Such objects are hidden objects.

Ven Gyurme: In Tibetan, it sounds like an existential statement, “If  it  is
a direct valid cogniser, it is not necessarily a perceptible object  because
if it is a yogic direct  perceiver  it  is  necessarily  not  a  perceptible
object.”

The illustration given here is that a yogic direct perceiver is  necessarily
not a perceptible object. Therefore there are direct  valid  cognisers  that
are not necessarily perceptible objects.

   If it is a subsequent cognizer it is necessarily a direct valid cognizer.

   There are four types of inferential cognizers:
3. inferential cognizers through the power of the fact,
4. inferential cognizers through renown,
5. inferential cognizers through an example, and
6. inferential cognizers through belief.

   Inferential cognizer through renown and inferential cognizer  through  an
   example are included in inferential cognizer through  the  power  of  the
   fact (Pages 25 – 26).

This is similar to what we learnt before in terms of the  divisions  of  the
inferential cogniser.  We did look at the:
1. inferential cognisers through the power of the fact
2. inferential cognisers through renown
3. inferential cognisers through belief


   If it is a valid  cognizer,  it  is  not  necessarily  non-mistaken  with
   respect  to  its  determined  object  because  an  inferential   cognizer
   realizing sound to be impermanent is a  consciousness  that  is  mistaken
   with respect to impermanent sound (Page 26).[1]

The example given here is of inferential  cogniser  realising  sound  to  be
impermanent.
• It is an inferential cogniser.
• It is a valid cogniser.
• It is a conceptual consciousness.
• It is a mistaken consciousness.
• It is mistaken with respect to its determined object.

   If  it  is  a  consciousness,  it  necessarily  realizes  its  object  of
   comprehension because the generic image of the horns of a rabbit  is  the
   object of comprehension of a  conception  apprehending  the  horns  of  a
   rabbit, and the generic  image  of  permanent  sound  is  the  object  of
   comprehension of a conception apprehending sound to  be  permanent  (Page
   26).

According  to  the  lower  tenets,  all   conceptual   consciousnesses   are
necessarily mistaken. The reason they are mistaken consciousness is  because
they are mistaken with respect to their appearing object that is  a  meaning
generality.

Here it is saying that the thought that realises the meaning  generality  or
mental image is not mistaken. “If it  is  a  consciousness,  it  necessarily
realizes its object of comprehension”: This means  that  regardless  of  the
consciousness in question, that consciousness  is  realising  something,  is
realising some object.

An illustration is a dream consciousness that has the appearance of a  dream
elephant. The dream consciousness  is  a  mistaken  consciousness  but  that
dream consciousness is realising something. What it realises  is  the  dream
elephant appearing as an elephant.

For  the  Prasangikas,  what  is  the  sign  that  shows  that  this   dream
consciousness realises its object, i.e., the dream elephant appearing as  an
elephant? Because when you wake up from the dream, you remember,  “I  dreamt
of an elephant.” So you remember that  vivid  appearance  you  saw  in  your
dream. What is the consciousness that realises that appearance?  It  is  the
dream consciousness.

With regard to the thought apprehending permanent sound, the  root  text  is
saying that the thought apprehending permanent sound apprehends or  realises
the meaning generality.

The point here is that the Prasangikas’ way of  asserting  consciousness  is
different in many ways from the lower tenets. This  is  something  that  you
need to figure out. You need to take time to think about it.

Is  an  inferential   cogniser   realising   impermanent   sound   a   wrong
consciousness? It is a wrong consciousness because  it  erroneously  engages
in its object of the mode of apprehension.

   6 Way of asserting selflessness

   The person being empty of being self-sufficient substantially existent is
   asserted to be a coarse selflessness of  persons  and  the  person  being
   empty of true existence is asserted to  be  the  subtle  selflessness  of
   persons.

   A gross object composed of partless  particles  and  the  valid  cognizer
   apprehending it being empty of being different substances[2]  is  posited
   as a coarse selflessness of phenomena and the aggregates – the  basis  of
   designation – being empty of true existence  is  posited  as  the  subtle
   selflessness of phenomena (Page 26).

Because the Prasangikas  assert  external  objects,  they  assert  that  the
external object  and  the  consciousness  apprehending  them  are  different
substances. Therefore the Prasangikas do not assert the coarse  selflessness
of phenomena that is the emptiness of subject  and  object  being  different
substances.

In other monastic textbooks in the Gelug tradition, I am not  sure  if  they
assert that the  Prasangikas  posit  a  coarse  selflessness  of  phenomena.
According to Jetsunpa’s monastic textbook of Sera  Je  College,  the  coarse
selflessness of phenomena is posited.

   The two [subtle] selflessnesses are differentiated by way of the basis of
   emptiness and not by way of the object of negation because the refutation
   of the object of negation - true existence - upon the basis of  a  person
   is the subtle selflessness of persons, and the refutation of  the  object
   of negation - true existence – upon the basis of the  aggregates  and  so
   forth is the subtle selflessness of phenomena.

   The two [subtle] conceptions of self are differentiated  by  way  of  the
   observed object and not by  way  of  the  mode  of  apprehension  because
   observing the basis - the person  -  and  apprehending  it  to  be  truly
   existent is posited as the subtle conception of a self  of  persons,  and
   observing the basis of imputation – the aggregates and  so  forth  -  and
   apprehending it to be truly existent is posited as the subtle  conception
   of a self of phenomena (Page 26).

All phenomena are merely imputed by the mind
According to the Prasangikas, all phenomena are merely imputed  by  thought.
The word “merely” negates (or eliminates) establishment by way  of  its  own
character or existence from its own side.

This is very  difficult  and  challenging.  According  to  the  Prasangikas,
everything that exists does so as merely  imputed  by  thought.  To  explain
this, the Prasangikas always use the classic example of mistaking a coil  of
rope to be a snake. Under certain conditions, such as foggy weather or  when
daylight fades and yet it is not completely dark, there may  be  a  coil  of
rope in the distance but what you see is a coiled snake.

Khen Rinpoche: This happens often in my hometown. At  Kopan,  you  not  only
see the rope but sometimes the real snake comes!  In  the  early  days,  the
rooms were not so good. The wooden houses had a lot of holes  and  sometimes
snakes would come in. When we went to bed, we would see the snake.

So when the conditions are right, you would  see  the  coil  of  rope  as  a
snake. There is an appearance of a snake right there from the  side  of  the
rope. Not only is there such an appearance, you believe in that  appearance.
Based on that, fear arises. Due to the coil of rope appearing to be a  snake
and you believing in that appearance of a real snake, you become afraid.

From the side of the coil of rope, you will not be able to find a  snake  on
the rope. From one end of the rope to the other end, you will  not  be  able
to find anything about the coil of rope that is a snake. There is  no  snake
on the rope. The coil of rope appearing to be a  real  snake  is  merely  an
imputation by the mind. Nevertheless you become afraid because  you  do  not
realise that it is your mind that has imputed the  coil  of  rope  to  be  a
snake.

In this example, the person does not  realise  that  his/her  own  mind  has
imputed a snake on the coil of rope but,  in  reality,  there  is  no  snake
there. Instinctively the mind believes there is a snake on the rope  without
realising it is imputed by thought. When you  look  for  the  snake  on  the
rope, you will not find a snake. Yet at the same time,  there  cannot  be  a
snake that is apart from the coil of rope. You will not be able  to  find  a
snake that is separate from that coil of rope.

When you walk closer and closer towards the rope, you will start to  realise
that there is no snake on the coil of rope. It is possible then to  realise,
“Oh! This is made up by my mind. The snake is merely imputed  by  my  mind.”
You will realise, “It is my own mistake.” When you  see  that  the  coil  of
rope is actually a coil of  rope,  you  will  realise  that  you  have  been
mistaken all along. The snake is actually made up and imputed by  the  mind.
But earlier on, you did not realise that you are mistaken. Earlier  on,  you
did not realise that the snake is imputed by the mind.

How the “I” exists
Using this as an example, the Prasangikas explain how the  “I”  exists:  the
“I” is that which is merely imputed in dependence upon the  aggregates  that
is the bases of designation. The “I”  is  none  other  than  that  which  is
merely imputed in dependence upon the aggregates. In  reality  that  is  how
the “I” exists, what the “I” is.

But how does the “I” appear to our mind? The “I” appears to exist  from  the
side of the  aggregates.  We  believe  that  there  is  an  “I”  within  the
aggregates, that the “I” is the aggregates, coming  from  the  side  of  the
aggregates, and is not merely imputed  by  thought.  This  is  how  the  “I”
appears to exist to us.

Is this how the “I” actually exists in reality? If the “I” exists  from  the
side of the aggregates, then when we  look  and  search  for  it  among  the
individual aggregates, we should be able to point to something that  is  the
“I.” But the “I” is not findable upon analysis.

When we look for the self, the “I,” or the person among the aggregates  that
are the bases of designation for the “I,” we will not be able  to  find  the
“I.” Nor is the “I” the collection of the aggregates. Just as you  will  not
be able to find the snake on the coil of rope,  likewise  one  will  not  be
able  to  find  the  person  on  the  aggregates  that  are  the  bases   of
designation.

The “I” is not the aggregates and cannot be  found  on  the  aggregates.  Is
there an “I” that is separate from and  is  not  the  aggregates?  When  you
eliminate the aggregates one by one, you will not be able  to  find  an  “I”
there in the end.

Going back to the example of seeing the coil of rope as  a  snake.  Just  as
you are not going to find a snake on the coil of rope, you will not be  able
to find a snake that is separate from the coil of rope. Likewise one  cannot
find the self or the person on the aggregates or among the  aggregates.  You
will also not be able to find the “I” or self  that  is  separate  or  apart
from the aggregates.

The “I” is none other than that which is merely imputed in  dependence  upon
the aggregates. Like the “I,” the person, the  aggregates  are  also  merely
imputed by mind.

Object of negation or refutation
According to the Prasangika, everything that exists  is  necessarily  merely
imputed by thought. There  isn’t  anything  that  can  exist  without  being
merely imputed by thought. According to the Prasangikas,  anything  that  is
said to exist and yet is not merely imputed by thought  becomes  the  object
of refutation or object of negation. This is what is meant by  a  “self”  or
self-establishment.
• If there is a person who can exist without being merely imputed  by  mind,
  existing from his own side, that is the self of persons.
• If there are phenomena other than persons that can exist  from  their  own
  side without being merely imputed by mind, that is the self of  phenomena.


So these are the self of persons and the self of phenomena.  These  are  the
two selves—persons existing from their own side and phenomena existing  from
their own side.

• The  non-existence  of  a  person  existing  from  its  own  side  is  the
  selflessness of persons.
• The non-existence of phenomena other than persons existing from their  own
  side is the selflessness of phenomena.

According to the Prasangikas, there is  no  difference  in  the  objects  of
negation  with  respect  to  the  two  selflessnesses,  whether  it  is  the
selflessness of persons or the selflessness of ppersonshenomena. The  object
of negation is true existence or inherent existence. The object of  negation
is the same. So the two selflessnesses are not differentiated by the  object
of negation.
• The non-existence of the object of negation in relation  to  a  person  is
  the selflessness of persons.
• The non-existence of the object of negation in relation  to  phenomena  is
  the selflessness of phenomena.

In the next lesson, we will  complete  the  remaining  presentation  of  the
Prasangikas. The discussion on the object of  negation  in  accordance  with
the assertion of the Prasangikas will come up again and again when  we  look
at the Heart of the Perfection of the Wisdom Sutra in the next module.

Question: According to the Prasangikas, is there a common  locus  between  a
mental direct perceiver and yogic direct perceiver?

Answer: The Mahayana uninterrupted path

Question: “A gross object composed  of  partless  particles  and  the  valid
cognizer apprehending it being empty of being  different  substances”:  this
sounds assertion of the MOS, i.e., the object and  subject  being  the  same
entity.

Answer: In the first  place,  does  a  gross  object  composed  of  partless
particles exist? It does not exist because there are no partless  particles.
If partless particles do not exist, then you cannot  posit  a  gross  object
that is made up of partless particles. Therefore  a  gross  object  that  is
composed of partless particle does not exist. If the gross  object  that  is
composed of partless particle does not exist, then there cannot be  a  valid
cogniser apprehending it. If that is the case, then these two cannot  be  of
the same substance. Because of their respective status, they are not of  one
substance. Therefore they are empty of being different substances.



Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme



Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee



Edited by Cecilia Tsong

-----------------------
[1] JN: ‘Impermanence of sound’ has  been  changed  to  ‘impermanent  sound’
(sgra mi rtag).
[2] Since Proponents of the Middle Way refute partless  particles,  a  gross
object composed of partless particles does not exist and hence also a  valid
cognizer apprehending that  does  not  exist.  Thus,  since  both  are  non-
existent it can be said that they are empty of being different substances.

