Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L14 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.737335
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 14                         Date: 16th April 2013

As mentioned in our discussion in the previous lessonclass, we  have  to  be
certain about and be sure from our side as to the  that  we  understand  the
reasons why we are learning the tenets. That was the whole  discussion.  The
main whole point is to enable us  be  able  to  fight  our  afflictions  and
/destructive emotions. The only way to do that  is to  reflect  on   and  to
familiarisze our mind with selflessness.

So far  in the tenets, we have looked at the selflessness  of  persons.   By
reflecting, , meditating on,  and familiariszing our mind with  the  meaning
of the selflessness of the persons, we are supposed to be able to fight  and
work against our destructive emotion/afflictions.

On top  of  that,   we  have  just  started  with  athe  discussion  on  the
selflessness of phenomena. By reflecting on   and  familiariszing  our  mind
with the meaning of  the  selflessness  of  phenomena,   we  can  also  work
against  our  destructive  emotions/afflictions.  It  is  said  that  by  by
meditating on the selflessness  of  phenomena   we  can  even  overcome  the
obscurations  that  can  prevent   us   from   achieving   omniscience   and
enlightenment or omniscience.

Having said all thatese, what we we have to figure  out  and  be  is  to  be
certain about  as is to how do the meditations on f the  selflessnesses  can
act as antidotes to our afflictions. Is it really  possible  to  uproot  all
our afflictions and all all our obscurations from  our  the  mind?  This  is
something we need to think about all the time over and over again.  all  the
time.

We have looked at the selflessness of person. As for now, Wwe know that  the
selflessness of persons is the  emptiness  of  a  permanent,  unitary,   and
independent self. It  is  said  in  the  teachings  that  if  when  wwee  do
understand that indeed such a permanent, unitary,   and  independent  person
does not exists whatsoever, through thinking and then comes  to  understand,
it is said that our afflictions will be weakened. So Wwhat we have to do  is
to generate this understanding from our own experience, by  to  seeing   for
ourselves  that  indeed  such  a  person—  -  a  permanent,   unitary,   and
independent self—-  does not exist whatsoever. We have to discover  this  at
for ourselves. Then Wwe then check whether our  afflictions  do  are  become
weakened r or not. This at is the discovery that we have to make it  on  our
own. by ourselves.

Then there is the subtle selflessness of person:  which is the emptiness  or
non-existence of a self-sufficient person. This is  more  subtle.  The  non-
existence of  a  self-sufficient  person  is  more  subtler  than  the  non-
existence of athe permanent, unitary,  and independent self.  Again  the  It
is again said in  the  teachings  say   that  when  we  realiszed  the  non-
existence of athe self-sufficient person, our afflictions will be  weakened.
This is what they said in the teaching.  This at is also  something  another
thing tthat we have to discover for ourselves .  We  have  to  discover  for
ourselves through thinking and through rreflection, to be  able  to  realise
ng that indeed such a self-sufficient person—, although  it  appears  to  us
and we have the experienced of it— and there is an appearance of it  to  us,
in reality, such a the self does not exist in such a way.  This  at  is  the
discovery that we  have  to  make  for  ourselves.  When  we  make  de  that
discovery,  then we should have to check and  see  whether  our  afflictions
are weakened or not. In the teachings,  it  is  said  that  the  afflictions
will be weakened when we achieve this realisation. if we realized  that.  So
once again this at  is  athe  discovery  that  that  we  have  to  make  for
ourselves.

Essentially, the whole process of learning and then familiariszing our  mind
with  the  selflessness  of  persons  is  basically  to  work  against   our
afflictions, i.e.,  to reduce and destroy our afflictions.    Going  by  the
tenets  that  we  have  covered  so  far  this  is  the  reflection  on  the
selflessness of person. But still when we look at our own experiences,  when
we look at things look around us and we look at ourselves, we look at  thing
other than at ourselves, phenomena things and phenomena around us appear  to
us as if they wereare right there,  outside of us. We call them it  external
objects.

According to the MOS, although external objects appear,  but  in  fact,   in
reality,  there are no n’t any external objects.  They  have  their  reasons
for saying thisat. So our experiment now is this:  is  to  see  that  if  we
adopt this view of the  MOS’ view that there areis no  external  objects,  ,
but in fact tthat in fact  phenomena are selflessness, ; i.e.,  subject  and
object do not exist as different entities..  It is said in  the  teaching  s
that when we see that subject and object  are  not  do  not  have  different
entities, our afflictions will also be reduced. It is said that  this  is  a
very powerful tool. This is what Wwe have to discover whether this  is  true
so oor not.

TIf we can think along the lines that of what  I  haveI   mentioned  in  the
previous lesson; I explained then the order in which to reflect and  how  we
can reflect on  which was about how we can put some  of  these  things  into
reflection, how we can think about it in the order and so forth.  The  whole
point is to make the discovery  that for ourselves. We have  to  reflect  on
what we have learnt. In so doing so, when we start to  taste  the  teachings
and see some truths and clarity lights behind what  is  mentioned  in  them,
teaching,  then  this  will  automatically  enhances  whatever  interest  we
already have in the teachings and our the practice.

Let continue with the text.
(Root text page 15)
`There are two types of False Aspectarians:
1. Tainted False Aspectarians and
2. Untainted False Aspectarians.
How many divisions are there for the MOS?
There are two divisions: (1)
Mind Only True Aspectarians and (2)
Mind Only False Aspectarians.

There are three types For the of  Mind  Only  True  Aspectarians  there  are
three types: (1)
1. Proponents of an Equal Number of Apprehendeds and Apprehenders, (2)
2. Half-Eggists, and (3)
3. Non-Pluralists.

Let us continue with the root text.

   There are two types of False Aspectarians:
1. Tainted False Aspectarians and
2. Untainted False Aspectarians (Page 15).


Mind  Only  Tainted  False  Aspectarians  &  Mind   Only   Untainted   False
Aspectarians
There are two types of For the Mind Onnly False Aspectarians:
1. there are two types:
1. Tainted False Aspectarians who assert that the nature of the  mind[1]  is
  polluted by the stains of dualistic appearance.


2. 2. Untainted False Aspectarians who assert that the nature  of  the  mind
  is  not  polluted  by  the  afflictions.  Rather  the   afflictions   are
  adventitious.

|Mind Only   |Mind Only True        |Proponents of an Equal Number |
|School      |Aspectarian           |of Apprehendeds and           |
|            |                      |Apprehenders                  |
|            |                      |Half-Eggists                  |
|            |                      |Non-Pluralists                |
|            |Mind Only False       |Tainted False Aspectarians    |
|            |Aspectarian           |                              |
|            |                      |Untainted False Aspectarians  |


The Tainted False Aspectarians  assert  that  the  nature  of  the  mind  is
polluted by the stains of the dualistic appearance.
The Untainted False Aspectarians assert that the nature of the mind  is  NOT
polluted by the afflictions, rather the afflictions are adventitious.
Ven Gyurme: I did not say the mind is polluted. I said that  the  nature  of
the mind is polluted.
The Tainted False Aspectarians assert that there is dualistic appearance  on
the buddha ground. Buddhas haves the dualistic appearance of,  for  example,
yellow,  blue,   and  so  forth.   appear  to  them.  There  are    mistaken
appearances on the buddha  ground. Are the  buddhas  Are  Buddhas  mistaken?
No, b. Buddhas areis not  mistaken  but  nevertheless  there  are   mistaken
appearances and there are dualistic appearances, this is  according  to  the
Tainted False Aspectarians.

The Untainted False Aspectarians, on the other hand, assert  that  there  is
are no dualistic appearances on the buddha ground. It seems  that  they  are
saying  that on in the buddha ground,  there are  no  appearances  of  blue,
yellow,  and so forth.

In  short,  the  difference  between  the  Tainted  False  Aspectarians  and
Untainted False Aspectarians lies in  with  whether  they  assert  that  the
nature of the mind is polluted by the stains of the dualistic appearance  or
not.

|Tainted False Aspectarians        |Untainted False Aspectarians      |
|They aAssert that the nature of   |They aAssert that the nature of   |
|the mind is polluted by the stains|the mind is notNOT  polluted by   |
|of the dualistic appearance.      |the afflictions. R, rather the    |
|                                  |afflictions are adventitious.     |
|They aAssert that there is        |They aAssert that there is no     |
|dualistic appearance on the buddha|dualistic appearance on the buddha|
|ground.                           |ground.                           |
|On the In buddha ground, yellow,  |On In the buddha ground, there are|
|blue,  and so forth appear to the |no appearances of blue, yellow,   |
|bBuddhas.                         |and so forth.                     |
|There are mistaken appearances and|                                  |
|dualistic appearances on the      |                                  |
|buddha  ground but a bBuddha is   |                                  |
|not mistaken. So there are        |                                  |
|mistaken appearances and there are|                                  |
|dualistic appearances.            |                                  |


   3 Etymology

   Why are they called ‘Proponents of Mind Only’?

   They are called ‘Proponents  of  Mind  Only’  because  they  assert  that
   phenomena are merely the nature of mind, and they are  called  Proponents
   of Cognition because they assert that all phenomena are merely the nature
   of cognition.

   4 Way of asserting objects

   There are two types of objects of knowledge:
   1. ultimate truths and
   2. conventional truths.

   The definition of an ultimate truth is: that which  is  realized  by  the
   direct valid cognizer directly realizing it by way of  the  vanishing  of
   dualistic appearance.

   Ultimate truth, final reality (Skt. dharmata), sphere  of  reality  (Skt.
   dharmadhatu), and final mode of abiding are equivalent.

   There are two divisions of ultimate truths:
   1. subtle selflessness of phenomena and
   2. subtle selflessness of persons.

   When the subtle selflessness of phenomena is divided by way of the  bases
   of emptiness, there are twenty  emptinesses.  When  they  are  condensed,
   there are eighteen; when they are condensed, there are sixteen; when they
   are condensed, there are four emptinesses, and so forth.

   Illustrations of the subtle selflessness of phenomena are,  for  example,
   the emptiness that is a form and the  valid  cognizer  apprehending  that
   form being empty of being different substances and the emptiness that  is
   a form being empty of existing by way of its  own  characteristics  as  a
   basis for applying the term ‘form.’

   An illustration of the subtle selflessness of persons  is,  for  example,
   the emptiness that is a  person  being  empty  of  being  self-sufficient
   substantially existent (Page 15).


Ultimate truth
(Root text page 15)
3 Etymology
Why are they called ‘Proponents of Mind Only’?
They are called Proponents of Mind Only because they assert  that  phenomena
are merely the nature of mind, and they are called Proponents  of  Cognition
because they assert that all phenomena are merely the nature of cognition
4 Way of asserting objects
There are two types of objects of knowledge:
1. ultimate truths and
2. conventional truths.
The definition of an ultimate truth  is:  that  which  is  realized  by  the
direct valid cognizer directly realizing it  by  way  of  the  vanishing  of
dualistic appearance.
Ultimate truth, final reality  (Skt.  dharmata),  sphere  of  reality  (Skt.
dharmadhatu), and final mode of abiding are equivalent.
There are two divisions of ultimate truths:
1. subtle selflessness of phenomena and
2. subtle selflessness of persons.
When the subtle selflessness of phenomena is divided by way of the bases  of
emptiness, there are twenty emptinesses. When they are condensed, there  are
eighteen; when  they  are  condensed,  there  are  sixteen;  when  they  are
condensed, there are four emptinesses, and so forth.
Illustrations of the subtle selflessness of phenomena are, for example,  the
emptiness that is a form and  the  valid  cognizer  apprehending  that  form
being empty of being different substances and the emptiness that is  a  form
being empty of existing by way of its own characteristics  as  a  basis  for
applying the term ‘form.’
An illustration of the subtle selflessness of persons is, for  example,  the
emptiness  that  is  a  person  being   empty   of   being   self-sufficient
substantially existent.
In the MOS, an ultimate truth, thoroughly established nature, and  emptiness
are mutually inclusive.
Here we have one definition of an ultimate truth in the root text. .  As  in
the root text:
The definition of an ultimate truth  is:  that  which  is  realized  by  the
direct valid cognizer  directly  realizing  it  by  way  of  the  subsiding/
vanishing of dualistic appearance.


There are different definitions for an ultimate truth  as  different  tenets
people haves different definitions. As there are many definitions,  and  one
can look at the ultimate truth it from different perspectives.

I am giving you now  another definition of an ultimate truth: .
Another definition of ultimate truth is: tThe final  object  of  observation
of a pure path. In
In this context, “pure path”   refers  to  the  wisdom  directly  realiszing
emptiness.

Here is another There are different ways of understanding what  an  ultimate
truth is.
An ultimate truth is an object that, Wwhen an object it is becomes the  made
into an object of the mode of apprehension of a particular mind and  ,  then
by meditating on and familiarising the mind  with  that  object,  zing  with
that one can eliminate the obscurations from the mind, .  then  that  object
would be an ultimate truth.
This is how you can understand an ultimate truth here.

Definition in the root text
TWhat is an ultimate truth? It is an ultimate truth if the object  that  you
meditate on and take it to be the object of the  mode  of  apprehension  can
eliminate the obscurations from your mind. Then  that  object  would  be  an
ultimate truth.
The definition of an ultimate truth in accordance with the root  text  which
is: “that  which  is  realiszed  by  the  direct  valid  cogniszer  directly
realiszing it by way of the vanishing subsiding of dualistic appearance.”:

• Here “Tthat which is realiszed” is the object, an   ultimate  truth  that,
  and in this case,  is emptiness.
Emptiness It is realiszed by the direct valid cogniszer directly  realiszing
it.
• What is the direct valid cogniszer in this instancedirectly realizing  it?
  It is the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness.
• Emptiness is realiszed by the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness.
• How does the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness realisze  emptiness?  It
  realiszes emptiness directly.
•
How does the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness realize its  object?  What
does it mean when we say the wisdom  perceiving  emptiness  reait  realiszes
emptiness it directly?
• When the wisdom directly perceiving  emptiness  realiszes  emptiness,   it
  does not realisze emptiness with any dualistic appearance. ,  but  Rrather
  emptiness is realiszed by this direct valid cogniszer  directly  realizing
  it through the subsidence ing of dualistic appearances.
• What does this  mean?  When  this  wisdom  directly  perceiving  emptiness
  realises
When the wisdom directly realizing emptiness realizes emptiness, it does  so
through the subsiding of dualistic appearances.
• What  does  it  means?  When  this  wisdom  directly  realizing  emptiness
  realizes emptiness, in the perspective of this mind, :
  1) there are no conventional appearances.
  2) T, there is no concept or /ffeeling  of  subject  or  object.  Instead,
     tThere is the feeling that these two, i.e., subject  and  object,   are
     merged. ; In other words, tthere is no duality between an objectsubject
     and object.
  (3) T and subject.
Then there isn’t any appearance of an external object.





It It is through the subsidence ing of such  dualistic  appearances  in  the
manner way that  I  have  explained  that  the  wisdom  directly  perceiving
realizing emptiness realiszes emptiness.
Therefore the definition of an ultimate truth is “that  which  is  realiszed
by the  direct  valid  cogniszer  directly  realiszing  it  by  way  of  the
vanishing subsiding of dualistic appearance.”

Etymology
Let us now look at the etymology of an the ultimate truth, ;  nnot  its  the
definition.
In English, the individual words do syllables are  not  fully  conveyed  the
meaning.
In Tibetan, there are isthe words   don  and  dam  pa.  When  they  are  put
together, it is don dam.
In this context, on its own,
• On its own, don, means object, in this context.
Dam  pa  is  translated  in  the  lam-rim  as  “holy”  or  “pure.”  In   the
philosophical context here, it can be translated as  “,  in  Lamrim,  it  is
translated as holy or pure.
• However here dam pa, in the philosophical  context,  you  can  say  it  as
  ultimate.”
• So When you put them together, don dam is the ultimate object.
But you cannot translate it like that all the time.

s.
In this context:
• Dam pa can be read as the meditative equipoise of a superior being.
, dam pa, ultimate, you can  read  it  as  the  meditative  equipoise  of  a
Superior being.
• Don is the object.
W
• In this context when you put them together, don dam  means  an  object  of
  the meditative equipoise of a sSuperior being.
So Tthe words for an ultimate truth in Tibetan is don dam bden pa.
We have explained don and dam pa. Here bden pa means is truth.
Try to understand the etymology of the word.
When we put them together, don is the an  object  that  .  The  object  here
refers here  to emptiness.
The Eemptiness is the object of which mind?
In this case, emptiness is the object  of  the  meditative  equipoise  of  a
sSuperior being.
|don              |Object. In this context, , here refers toit refers |
|                 |to the  as emptiness that , which iis the object of|
|                 |the meditative equipoise of a sSuperior being.     |
|dam pa           |Ultimate. In , in this context, it means the       |
|                 |meditative equipoise of a sSuperior being. being   |
|don dam          |Uultimate object                                   |
|bden pa          |Ttruth                                             |
|don dam bden pa  |Uultimate truth                                    |

In the perspective of theis meditative equipoise of a  sSuperior  being,  in
the case pf emptiness, there is no discord between reality ies  and  how  it
appears. Therefore it is truth.  It is true in  the  a  perspective  of  the
meditative equipoise of a sSuperior being being;. T therefore, emptiness  is
an ultimate truth.

There is anAnother shorter  way of looking at this:
it is shorter. Sometimes you can take don dam together to mean  an  ultimate
awareness, which, . Iin  this  case,   is  the  meditative  equipoise  of  a
sSuperior being being. In the perspective of this  ultimate  awareness,  the
meditative equipoise of a superior  being,  emptiness  is  true  because  it
exists in the way it appears. Therefore it is an ultimate truth  because  it
is true in the perspective of the meditative equipoise of a superior being.
•
• In the perspective of this meditative equipoise of a Superior being,  this
  ultimate awareness, emptiness is true because  it  exist  in  the  way  it
  appears; therefore it is an ultimate truth. It is true in the  perspective
  of the meditative equipoise of a Superior being.
That is why the English language does not convey fully.
In our root text, the definition of an  ultimate  truth  is  that  which  is
realized by the direct valid cognizer directly realizing it by  way  of  the
subsiding of dualistic appearance.
Different people have different definitions. The  definition  which  I  have
gave you earlier is the final object of observation of a pure path.  Another
way of looking at it is that is an object by which if you  familiarize  with
it over and over again  you  will  be  able  to  eliminate  or  purify  your
obscurations.
|Definitions of an ultimate truth                                     |
|IDifferent ways of defining ultimate truth                           |
|n the root text: tThat which is realiszed by the direct valid        |
|cogniszer directly realiszing it by way of the vanishing of subsiding|
|of dualistic appearance (root text)                                  |
|                                                                     |
|The final object of observation of a pure path.                      |
|                                                                     |
|If the object that you are meditating e onon,  and ttaking e that    |
|object it toto  be the object of the mode of apprehension of your    |
|mind,  can eliminate or purify the obscurations from your mind, that |
|object is an ultimate truth.                                         |


If you think that you do not n’t need all these  complications,   and  would
like to keep your life easy then yyou can always  take  ultimate  truth  and
emptiness to mtheean the  same thing.
But iIf you really want to understand this, then you  have  to  look  at  an
ultimate truth and its meaning it in greatermore detail.  of  what  we  have
done for ultimate truth and its meaning. I guess you understood  them  so  I
will move on.

Divisions of emptiness

There are many divisions of emptiness. As mentioned in the root text,  there
are twenty emptinesses, there are eighteen emptinesses,  there  are  sixteen
emptinesses,  and so forth. These divisions are not made  on  the  basis  of
there being a different objects of negation,  i.e.,  the  objects  that  are
being refuted. , but  Rrather  these  divisions  are  made  because  of  the
difference in the according to the bases of emptiness.

When emptinesses are condensed, there are four emptinesses:
1. Emptiness of things
2. Emptiness of non-things
3. Emptiness of nature
4. Emptiness of other- nature
Such divisions are made not because of the different in object  of  negation
i.e.the thing that you are refuting.
But the divisions  are  made  because  of  the  different  in  the  base  of
emptiness.

• Emptiness of things: “ - ‘Tthings” ’ here refers to functioningal  things,
  the those many different composed phenomenaon such as forms and so  forth.
  Their  emptinesses isof those are called the emptiness of things.

• Emptiness of non-things - :  “‘Nnon-things”’  here  refers  to  uncomposed
  phenomena such as uncompounded space. The emptinesses that which exists on
  these uncomposed phenomena is are the emptiness of non-things.
When If you divide emptiness into these two—: the emptiness  of  things  and
the emptiness of non-things—, all emptinesses are subsumed  under  them.  in
it.
• When emptiness is divided into two, then emptiness of thing and  emptiness
  of non-thing would cover all emptinesses. The emptinesses are the same but
  the bases of the emptinesses are different.
When emptinesses is  are divided into four, then there is the  emptiness  of
nature. What does emptiness of nature mean?
• , i.e., Emptiness of nature refers to the emptiness of emptiness.
• The fourth emptiness, the emptiness of other-  nature,  ,  refers  to  the
  emptiness of nirvana.

There are  many  divisions  of  emptiness  such  as  the  emptiness  of  the
internal, the emptiness of the external,  and so forth but all divisions  of
emptinesseses are referring according to the  bases  of  the  emptiness.  In
English you can say; the object that  is  qualified  by  emptiness  has  the
nature of emptiness..

• The emptiness of the internal: -  we have Tthe five sense powers  such  as
  the eye sense power, and so forth and these are included in the  continuum
  of a person. T, therefore they are it is internal, like the emptinesses of
  these five sense powers.
• The emptiness of the external: -  “E‘external”’ refers to those  phenomena
  that are not conjoined with the continuum of a person such as a  form that
  we can see. The emptiness of such a those forms would be the  emptiness of
  the external.

I am not going into  the  details  of  the   with  the  twenty  emptinesses,
eighteen emptinesses, sixteen emptinesses,  and so forth.

Subtle selflessness of phenomena

There are Ttwo illustrations are given for thethe   subtle  selflessness  of
phenomena:
.
1. “The emptiness that is a form and the valid cogniszer  apprehending  that
   form being empty of being different substances.”

2. “The emptiness that is a form being empty of existing by way of  its  own
   characteristics as a basis for applying the term ‘form.’”

The first illustration  deals  with  the  sense  consciousness.  The  second
illustration deals with the conceptual consciousness.

The emptiness that is a form being empty of  existing  by  way  of  its  own
characteristics as a basis for applying the term “form”
• The emptiness that is a form and  the  valid  cognizer  apprehending  that
  form being empty of being different substances is the  illustration  of  a
  sense consciousness.

• The emptiness that is a form being empty of existing by  way  of  its  own
  characteristics as a basis for applying the term ‘form is the illustration
  of a conceptual consciousness.

Let’s look at what exactly is being negated. Is it the object  of  negation/
object of refutation?

This is something you have to focus on. and Iit is not easy.
First, you must identify what exactly what  is being negated or / refuted?
Let us ’s look at the second illustration:

The emptiness that is a form being empty of  existing  by  way  of  its  own
characteristics as a basis for applying the term “‘form.”

This is an illustration of a conceptual consciousness.
Object of negation
The object of negation is the the object that  exists  by  way  of  its  own
character as the  basis  for  the  applying  the  term  “object”[2]  to  the
conceptual  consciousness  apprehending  the  object.[3]  Let  us  use   the
referent of the names.

For example of , blue. BBlue existsing  by way of its own character  as  the
basis for applying the term referent of the name “blue”  to  the  conceptual
consciousness apprehending blue. This is the object of negation.

Blue appears to this mind, the  conceptual  consciousness,  and  it  appears
naturally to be as the basis for applying the term “blue.”
BThis blue lue appearsing to exist naturally from its own side,  by  way  of
its own character naturally as the basis for applying  the  term  “blue”  to
the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue something to be  called  blue
from its own side by way of its own characteristic without depending on  the
conceptual  consciousness  apprehending  blue.  Thisat  is  the  object   of
negation.

AcAccording to the MOS, in reality, such a blue blue  does  not  exist  from
its own side, i.e., as its own uncommon  mode  of  subsistence  and  as  the
basis for applying the term blue.

Blue does not exist by way of its own character as the  basis  for  applying
the term “blue” in relation to  the  conceptual  consciousness  apprehending
blueit.

• Blue does not exist from its own side as its uncommon mode of  abiding  as
  the basis for applying the  term  blue  to  the  conceptual  consciousness
  apprehending blue.

Blue existing by way of its own character as  the  basis  for  applying  the
term blue, this is the object of negation.

For the time being, lLet us ’s talk about blue in  general  without  talking
about blue as  being the basis for applying the term “blue.”

According to the MOS, in general, blue is truly  established,  isan   other-
powered nature and . iIn this school, that  means  blue  it  is  necessarily
truly established. This  which means that  it  exists  by  way  of  its  own
character. This at is how blueit exists.

• Both Tthe SS and the MOS assert  that  blue  exists  by  way  of  its  own
  character and that blue is truly established.

• Both the SS and the MOS assert that there is a blue  that  exists  as  the
  basis for  applying  the  term  “blue”  to  the  conceptual  consciousness
  apprehending blue.
• Both SS and MOS assert that blue exist by way of its own  character.  Blue
  is truly established.
• Both SS and MOS assert that there is a blue that there is  the  basis  for
  applying the term blue.
• Although both the SS and the MOS assert that there is a blue  that  exists
  as blue which is the basis for applying the term “blue,” to the conceptual
  consciousness apprehending blue:
a
   o -but according to the SS, this blue that exists as a basis for applying
     the term “blue”  to  the  conceptual  consciousness  apprehending  blue
     exists ast its own uncommon mode  of  subsistence.  This  at  means  it
     exists from by way of its own  side,  by  way  of  its  own  character,
     whereas .

   o -whereas according to the MOS, this blue that  which  is  a  basis  for
     applying the term “blue” to the conceptual  consciousness  apprehending
     blue does not exist by way of its own character.
Thisat is the difference.

The blue that is merely imputed by conceptuality
The MOS asserts that:
•  there is a blue that is a basis for applying the term “blue,”
• but theis blue that which is the basis for applying the  term  “blue”   to
  the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue does not exist  by  way  of
  its own character.
• It exists but it does not exist by way of its own character. It exists  as
  merely imputed by the conceptual consciousness.conceptuality.

To recap:
(1) There is a blue.
(2)  and Bblue exists by way of its own character.
(3) There is also a blue that  which  is  a  basis  for  applying  the  term
“blue.” but
(4) But the such a blue that which is existing by way of its  own  character
   as the  the  basis  for  applying  the  term  “blue”  to  the  conceptual
   consciousness apprehending  blue  does  not  exist  by  way  of  its  own
   character.
(5) So Tthe blue that which is the basis for applying  the  term  “blue”  to
   the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue does not exist by  way  of
   its  own  character.   butI  t  is  merely  imputed  by  the   conceptual
   consciousnessconceptuality.

You really have to focus and  listen.   and  Yyour  brain  has  to  be  very
alertdeath.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): If your brain is dead,  ath  then  nothing
goes inside.

The bBlue that is the basis for applying the term “blue” to  the  conceptual
consciousness apprehending blue exists but it does not exist by way  of  its
own character. IIt does not exist as its own uncommon mode of subsistence.

Blue that is the  basis  for  applying  the  term  blue  to  the  conceptual
consciousness apprehending it exist but it does not exist by way of its  own
character. So Hhow does  it  exist?   It  exists  as  merely  imputed  by  a
conceptual consciousness. conceptuality.


Blue existing as the basis for applying the term blue does  not  exist  from
the side of blue.

The blue that is the basis for applying the term “blue” does exists.
But theis blue that is the  basis  for  applying  the  term  “blue”  to  the
conceptual consciousness apprehending blue does not exist from the  side  of
blue.  but rRather blue as the basis for applying the  term  “blue”  to  the
conceptual consciousness apprehending blue exists  as  a  mental  construct,
merely imputedation by the conceptual consciousness.conceptuality.

Presenting the fallacies
If there is a blue that exist naturally as the basis for applying  the  term
blue from its own side without depending on  conceptual  consciousness  then
what is the problem?
There is a blue that exists as the basis for applying  the  term  “blue”  to
the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.  However,
Blue does not exist as the natural base of engagement of blue.b
Blue does not exist as the  basis  for  applying  the  term  “blue”  to  the
conceptual consciousness apprehending blue from its own side, by way of  its
own character.


If there is a blue that exists by way of its own character as the basis  for
applying the term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending  blue,
  by  way  of  its  own   characterwithout   depending   on   a   conceptual
consciousness,  then what is the problem?


The problem is this: that, For for example, think of a flat-  based  bulbous
thing. A flat- based bulbous thing is essentially a  vase.  The  consequence
then is that when if you see a flat-  based  bulbous  thing,  naturally  you
will be thinking of a vase.
If the flat- based bulbous thing exists by way of its  own  character,  from
its own side,  as the basis for applying the term “vase,” from its own  side
 then simply by seeing the flat- based  bulbous  thing,   you  would  should
generate the thought “vase.” This is because  you  should  be  able  to  see
“vase”  immediately if the flat- based bulbous thing  exists  from  its  own
side, by way of its own character,  as  the  basis  for  applying  the  term
“vase.” by way of its own character.
If the object existed from the side of the basis of  engagement,  then  just
by seeing the flat base bulbous thing then you should see vase.

But this is not so.
If the flat base bulbous thing existed from its own side as  the  basis  for
applying the term vase then when we see that  flat  base  bulbous  thing  we
should apprehend vase immediately but that is not the case.  Therefore,  the
basis  for  applying  the  term  “vase”  of  engagement  to  the  conceptual
consciousness  apprehending  vase  is  merely  imputed  by  the   conceptual
consciousnessity.

Arya Asanga gave an example of a  person  someone  who  is  known  by  three
different names. If thate person existsed naturally, i.e., from his  or  her
own side, naturally as the basis  of  engagement  of  those  three  namesfor
applying those three names  to  the  conceptual  consciousness  apprehending
that person, it will follow that there would be three different persons.  It
,  then  that  would  incur  the  fallacy  of  there  being  three  separate
individuals. If the person existed naturally as the base  of  engagement  or
exist as the basis for applying the name from its own side, then just  as  a
person who is known by three different names, it will follow that  it  would
be three different persons. But here we are talking about a single person.

What if there are two different persons having the same name?
If theose two different persons existed from  their  own  side,  by  way  of
their own character as the bases for applying,  naturally  as  the  base  of
engagementsay,  the   name   “John,”   to   the   conceptual   consciousness
apprehending these two persons let’s say both known as John,  and  if  these
two exist as the basis for applying the name John from their own side,  then
that would mean that these the two separate  individuals  would  become  one
person.

We now gGoing back to the example of  blue. B, blue does not  exist  by  way
of its own character as the basis  for  applying  the  term  “blue”  to  the
conceptual consciousness apprehending blue. by way  of  its  own  character.
The blue as the basis for applying the term blue does not exist  by  way  of
its own character.

If the blue exists by way of its own character as  the  basis  for  applying
the term “blue,”  by way of its own character then  everyonebody  who  looks
at it would necessarily see blue.
Because if blue existed naturally by way of its own character as  the  basis
for applying the term blue, then whoever see it should see blue.  It  should
be like that because it is not dependent on terms and notation.

Summary
• In short, tThere is a blue that which is the basis for applying  the  term
  “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending it.
• However, the blue that which is the basis for applying the term “blue”  to
  the conceptual consciousness apprehending blueit does not exist,  that  it
  being the basis for applying the term blue does not exist by  way  of  its
  own character. ,
• but Rrather it is a merely an imputation by the conceptual  consciousness.
  conceptuality.

For that reason, the text refers  to  says  that  “a  form  being  empty  of
existing by way of its own characteristics as a basis for applying the  term
‘form.’”

So Wwhat we have to understand is:
(1) W that what does it means when we  see  the  sentence,   “a  form  being
empty of existing by way of its own characteristics istics as  a  basis  for
applying the term ‘form.’”
(2)  What  is  the  problem  if  “a  form  exists  by   way   of   its   own
characteristicsistic as a basis for applying the term “‘form”’?

This is something that which will become clearer  over  time  if  you  think
about it. You have to work at it and  trying  to  get  it.  It  will  become
clearer over time oOnly if you think about it, then overtime it will  become
clearer. If you don’t even want to work at it or think about  it,   then  it
will never become clearer.

• We have to know the words and have to  say,  such  as,  “athe  form  being
  empty of existing by way  of  its  own  characteristics  as  a  basis  for
  applying the term ‘form.’” There is no choice.
• It is only on the basis of knowing the words that en you can  move  on  to
  the next step of finding out what they mean it means when the  text  says,
  we say “a form being empty of existing by way of its  own  characteristics
  as a basis for applying the term ‘form.’”
• Only after that,  can you can think about of  the  next  point,  “What  if
  form exists by way of its own characteristics as a basis for applying  the
  term ‘form’.’”?
• Only thThen can you can only figure out how a form exists as a  basis  for
  applying the term “‘form,”’ i.e., and  it  exists  as  something  that  is
  merely imputed by conceptuality.

From your side, the first thing you must  do  is  that  you  must  know  the
words.  You must be able to say them as easily as you recite Om  Mani  Padme
Hum. and also must able to speak it out like you are  doing  with  “Om  Mani
Padme Hum.”  You have no choice. You have to be able to recite  it  just  as
you recite “Om Mani Padme Hum,” Ootherwise you have there  is  no  basis  to
work withon. How are you  going to ask questions?  What  are  you  going  to
think about? You would have nothing to think about, rightNothing, isn’t  it?
If there is nothing to think about, then  how  can  there  it  ever  be  any
understanding?  So the first thing is that you must be able to are  able  to
say the words. speak it out.

Questions for discussion on Sunday, 21st April 2013
   1. What are the differences in the presentation of the two truths by  the
      Great Exposition School and the Sutra School?
   2. What is a conventional awareness according to the Sutra School? Why is
      it called a conventional awareness?
   3. What is an ultimate awareness according to the Sutra School? Why is it
      called an ultimate awareness?
   4. What are the reasons for the  Sutra  School’s  assertion  of  external
      objects? What are the reasons for the Mind-Only School’s refutation of
      external objects?
   5. Why dois it that the Great Exposition School and the Sutra  School  do
      not assert a selflessness of phenomena?


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong


-----------------------
[1] Ven Gyurme: I did not say that the mind is polluted.  I  said  that  the
nature of the mind is polluted.

[2] “Existing by way of its own character as  the  basis  for  applying  the
term (or name)” is  also  translated  as  “natural  referent  of  terms  (or
names)” or “natural base of engagement for the term (or name).” For ease  of
understanding and clarity, only “existing by way of  its  own  character  as
the basis for applying  the  term  (or  name)”  will  be  used  in  sections
relating to this topic in the transcripts.



