Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L24upload.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.509158
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 24[1]                            Date: 6th June 2013


                            1 Consequence School


   The explanation of the Consequence School  (Skt.  Prasangika)  has  seven
   outlines, as before.

   1  Definition

   The definition of a Consequentialist is: a Proponent of  the  Middle  Way
   who, by way of  accepting  just  other-approved  consequences,  does  not
   assert true existence even conventionally.

   2  Divisions

   Examples  [of  Consequentialists]  are  Buddhapalita,  Chandrakirti,  and
   Shantideva.

   3  Etymology

   There   is   a   reason   why   Acharya   Buddhapalita   is   called    a
   ‘Consequentialist.’  He  is  called  such  due  to  asserting   that   an
   inferential cognizer realizing a thesis is generated in the continuum  of
   an opponent just by [stating] consequences (Page 24).


When  we  look  at  the  etymology  of  the  word,  “Consequentialist”   (or
Prasangika), it is someone who is able to cause an opponent to  generate  an
inferential cognitiontion realising a  particular  thesis   just  by  merely
stating a consequence ofr the opponent’s whatever argument or  statement  he
makes.

The Consequentialist states that Iin order for an opponent  to  generate  an
inferential cognition zer realiszing a thesis, it is not necessary  for  the
Consequentialist to cause him to realisze that thesis by stating  a  reason,
“This is such aso annd suchso.” All he you has ve tto do,  sometime,  is  is
to merely state a mere consequence of the opponent’s his/her  pposition,  by
saying, just stating “It follows then that ...”

Let  us  ’s  use  as  just  state  an  example   of  a  consequence  that  a
Consequentialist could use against would throw at the a  Pproponent  of  the
Autonomy School in order to refute truely existencet.
A Consequentialist may will say, : “It follows  then  that  the  subject,  a
sprout, is not produced in dependence upon its  own  cause,  because  it  is
inherently inherently existent.”
 It is said that the opponent,  by simply hearing the consequence that is  ,
just thrown at them ccan realisze that there is  an  internal  contradiction
in his their own position. In the process and, in  the  processdoing,  ,  he
they may come to realisze the emptiness of inherent existencet.

The Consequentialists states that  in order for an opponent to  generate  an
inferential  cognition  zer  realiszing  a  particular  thesis,  it  is  not
necessary:
• it is not necessary to state a subject that is  commonly  agreed  upon  by
  both parties and
• to ait is also not necessary always to state a reason.

The point is that the  Consequentialists  states  that,   in  order  for  an
opponent to generate an inferential cognition zer realiszing  a  thesis,  it
is not necessary always to cause the opponent to do so by always  stating  a
proof or reason. One You can do that simply by pointing out stating  the  an
“absurdity of a  consequence” of their position.

The root of the Consequence School stems from  Nagarjuna,  father  and  son,
namely Nagarjuna  and  his  spiritual  son,   Aryadeva.  Nagarjuna  composed
Fundamental Wisdom. Nagarjuna and Aryadeva did not employ many  consequences
in stating the Madhyamakas view did not employ a lot of  consequences.  What
they merely did was to establishestablishing  the general procedure  of  the
Madhyamaka view.

Later on Acharya Buddhapalita,  came. Iinn  his  commentary  on  Nagarjuna’s
Fundamental Wisdom, Buddhapalita employed only  consequences  in  explaining
Nagarjuna’s view and intent. He did not use any autonomous reasons.

Later Bhavaviveka came along. He ddisagreed with  Buddhapalita’s  commentary
on Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom and . He disagreed with the idea that  one
can simply  just  use  consequences  in  order  to  establish  the  view  of
selflessness.  He  felt  that  one  cannot  realise  Nagarjuna’s  intent  by
employing consequences only. He was not saying that a consequence is  not  a
line of reasoning but hHe explained that one must use autonomous proofs  and
reasons in order to be able to cause an opponent to generate an  inferential
cognition  zer  realiszing  selflessness.  He  wrote   a   few   couple   of
commentaries explaining Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom by  using  autonomous
proofs and reasons. This is how Bhavaviveka becaome the trailblazer  of  the
AMWS  (Svatantrika-Madhyamaka).

Bhavaviveka disagreed with Buddhapalita’s commentary because  he  felt  that
one cannot realize Nagarjuna’s thought just by  employing  consequences.  He
is not saying that a consequence is not a line  of  reasoning  but  he  felt
that one must employ autonomous reasons and proofs  in  order  to  cause  an
opponent to generate an inferential cognizer realizing a particular  thesis.

Later the great master Chandrakirti, came along. in In  one  of  his  famous
commentaries  y  called  the  “Clear  Words,”  he  supported  Buddhapalita’s
position  by  saying  that  one  can  cause  an  opponent  to  generate   an
inferential cognition zer realiszing the thesis just  by  merely  stating  a
consequence. In his Clear Words,  Chandrakirti  agreed  with  Buddhapalita’s
mode of explaining Nagarjuna’s Fundamental  Wisdom,  .  He  also  sstatinged
clearly that Buddhapalita’s explanation was exactly according to the  intent
of Nagarjuna. He also stated that the use of autonomous reasons in order  to
generate an inferential cognition zer realiszing a thesis in an opponent  is
wrong.

Great master Chandrakirti stated very  clearly  that  the  position  of  the
Prasangika’s position  is a correct  one,  whereas  the  assertions  of  the
Aautonomistsous  wereis  incorrect.  For  that  reason,  most  people  would
attribute  Chandrakirti  to  be   the   trailblazer   of   the   Prasangika-
Madhyamiikaa. Of course However there are scholars or masters who  say  that
Buddhapalita  is  the  trailblazer  of  the  Prasangika,   instead  of   not
Chandrakirti.


   4  Way of asserting objects

   There are two types of objects:
1. hidden objects and
2. manifest objects.

   Objects that are necessarily realized  in  dependence  on  a  reason  are
   posited as hidden objects, and objects that  can  be  ascertained  by  an
   ordinary person through the force of experience without  depending  on  a
   reason are posited as manifest objects (Page 24).
 (Root text page 24)
4 Way of asserting objects
There are two types of objects:
1. Hidden objects and
2. Manifest objects.
Objects that are necessarily realized in dependence on a reason are  posited
as hidden objects, and objects  that  can  be  ascertained  by  an  ordinary
person through the force of experience without depending  on  a  reason  are
posited as manifest objects.
“Ordinary person” can be taken  literally  and  ry  means  the  ordinary  in
English, nnot necessarily the “ordinary”  in the  spiritual  sense  of  a  ,
i.e. the person who is only concerned with looks only at this life.

   Illustrations of hidden objects are, for  example,  the  impermanence  of
   sound and the emptiness of sound being truly existent.


   Illustrations of manifest objects are, for example, a pot and  a  woollen
   cloth.

   Perceptible object[2] and manifest object are equivalent (Page 24).

Perceptible/manifest objects
A perceptible object  and  a  mIllustrations  of  hidden  objects  are,  for
example, the impermanence of sound and the emptiness of  sound  being  truly
existent.
Illustrations of manifest objects are, for example,  a  pot  and  a  woollen
cloth.
Perceptible object*1 and manifest object are equivalent.
*1  mngon sum (Skt. pratyaksa) This can also be translated as ‘direct’.  For
schools other than the Consequence school, this is  normally  translated  as
‘perception’  or  ‘direct  perceiver’  since  it  refers  to  the  cognitive
subject. In the Consequence  school  however  it  primarily  refers  to  the
object of  cognition  and  hence  it  is  translated  here  as  ‘perceptible
object’.
Manifest  object and perceptible object are mutually inclusive.
It is obvious wWhether it is a a pot, a table, a   or  cup,  and  so  forth.
When we see a cup, wethese things are obvious. We do see a cup.  We  do  not
n’t have to sit and have to think,  using reasons, to  trying to figure  out
what the object is. ether it is a cup or not. Obviously it  is  a  cup.  You
realisze that  it  through  experience.  You  don’t  have  think  about  it.
Basically, Aall the objects of the five senses are obvious:
    • visual form is the object of the eye consciousness,
    • sound is the object of the  ear consciousness,
    • smell is the object of the nose consciousnesss,
    • taste is the object of the tongue consciousness and
    • tactility is the object of the body consciousness.

You don’t have to depend on a reason to realize them. You experience them.
So Iin order to realisze a perceptible, manifest, or obvious or  perceptible
objects, you do not n’t necessarily have to depend on a  reason.  Of  course
Tthere are exceptions in which you may need to think about what this is  and
what that is, but,  in general,  these  things  need  not  be  realiszed  by
using a reason. These are obvious or manifest objects.

Hidden objects
Hidden objects These aare objects that you  have  to  realise,  ,  at  least
initially, realize by using a reason. The examples of  hidden  objects  that
are given in the text are the impermanence of sound  and  the  emptiness  of
sound being truly existent. In order to realisze  the  impermanence  or  the
emptiness of sound or to realize the emptiness of sound, one has  no  choice
but to depend on a reason. Without depending on a  reason,  they  cannot  be
realised. there is no way to realize it.

According to the Consequence  School,  anything  that  exists  is  either  a
hidden object or a manifest object. There is no n’t a common  locus  between
the two, i.e., that is, you will not be able to find something that is  both
a hidden object and a manifest object. Therefore this makes  these  two  are
mutually exclusive.

Hidden and extremely hidden objects
Within the category of hidden objects, there  are  (1)  hidden  objects  and
there are (2) extremely hidden objects (or extremely obscured objects).

Examples of eExtremely hidden  objects  will  are  bethings  like  the   the
extremely very subtle details of the workings  of  a  particular  cause  and
effect relationship, and also  the  existence  of  the  pure  lands  of  the
bBuddhas, which are very extensive, exist in the  ten  directions,  and  are
countless in number. ’s Pure Land
. Buddha’s Pure Lands are huge and extensive. They are  in  every  direction
and also there are numberless of them. These  are  what  we  call  extremely
hidden objects.
 Extremely hidden objects can only be realiszed in dependence on  scriptural
authority. In dependence upon the scriptural authority, one generates  athne
inferential cogniszer through belief. This is how one  comes  to  understand
the extremely hidden objects.

According to  the  ConsequentialistsPrasangika,  the  manifest  objects  and
hidden objects are mutually exclusive. However, in the  lower  schools,  the
ways they define a manifest object in a different way. For  ,  for  example,
according to the Sutra School:
• that which is explicitly realiszed  by  a  direct  valid  cogniszer  is  a
  manifest object.
• that which is explicitly  realiszed  by  an  inferential  cogniszer  is  a
  hidden object.

Because  of  this  understanding  of  what  constitutes  a  hidden   object,
according to a lower school,— that  which  is  explicitly  realiszed  by  an
inferential cogniszer—. fFor them, everything can  be  explicitly  realiszed
by an inferential cogniszer. If  that  is  the  case  ,  then  that   makess
everything a a hidden object as well. But as seen As in the previous  module
on  lo-rLorig,  remember  that  existents  and  non-existents  are  mutually
exclusive.

According  to  the  ConsequentialistsPrasangika,  manifest  objects  can  be
realiszed directly through experience without necessarily having  to  depend
on a reason necessarily, whereas a hidden objects  hhaves  to  be  realiszed
in dependence on a reason.
So Tthisat is one way of looking at existents—: hidden objects and  manifest
objects.

|Hidden objects                    |Manifest objects                 |
|Objects that are necessarily      |Objects that can be ascertained  |
|realiszed in dependence on a      |by an ordinary person through the|
|reason.                           |force of experience without      |
|                                  |depending on a reason.           |
|Illustrations: the impermanence of|Illustrations: a pot, a table, a |
|sound and the emptiness of sound  |cup, a woollen cloth.            |
|being truly existent.             |                                 |
|Two divisions:                    |Manifest object and Pperceptible |
|Hidden object                     |object and manifest object are   |
|Extremely hidden object           |mutually inclusive               |
|Extremely hidden objects can only |                                 |
|be realiszed in dependence on     |                                 |
|scriptural authority.             |                                 |
|Examples:  The existence of       |                                 |
|Pureland, the subtle details of   |                                 |
|the workings of a cause and effect|                                 |
|relationship or the existence of  |                                 |
|the pure lands of the buddhas.    |                                 |

   (Root text page 24)
   Another way of dividing objects is into:
   1. conventional truths and
   2. ultimate truths.
   The definition of being a conventional truth is: an object that is  found
   by a valid cognizer analyzing a conventionality and with respect to which
   that  valid  cognizer  analyzing  the  conventionality  becomes  a  valid
   cognizer analyzing a conventionality.
   It is  inadmissible  to  divide  conventional  truths  into  two  –  real
   conventional truths and unreal conventional truths – because there are no
   real conventional truths. This is so because  if  it  is  a  conventional
   truth, it is necessarily not  real.  This  is  so  because  if  it  is  a
   conventional truth, it is necessarily unreal. [i.e., a falsity]
   It is admissible to divide conventional truths into two – real and unreal
   – relative to the perspective of a worldly consciousness because a  form,
   relative to the perspective of a  worldly consciousness, is  real,  while
   the reflection of a face in a mirror [being  a  face],  relative  to  the
   perspective of a worldly consciousness, is unreal. If it is real relative
   to the perspective of a worldly consciousness, it  does  not  necessarily
   exist because truly existent forms are [real with respect  to  a  worldly
   consciousness but do not exist].

   Another way of dividing objects is into:
1. conventional truths and
2. ultimate truths.




The two truths

   The definition of being a conventional truth is: an object that is  found
   by a valid cognizer analyzing a conventionality and with respect to which
   that  valid  cognizer  analyzing  the  conventionality  becomes  a  valid
   cognizer analyzing a conventionality.

   It is  inadmissible  to  divide  conventional  truths  into  two  –  real
   conventional truths and unreal conventional truths – because there are no
   real conventional truths. This is so because  if  it  is  a  conventional
   truth, it is necessarily not  real.  This  is  so  because  if  it  is  a
   conventional truth, it is necessarily unreal. [i.e., a falsity]

   It is admissible to divide conventional truths into two – real and unreal
   – relative to the perspective of a worldly consciousness because a  form,
   relative to the perspective of a worldly consciousness,  is  real,  while
   the reflection of a face in a mirror [being  a  face],  relative  to  the
   perspective of a worldly consciousness, is unreal. If it is real relative
   to the perspective of a worldly consciousness, it  does  not  necessarily
   exist because truly existent forms are [real with respect  to  a  worldly
   consciousness but do not exist] (Pages 24 – 25).

There are is many ways  of  translating  kun  rdzob  bden  pa:  conventional
truth, obscurational truth, truth of a concealer, concealer  truth,  and  so
forth. In  the  context  of  the  Consequentialists,  Prasangika,  sometimes
obscurational truth is more  accurate.  Let’s  us  stick  with  conventional
truth for the time being.

Alternative definition of conventional truth from  Ven.  Gyurme:  an  object
that is found by a valid cogniser distinguishing a conventionality and  with
respect to which that  valid  cogniser  distinguishing  the  conventionality
becomes a valid cogniser distinguishing a conventionality.

|Definition of conventional truth is: an object that is found by a  |
|valid cognizer distinguishing a conventionality and with respect to|
|which that valid cognizer distinguishing the conventionality       |
|becomes a valid cognizer distinguishing a conventionality.         |


Ven   Gyurme:   I   prefer   the   term   “‘distinguishing”’   rather   than
“‘analyszing.”g’

In the definition “Aa valid cogniszer distinguishing a conventionality”:
there is aone valid cogniszer distinguishing a conventionality
and there is also a valid cogniszer distinguishing an ultimate.
For the ease of understanding:
• A conventional truth is the  final  object  or  main  object  of  a  valid
  cogniszer distinguishing a conventionality.
• An ultimate truth is  the  final  object  or  main  object  of  the  valid
  cogniszer distinguishing an ultimate.


   The definition of being an ultimate truth is: an object found by a  valid
   cognizer analyzing the ultimate and with  respect  to  which  that  valid
   cognizer analyzing the ultimate becomes a valid  cognizer  analyzing  the
   ultimate (Page 25).

Here we are talking about the highest school, the Consequence School.
There is a definition of ultimate truth.
|The definition of being an ultimate truth is: an object found by a |
|valid cognizer analyzing the ultimate and with respect to which    |
|that valid cognizer analyzing the ultimate becomes a valid cognizer|
|analyzing the ultimate.                                            |


What  exactly  is  an  ultimate  truth?  It  is  the  emptiness  of   truely
existencet.
There is nothing higher or more exalted than that.  So,  ultimate  truth  is
essentially the emptiness of truly existent. Any existencet other than  true
existence that is a conventional truth. This is an easy  way  to  understand
the two truths according to the ConsequentialistsPrasangika.

The definition of athe conventional truth: is an object that is found  by  a
valid cogniszer distinguishing a conventionality and with respect  to  which
that valid cognizser distinguishing  the  conventionality  becomes  a  valid
cogniszer distinguishing a conventionality.
When If we are just looking at a conventional truth from the perspective  of
a sentient being, then the first part— [aAn object that is found by a  valid
cogniszer distinguishing a conventionality—] is enough.
WhyWhy then  do we have the rest of the definition? Because there is a bu
Basically there is Buddha who is different from  us.  The  Buddha  perceives
the two truths simultaneously.

The Buddha’s omniscient mind of a buddha directly perceives the  two  truths
simultaneously. This at would makes that one e omniscient mind of  a  buddha
both a valid cogniszer distinguishing a  conventionality  and  at  the  same
time, at the same time,  a valid cogniszer distinguishing an ultimate.

Is there a phenomenon that is both these two cogniszers?

A vase is a conventional truth and . It is not an ultimate truth.
But Then someone body comes along and  says  to  you,  :  “The  vase  is  an
ultimate truth because it is the final object that is  distinguisheds  by  a
valid cogniszer distinguishing an ultimate.”.

What are  you  going  to  say?  You  have  to  say  “No”.   The  vase  is  a
conventional truth and not an ultimate truth.
But somebody comes along and says: “It is an ultimate truth  because  it  is
the final object. It is the  object  that  is  found  by  a  valid  cognizer
distinguishing an ultimate”.
Then you say, : “No. I, it is a conventional truth.”

But tTheat other  person continues to say, : “It follows that  the  vase  is
the final object of a valid cogniszer distinguishing an ultimate because  it
is the object of  comprehension  of  a  valid  cogniszer  distinguishing  an
ultimate.”

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Are you getting somewhere  or  are  you  not
getting notanywhere? All right. We Okay we try onee more time.

Do you know why we are going through this process? The point  here  is  that
if Ssomeone may body were to ask you, :
“Why can’t we not just define a conventional truth only as  an  object  that
is found by a  valid  cogniszer  distinguishing  a  conventionality  and  an
ultimate  truth  as  an  object  that  is  found  by   a   valid   cogniszer
distinguishing the ultimate?”
It should isbe enough to just state that because they are it  is  the  final
objects that areis distinguished by both valid cogniszers respectively.  Why
can ’t we not just leave it atas that?” Why we need  to  have  such  a  long
sentence for that?

If the definition of an ultimate truth is simply, “Aan object that is  found
by a valid cogniszer analyszing the ultimate,”  then in thin this  is  case,
an  ultimate truth will not necessarily be limited to emptiness.

So the question is, : “If it is an the object found  by  a  valid  cogniszer
distinguishing an ultimate truth, is it necessarily emptiness?”

The point is this. W: What would be the problem  if  the  definition  of  an
ultimate truth is just like that alone, i.e., “Is an object  that  is  found
by a valid cogniszer distinguishing an ultimate”? (The actual definition  of
ultimate truth: is an  object  found  by  a  valid  cognizer  analyzing  the
ultimate and with  respect  to  which  that  valid  cognizer  analyzing  the
ultimate becomes a valid cognizer analyzing the ultimate)
The problem then is that you can posit  anything,  basically  any  existent,
not necessarily just emptiness, to be the object that is found  by  a  valid
cogniszer distinguishing an ultimate. It can be  anything  else  other  than
emptiness.
All  phenomena  are  the  objects  that  are  found  by  a  valid  cogniszer
distinguishing an ultimate. Likewise, all phenomena  aare  lso  become  also
the  objects  that  are  found  by  a  valid  cogniszer   distinguishing   a
conventionality.

The problem becomes clear when somebody tells you, “:  The  subject  is  the
Buddha’s omniscient mind of a buddha that which realiszes emptiness.”
The Buddha’s omniscient mind of a buddha  realiszes  emptiness.  Is  that  a
valid cogniszer distinguishing es an ultimate or not? Yes it is.

Does the A Buddha’s omniscient mind of a  buddha   realising  zes  emptiness
realiszes  only  emptiness?  The  Buddha’s  omniscient  mind  of  a   buddha
realiszes everything else, every single thing, which means everything  other
than emptiness.
Because of this, therefore it follows that all phenomena  are  objects  that
are ffound by a valid cogniszer distinguishing an  ultimate.  All  phenomena
are the objects that are found by the Buddha’s omniscient mind.

Likewise, all  phenomena  are  also  objects  that  are  found  by  a  valid
cogniszer  distinguishing   a   conventionality   because   athe   bBuddha’s
omniscient mind directly perceivesing all conventionalities.  All  phenomena
become the objects that are found by that mind.

Because we have to consider the workings of the mind of a buddha, iHow  does
the Buddha’s mind works? If you were to just define the two  truths  as  the
objects that are  found  by  their   respective  valid  cogniszers,  whether
distinguishing an ultimate or distinguishing a conventionality, then iit  is
not going to work.
Therefore tThe definition of a  conventional  truth  is  posited  to  be  an
object that is found by a valid cognizer  distinguishing  a  conventionality
and—not  stopping  there—  with  respect  to  which  that   valid   cognizer
distinguishing the conventionality becomes a valid  cognizer  distinguishing
a conventionality.

Divisions of conventional truth
Unlike the AutonomistsSvatantrika, the Consequentialists Prasangika  do  not
divide conventional truth into (1) :
rReal conventional truth and (2)
uUnreal conventional truth.
According  to  the  Consequentialists,  Prasangika,   there   is   no   real
conventional truth. Why? Because if  it  is  a  conventional  truth,  it  is
necessarily unnot real and is a falsity.

However, relative to the perspective of a worldly  consciousness,  one  does
divide the conventional truth into real and unreal.
The essence is this: There are no real  conventional  truths.  If  it  is  a
conventional truth, it is necessarily  unreal.  This  means  that  it  is  a
falsity. However, the Consequentialists Prasangika  do  divide  conventional
truths into real and unreal relative only to the perspective  of  a  worldly
consciousness.
As stated in the root text, : “Bbecause a form, relative to the  perspective
of a worldly consciousness, is real, while the reflection of  a  face  in  a
mirror  [being  a  face],  relative  to  the  perspective   of   a   worldly
consciousness, is unreal.” (Page 25).  is not a real face”.

So, it is said “Rrelative to the perspective of  a  worldly  consciousness”:
-here “worldly” refers to someone who has not realiszed  emptiness.  So  Iin
the perspective of such a person, a form is real. E
In a  perspective  of  a  worldly  person,  someone  who  has  not  realized
emptiness, everything  that  appears  to  that  person  appears  to  (1)  as
existing by way of its own character, (2) existing truly, and  (3)  existing
inherently. Not only is is there that appearance, the person assents to  the
appearance and thinks, : “This is how things existare.” Basically he  agrees
and assumes that this  is  how  things  exist  and  things  are  like  that.
Therefore, in the perspective of such a person, everything is real  in  that
sense.  Real as in what they are and what one see.
Here “form” is considered to be a real conventional truth according  to  the
perspective of a worldly consciousness.

The text continues: “If it is real relative to the perspective of a  worldly
consciousness, it does not necessarily exist because  truly  existent  forms
are [real with respect to a worldly consciousness but do not exist].”  (Page
25).


The reflection of a face in the mirror is an unreal  conventional  truth  in
the perspective of a worldly consciousness. Even for  someone  who  has  not
realiszed emptiness can realiszes that the reflection of  the  face  in  the
mirror is not an the actual face. So the person realiszes that  there  is  a
disparity between the appearance and reality.

For the worldly person someone who has not realiszed emptiness, with  regard
to certain phenomena, there are things that the  worldly  person  he  cannot
realisze that there is a disparity between how they it appears and how  they
it exist. s, To this worldly person, except that they it exists in  the  way
they it appears. Those phenomena are what we call real  conventional  truths
in the perspective of a worldly consciousness.

The reflection of the face in the mirror is  an  unreal  conventional  truth
relative to the perspective of to  a  worldly  consciousness.  Why?  Because
even for a worldly person who has not realiszed emptiness, that  person  can
realiszes that the reflection of the face  in  the  mirror  is  not  an  the
actual face.  The  person  sees  that  there  is  a  disparity  between  the
appearance and reality. The Such an example of , like the reflection of  the
face in the mirror, is an example of an unreal conventional  truth  relative
to the perspective of a worldly consciousness.

Do real conventional truths exist? No.

Do unreal conventional truths exist? One may be able to say “Yes.”.
Like the reflection of the face in the  mirror,  it  is  a  falsity.  It  is
unreal.


   The definition of being an ultimate truth is: an object found by a  valid
   cognizer analyzing the ultimate and with  respect  to  which  that  valid
   cognizer analyzing the ultimate becomes a valid  cognizer  analyzing  the
   ultimate.

   The divisions [of ultimate truths] are similar to those in the context of
   the Proponents of Mind Only, however in this context it is asserted  that
   true cessations are necessarily ultimate truths (Page 25).
(Root text page 25)
The definition of being an ultimate truth is: an object  found  by  a  valid
cognizer analyzing the  ultimate  and  with  respect  to  which  that  valid
cognizer analyzing the ultimate  becomes  a  valid  cognizer  analyzing  the
ultimate.
The divisions [of ultimate truths] are similar to those in  the  context  of
the Proponents of Mind Only, however in this context  it  is  asserted  that
true cessations are necessarily ultimate truths.

The Consequentialists are  alike  in  asserting  that  true  cessations  are
ultimate truths.

Next is the way  of  asserting  object-  processors.  Here  there  are  some
differences in the position of the Consequentialists. ’ position.


   5 Way of asserting object-possessors

   The mere I that is imputed  in  dependence  on  the  five  aggregates  is
   asserted to be the illustration of the person.

   Person is necessarily a non-associated compositional factor (Page 25).

Illustration of the person(Root text page 25)
5 Way of asserting object-possessors
The mere I that is imputed in dependence on the five aggregates is  asserted
to be the illustration of the person.
Person is necessarily a non-associated compositional factor.

With the exception of the Consequentialists, all the other tenets  everybody
else believes that things exist inherently. This means that  when  you  look
for the object, you definitely will able to  find  something  that  you  can
point to and say, : “There that is it is (referring  to  the  object).”  the
thing”. That is the meaning of the phrase “the imputed  object  when  sought
is findable.”.

With the exception of the Consequentialists,  some  says  that  the  “I”  or
person is the body. Many , and a lot of them say that the “I” or  person  is
the mind.

The Consequentialists obviously do not say that the  person  is  either  the
body or mind. In fact, they say that the person is not the  mind.  To  them,
It is ridiculous; the person cannot be the mind. The person  cannot  be  the
body either. as well. When you look for  the  person,  ultimately  what  you
cannot you find it. ound is nothing. You are not able  to  find  the  person
when you look for it, yet the person exists. Obviously Tthe  person  exists,
but when you look for it, it cannot be found.  So,  what  on  earth  is  the
person?

At the end of the day, To the Consequentialists, the person  is  none  other
than that which is merely imputed in dependence upon  the  five  aggregates.
This is how the “I” exists. , Ttheat which the “I” exists as merely  imputed
in dependence upon the five aggregates. There is n Nothing is  beyond  that.
Therefore, in this school, the  person  is  a  non-associated  compositional
factor. It is neither ot matter nor is it . It is not consciousness.

Valid cognition

   There are two types of awarenesses:
1. valid cognizers and
2. non-valid cognizers (Page 25).

   There are two types of valid cognizer:
3. direct valid cognizers and
4. inferential valid cognizers (Page 25).
(Root text page 25)
There are two types of awarenesses:
   1. valid cognizers and
   2. non-valid cognizers.
There are two types of valid cognizer:
   3. direct valid cognizers and
   4. inferential valid cognizers.

The Consequentialists Prasangika defines a valid cogniszer differently  from
the otherrest of the  tenets. To them,
For the Prasangika, as long as the mind realiszes its own object  and  ,  it
is infallible with respect to the object, so it is a valid cogniszer.

This position is
Uunlike the schools below it  who  all  ,  they  all  insist  that  a  valid
cogniszer has to be a newly incontrovertible knower. “Newly” refers  to  the
That means it has to be fresh, the very first moment of cognition.
The Consequentialists Prasangika says that  that  is  unnecessary.  A  valid
cognition need not be the first moment of realisation of the  object.  there
is no need for that. So there is a difference  between  the  Prasangika  and
the rest of the tenets in that.
For the Prasangika, a valid cognizer needs not be just that first moment  of
realization of the object.
It doesn’t have to be a newly incontrovertible knower. For  the  Prasangika,
as long as it realizes the object, it is a valid cognizer.
For that reason, according to  the  ConsequentialistsPrasangika,  subsequent
cogniszers are  considered  to  be  to  be  valid  cogniszers  as  well.  As
mentioned in in ththe previous module on lo-rig, ,  a  subsequent  cogniszer
is not a valid cogniszer. A subsequent cogniszer is a knower that  realiszes
what has already been realiszed.

You have to understand  The  point  that  you  have  to  get  is  tthese  he
differencess  in  the  assertions  of  the  Consequentialists  between   the
Prasangika  and  the  other  rest  of  the  ttenets  with  regards  to  what
constitutes a valid cogniszer. The difference comes in their  definition  of
a valid cogniszer.

   There are two types of valid cognizer:
   1. direct valid cognizers and
   2. inferential valid cognizers (Page 25).

There are two types of valid cognizers:
    ➢ Direct valid cognizers and
Inferential valid cognizers.
According to the ConsequentialistsPrasangika, a direct valid cogniszeer
• is a valid cogniszer that arises without necessarily having to  depend  on
  directly (or explicitly)  realiszing  a sign and
• is an incontrovertible knower  with respect to its object of the  mode  of
  apprehension.

What is a direct valid cognizer according to the Prasangika?
    ➢ It is a valid cognizer which does not arise by directly or  explicitly
      depending on a sign and
    ➢ It is an incontrovertible knower with respect to  its  object  of  the
      mode of apprehension.
They assert direct  (1)  direct  valid  cogniszers,  (2)  inferential  valid
cogniszers,  and (3) yogic direct perceivers.
They do not assert self-knowing direct perceivers.
This  is   Here   is   another   difference   in   the   position   of   the
Consequentialistsfor the Prasangika.


   There are two types of direct valid cognizers:
   1. conceptual direct valid cognizers and
   2. non-conceptual direct valid cognizers (Page 25).
   (Root text page 25)
   There are two types of direct valid cognizers:
1. conceptual direct valid cognizers and
2. non-conceptual direct valid cognizers.
As mentioned we did in lthe Lo-rig, according to the lowers schools such  as
the SS, a direct valid cogniszer is  necessarily  free  from  conceptuality.
But  here,  according  to   the   ConsequentialistsPrasangika,   there   are
conceptual direct valid cognizers.


   Illustrations of conceptual direct valid cognizers are, for example,  the
   second  moment  of  an  inferential  cognizer  realizing  sound   to   be
   impermanent  and  a  remembering  consciousness  that  is   a   factually
   concordant memory of blue generated through  being  induced  by  a  sense
   direct perceiver apprehending blue (Page 25).
(Root text page 25)
Illustrations of conceptual direct valid cognizers  are,  for  example,  the
second moment of an inferential cognizer realizing sound to  be  impermanent
and a remembering consciousness that is a  factually  concordant  memory  of
blue  generated  through  being  induced  by  a   sense   direct   perceiver
apprehending blue.

The illustration given of a conceptual direct valid cogniszer is the  second
moment of an inferential cogniszer realiszing sound to be impermanent.
What about the first moment of this inferential cognition?
• The first moment  of  an  inferential  cogniszer  realizing  sound  to  be
  impermanent is an inferential valid cogniszer.
• In tThe second moment, it  becomes a subsequent cogniszer,  but  it  is  a
  conceptual direct  valid  cogniszer.  It  is  a  conceptual  direct  valid
  cognizer.

Why is the first moment of an inferential cogniszer realiszing sound  to  be
impermanent an inferential valid cogniszer and then,  in the second  moment,
it becomes a conceptual direct valid cogniszer?

As mentioned  before,  according  to  the  ConsequentialistsPrasangika,  the
difference between  a  direct  valid  cogniszer  and  an  inferential  valid
cogniszer hinges hinges  on  whether  that  mind  is  generated  by  relying
directly on a sign or reason or  not.  The  generation  of  a  direct  valid
cogniszer does not come about by relying  directly  on  a  sign  whereas  an
inferential cogniszer is generated by relying directly on a sign or reason.

Do you remember “in dependence upon a sign from the definition”  as  in  the
last module Lorig?
The first moment of a mind realiszing the impermanencet of sound comes  from
is  by  relying  on  a  reasonreason.  That  makes  that  first  moment   an
inferential valid cogniszer because that first  moment  is  generated  comes
about by relying directly on a reasonsign.
It is a  valid  cogniszer.  Not  only  that,  it  is  an  inferential  valid
cogniszer.
So, the first moment of the  inferential  cognizer  realizing  sound  to  be
impermanent is an inferential cognizer. This  is  because  it  is  generated
directly depending on a sign.

How come in the second moment, that same mind is then now considered  to  be
a directly valid cogniszer?
Is Is that second moment generated in dependence on a reason or not?
In the second moment, it is  not  generated  in  dependence  directly  on  a
reason.
Since in the second moment of an inferential cogniszer realiszing  sound  to
be impermanent  is  not  generated  directly  in  dependence  on  a  reason,
therefore it is not an inferential valid cogniszer. It  is  a  direct  valid
cogniszer.
Is it a  conceptual mind? Yes, it is conceptual..  So, it  is  a  conceptual
direct valid cogniszer.

   An illustration  of  a  non-conceptual  direct  valid  cognizer  is,  for
   example, a sense direct perceiver apprehending a form.

   If it is  a  direct  valid  cognizer  it  does  not  necessarily  have  a
   perceptible  object  because  if  it  is  a  yogic  direct  perceiver  it
   necessarily does not have  a  perceptible  object.  This  is  so  because
   perceptible object and manifest object are equivalent.

   If it is a subsequent cognizer it is necessarily a direct valid  cognizer
   (Page 25).
An illustration of a non-conceptual direct valid cognizer is,  for  example,
a sense direct perceiver apprehending a form.
If it is a direct valid cognizer it does not necessarily have a  perceptible
object because if it is a yogic direct perceiver  it  necessarily  does  not
have a perceptible  object.  This  is  so  because  perceptible  object  and
manifest object are equivalent.
If it is a subsequent cognizer it is necessarily a direct valid cognizer
For the second moment  of  an  eye  consciousness  apprehending  blue,  that
second moment of an eye consciousness apprehending  blue  is  not  generated
directly in dependence on a sign or reason. Because it is  a  second  moment
of an eye consciousness apprehending blue, it is a subsequent cogniszer.  It
is non-conceptual. It is a valid cogniszer. That makes it  a  non-conceptual
direct valid cogniszer.

What you have to get is that, according to the  ConsequentialistsPrasangika,
a valid cogniszer needs not be newly incontrovertible.  As  long  as  it  is
incontrovertible with respect to its object, then it is a valid cogniszer.

Because  of  this,  according  to  the  Consequentialists,  the   subsequent
cogniszers are also valid cogniszers.

What distinguishes a  direct  valid  cogniszer  from  an  inferential  valid
cogniszer?
Both are valid cogniszers, but direct valid cogniszers are not generated  by
directly depending  on  a  sign  or  reason  whereas  an  inferential  valid
cogniszer is needs to be generated by relying directly on a sign.
For that reason, therefore the second moment of an inferential cogniszer  is
not posited to be an inferential valid cogniszer, but it is a  direct  valid
cognizer. It is a conceptual direct valid cogniszer.

According to the Consequentialists, a direct perceiver is not necessarily  a
knower that is free of conceptuality.

If we have some time, we will look at the  rest  of  the  way  of  asserting
object- processors according to the ConsequentialistsPrasangika.  Then  what
is left is the explaining of what the objects of negation  is  according  to
the ConsequentialistsPrasangika. Then that is about it.

It is understandable that after being getting  used  to  a  certain  way  of
presentation of the ng the mind, and then suddenly you  now  encounter  have
thisthe    ConsequentialistsPrasangika   who   have   their    own    unique
understanding of the mind. It is important to know clearly the  differences.
Now  Tthink   about   the   differences   between   the   Consequentialists’
Prasangika’s way of presenting  the  object-  processors  and  what  we  had
studied previously. If there are  aany  differences  that  you  do  not  n’t
understand or you cannot reconcile,  then bring it up in class.

.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong

-----------------------
[1] There are no transcripts for Lesson 23 held on 4th  June  2013  as  this
was a class exercise session.
[2] mngon sum (Skt. pratyaksa) This can also be translated as ‘direct’.  For
schools other than the Consequence school, this is  normally  translated  as
‘perception’  or  ‘direct  perceiver’  since  it  refers  to  the  cognitive
subject. In the Consequence  school  however  it  primarily  refers  to  the
object of  cognition  and  hence  it  is  translated  here  as  ‘perceptible
object’.

