Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L18 upload.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.615327
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 18                            Date: 9th May 2013

   6 Way of asserting selflessness

   The way of positing illustrations of the coarse and  subtle  selflessness
   of persons is similar to the Autonomists and below.

   An illustration of the selflessness of phenomena  is,  for  example,  the
   emptiness that is a form and the valid cognizer  apprehending  that  form
   being empty of being different substances.

   7 Presentation of the grounds and paths

   This is explained in two parts:
1. objects of abandonment and
2. actual presentation of the grounds and paths.

   7A Objects of abandonment

   The conception of a self of persons together with its seeds and the three
   poisons arising due to the force of that [conception] together with their
   seeds are posited to be afflictive obscurations.

   The conception of [things] as being true[1] together with its seeds,  the
   latencies of that [conception], and all  mistaken  dualistic  appearances
   that arise due to the force of that are posited  to  be  obscurations  to
   knowledge (Pages 17 – 18).

According to the MOS, what are the objects of abandonment?  “The  conception
of self of persons together with its seeds and  the  three  poisons  arising
due to the force of that conception together with their  seeds  are  posited
to be afflictive obscurations.” I don’t think I need to  explain  this.   We
talked about this many times. You should not have any problem  understanding
what I just read.

Khen Rinpoche: Does anyone have problems with this? When you read  this,  do
you understand? Is there any part of  this  long  sentence  that  you  don’t
understand?

If all of you understand that then there is no need for me to say  anything.
If there is anything that you don’t understand then you  have  to  speak  up
and I will try to explain it. Otherwise I will just move on.

Afflictive obscuration: conception of self of persons
According to the MOS, the conception of a self of persons is the  conception
of a self-sufficient substantially existent person.
• The conception of self-sufficient  substantially  existent  person  is  an
  afflictive obscuration.
• The seeds of that conception are also afflictive obscurations.
• The three mental poisons that arise due to the force of the conception  of
  a self-sufficient substantially existent person are  also  posited  to  be
  afflictive obscurations.

Obscuration to knowledge: conception of true existence
According to the MOS:
• The conception of true existence (translated in  the  root  text  as  “the
  conception of things as being true”) that is the conception of subject and
  object as being  different  substances  is  a  knowledge  obscuration  (or
  obscurations to knowledge).
•  The  seeds  of  that  conception  are  also  posited  to   be   knowledge
  obscurations.
• The  latencies  that  are  deposited  on  the  mental  continuum  by  that
  conception are also posited as knowledge obscurations.
• The mistaken dualistic appearances that arise due to the  force  of  those
  latencies—the latencies of conceiving  subject  and  object  as  different
  substances—are also posited to be knowledge obscurations.

Seeds and latencies
I had explained the difference between seeds and latencies.  You  must  know
that there are times when these two terms are translated in  the  same  way,
i.e. using the same word in English.  Most of  the  time,  these  two  terms
mean the same thing but there are also times when they do not mean the  same
thing. You must know the difference between a seed and a latency.

A “seed” is pretty straightforward in English. No one  translates  it  in  a
different way. But for “latencies”, there are many translations of the  word
“bag chags” such as proclivities, predispositions, and imprints.

Let  us  take  the  conception  of  subject  and  object   being   different
substances. This is the conception of true existence according to the MOS.
• There is the seed of this conception.
• There is also the latency of this conception.
Both the seed and the latency of this conception are similar  in  that  both
are planted or placed on the mental continuum by the same conception.

The difference is that:
• The  seed  of  the  conception  of  subject  and  object  being  different
  substances has the potential to produce that same conception again whereas
• the latency of that conception  of  subject  and  object  being  different
  substances do not have the power  to  produce  that  conception.  What  it
  produces are the mistaken dualistic appearances.
   7B Actual presentation of the grounds and paths


   Those of the hearer lineage conjoin the view realizing  the  selflessness
   of persons with a small accumulation of merit for the sake of  their  own
   welfare, while those of the solitary realize  lineage  conjoin  the  view
   realizing the selflessness of persons with  a  middling  accumulation  of
   merit for the sake of their own welfare, and,  in  dependence  on  having
   cultivated that for at least three lifetimes, one hundred  eons,  and  so
   on, actualize their respective enlightenments (Page 18).

The three vehicles
Earlier I talked about the three yanas, i.e., the  three  vehicles  and  the
five paths. They are the same here.

What are the three vehicles? They are:
1. Hearers’ Vehicle
2. Solitary Realisers’ Vehicle
3. Great Vehicle or the Mahayana

The hearers and the solitary realisers have:
• the selflessness of persons as their main object of meditation and
• the conception of the self  of  persons,  an  afflictive  obscuration,  as
  their main object of abandonment
They meditate on the  selflessness  of  persons  in  order  to  abandon  the
conception of the self of persons for the purpose of their own welfare.

The hearers and solitary realisers are the same in having the conception  of
the self of persons as their object of abandonment and they are the same  in
having the selflessness of persons as their main object of meditation.  They
are also the same in that they meditate on the selflessness  of  persons  in
order to accomplish their own welfare.

Having said that, in what way are they  different?  The  solitary  realisers
are able to conjoin the view realising the selflessness of persons  with  an
accumulation of merit over a period of hundred eons whereas the hearers  are
not able to do that.
Since  there  is  a  difference  in  their  ability  to  accumulate   merit,
definitely there must be a difference in the results they achieve.  In  term
of the results that they achieve, we can talk about a superior result and  a
lesser result.

  Bodhisattvas conjoin the view  realizing  apprehenders  and  apprehendeds
  being empty of being different substances with a  great  accumulation  of
  merit for the sake of others’  welfare,  and,  in  dependence  on  having
  cultivated that for at least  three  countless  great  eons  and  so  on,
  actualize their respective enlightenment (Page 18).

• The main object of meditation of the bodhisattva is  the  selflessness  of
  phenomena.
• The main objects of abandonment  of  the  bodhisattva  are  the  knowledge
  obscurations.
• Their purpose of cultivating the path is for the welfare of others.
• It is said that the bodhisattva accumulates merit over a period  of  three
  countless great eons.
|           |Hearers          |Solitary Realisers |Bodhisattvas       |
|Object of  |Selflessness     |Selflessness       |Selflessness       |
|meditation |of persons       |of persons         |of phenomena       |
|Object of  |Afflictive       |Afflictive         |Knowledge          |
|abandonment|obscurations,    |obscurations, i.e.,|obscurations, i.e.,|
|           |i.e., the        |the conception of  |the conception of  |
|           |conception of the|the self of persons|true existence     |
|           |self of persons  |together with its  |together with its  |
|           |together with its|seeds and the three|seeds, the         |
|           |seeds and the    |poisons arising due|latencies of that  |
|           |three poisons    |to the force of    |conception and all |
|           |arising due to   |that conception    |mistaken dualistic |
|           |the force of that|together with their|appearances that   |
|           |conception       |seeds.             |arise due to the   |
|           |together with    |                   |force of that      |
|           |their seeds.     |                   |conception.        |
|Accumulatio|Able to conjoin  |Able to conjoin the|Able to conjoin the|
|n of merit |the view         |view realising the |view realising the |
|           |realising the    |selflessness of    |selflessness of    |
|           |selflessness of  |persons with an    |phenomena, i.e.,   |
|           |persons with an  |accumulation of    |the apprehender and|
|           |accumulation of  |merit over one     |apprehended as     |
|           |merit for at     |hundred eons.      |being empty of     |
|           |least three      |                   |being different    |
|           |lifetimes.       |                   |substances with an |
|           |                 |                   |accumulation of    |
|           |                 |                   |merit over a period|
|           |                 |                   |of three countless |
|           |                 |                   |great eons.        |
|Purpose of |For their own    |For their own      |For the welfare of |
|cultivating|welfare          |welfare            |others             |
|the path   |                 |                   |                   |

   True Aspectarians assert that  when  hearer  and  solitary  realizer  foe
   destroyers pass  beyond  sorrow  without  remainder  their  continuum  of
   awareness is severed. They assert that it  is  impossible  to  sever  the
   continuum of awareness of a buddha superior because they assert that  for
   the bodhisattva  who  attained  enlightenment  initially  as  a  complete
   enjoyment body in Akanishta, the continuum of similar type of  aspect  of
   that complete enjoyment body is not severed as long  as  samsara  is  not
   empty, but rather  it  enacts  the  welfare  of  others  through  various
   emanations in accordance with the fortunes of each  individual  disciple.
   The individual lineages of the three vehicles are definite  because  they
   assert that sentient beings,  since  beginningless  time,  are  of  three
   different  lineages  or  dispositions  and  thus  have  three   different
   aspirations, and thus have three different ways of practicing,  and  thus
   will attain three different results (Page 18).

The Mind Only True Aspectarians are similar to the Proponents of  the  Great
Exposition and the Proponents of Sutra in that they  assert  that  when  the
hearer arhats and the solitary realiser arhats pass  beyond  sorrow  without
remainder, their mental continua are severed.

• The Hinayana tenets also assert that  when  someone  achieves  buddhahood,
  i.e., when one becomes a buddha, when a buddha passes beyond  sorrow,  the
  continuum of awareness of a buddha is severed.
• The Mahayana tenets do not assert that the continuum  of  awareness  of  a
  buddha is severed when a buddha passes beyond sorrow without remainder.
So there is a difference between the explanations  of  the  Hinayana  tenets
and the Mahayana tenets with respect to a buddha.

According to the Hinayana tenets, the continuum of awareness of a buddha  is
severed when a buddha passes beyond sorrow without remainder.  This  is  not
what is asserted in the Mahayana tenets. According to the  Mahayana  tenets,
one travels through all the ten bodhisattva grounds and  then  one  achieves
enlightenment. One achieves enlightenment initially in the pure land  called
Akanishta. When one achieves enlightenment, one  achieves  the  sambhogakaya
or the complete enjoyment body. This complete enjoyment body  is  the  basis
of emanations, i.e., from this complete enjoyment body,  various  emanations
are emitted to work  for  the  welfare  of  sentient  beings.  The  Mahayana
teachings  say  that  once  enlightenment  is  achieved,  a   buddha   works
uninterruptedly for the happiness and welfare of sentient beings.

The four kayas
The Mahayana teachings explain enlightenment or buddhahood in terms  of  the
four kayas or four bodies.

In general, there are the two bodies:
1. the truth body (the embodiment  of  truth  or  the  dharmakaya)  has  two
   divisions:
   • the wisdom truth body
   • the nature truth body
2. the form body (the embodiment of form  or  the  rupakaya)  also  has  two
   divisions:
   • the complete enjoyment body (sambhogakaya)
   • the emanation body (nirmanakaya)

Such a presentation of the four kayas or the four bodies  is  not  found  in
the Hinayana teachings.

What is the wisdom truth body? It is the mind  of  a  buddha  that  directly
perceives all phenomena as they are.

What is the nature truth body? According to the MOS, the nature  truth  body
is the emptiness of the mind of a buddha superior existing  by  way  of  its
own character as the  basis  for  applying  the  term,  “mind  of  a  buddha
superior.” We talked many times about form not existing by way  of  its  own
character as the basis for applying the term “form.” Here the  attribute  is
the same but the object that we are using  this  time  is  “the  mind  of  a
buddha superior.”

So the attribute is this: the mind of a buddha superior does  not  exist  by
way of its own character as the basis for applying the term, “the mind of  a
buddha superior.” What you need to understand is if it exists by way of  its
own character, what is the problem?

Once you understand that the attribute is something  that  cannot  exist  by
way of its own character as the referent of a term, then  the  non-existence
of that is emptiness. The emptiness of the mind of a buddha  superior  of  a
self of phenomena is the nature truth body. In short, the  suchness  of  the
mind of a buddha is the nature truth body.

It is said that one first achieves enlightenment in  the  pure  land  called
Akanishta in the aspect  of  the  complete  enjoyment  body.  This  complete
enjoyment body is the basis of emanation from which various  emanations  are
sent out to help sentient beings. It is said that  this  complete  enjoyment
body lasts forever until   samsara is emptied. The complete  enjoyment  body
possesses five certainties:
1. Certainty of place: it abides only in Akanishta.
2.  Certainty  of  retinue:   its  retinue  consists  of  only   bodhisattva
   superiors.
3. Certainty of Dharma: it teaches only the Mahayana Dharma.
4. Certainty of time: it lasts forever until samsara is emptied.
5. Certainty of the body: it is beautified or ornamented  by  the  32  signs
   and the 80 exemplifications.

The complete enjoyment body is the basis  of  emanations  of  the  emanation
body.
There are different emanation bodies. One of the divisions of the  emanation
body is called the supreme emanation body such as that of our kind  founder,
Shakyamuni Buddha. This supreme emanation body teaches all kinds of  Dharma,
not necessarily only the Mahayana, and has all kinds of disciples  who  have
the pure karma to be able to meet with the supreme  emanation  body.  Unlike
the complete  enjoyment  body,  there  is  no  certainty  that  the  supreme
emanation body will abide until the  end  of  samsara.  The  emanation  body
(nirmanakaya)   is   not   necessarily   adorned   with   the   signs    and
exemplifications.

In short, the complete enjoyment body possesses  the  five  certainties  but
this is   not the case for the emanation body.

The basis of the presentation of the four kayas is made on the premise  that
the continuum of awareness of a buddha is not severed after a buddha  passes
beyond sorrow without remainder because  you  cannot  talk  about  the  four
kayas if a buddha disappears. Perhaps this is one of the  things  that  sets
the Hinayana and Mahayana  tenets  apart  from  one  another.  The  Mahayana
tenets have a detailed presentation of the four kayas whereas  the  Hinayana
tenets do not have such a presentation.

The Mind Only True Aspectarians’ assertion of the three final vehicles
The True Aspectarians assert that there are three final  vehicles.  What  is
the reason for the True Aspectarians asserting that there  are  three  final
vehicles? The reason is “because they assert  that  sentient  beings,  since
beginningless time, are of three  different  lineages  or  dispositions  and
thus have three different aspirations, and thus have  three  different  ways
of practicing, and thus will attain three different results” (Page 18).

The Mind Only True Aspectarians have to assert that there  are  three  final
vehicles because they have already asserted that when a hearer arhat  passes
beyond sorrow without remainder, his  continuum  of  awareness  is  severed.
When the continuum of awareness is severed, there is  nothing  beyond  that.
One dies as a hearer arhat.

The True Aspectarians also assert that when solitary  realiser  arhats  pass
beyond sorrow without  remainder,  their  continua  of  awareness  are  also
severed and they die as  solitary  realiser  arhats.  This  is  a  different
result from the hearer arhat.  The  solitary  realisers  are  not  going  to
achieve anything more than that. In  that  sense,  that  is  definite.  Then
there are the buddhas. That is why they assert three final vehicles.

Another reason why the Mind Only True Aspectarians  assert  that  there  are
three final vehicles has to do  with  sentient  beings  being  of  different
dispositions.  They  assert  the  mind-basis-of-all.   Predispositions   are
deposited  on  this  mind-basis-of-all  so  the  mind-basis-of-all  is   the
repository of these predispositions or imprints.


According  to  the  True  Aspectarians,  the  mind-basis-of-all   is   truly
established. There is an imprint that is  stored  in  the  mind-basis-of-all
that predisposes that person to be a hearer. That imprint makes it  definite
that the person will be a hearer. When  that  person  enters  the  path,  he
enters the hearers’ path. That is the  path  he  will  travel  on.  He  will
achieve the hearers’ enlightenment and become a  hearer  foe  destroyer.  In
that sense, the lineage is definite for that person.

Likewise, it is the same with the imprint that predisposes someone to  be  a
solitary realiser or to be a bodhisattva who aspires to be a  buddha.  These
imprints are stored in  the  mind-basis-of-all.  These  imprints  predispose
that person to be of a certain lineage.

In that sense, it is certain that sentient beings are organised  into  these
three different  lineages.  It  is  definite  that  some  will  become  only
hearers, some will become only solitary  realisers,  and  some  will  become
only buddhas. This is their explanation but is not necessarily the truth  or
accord with reality.

Definite and indefinite lineages
There are some hearers who have the predisposition to  be  able  to  achieve
enlightenment. Therefore we talk about (1)  the  definite  hearer’s  lineage
and (2) the indefinite hearer’s lineage.

What is the hearer’s lineage? The hearer’s lineage refers to the lineage  or
the potential that  enables  one  to  achieve  the  hearer’s  enlightenment.
Having said that, there is the definite hearer’s lineage and the  indefinite
hearer’s lineage.

Those who are of the definite hearer’s  lineage  refers  to  those  sentient
beings who definitely enter the hearer’s path, travel on it to the end,  and
achieve the hearer’s enlightenment, i.e., become hearer  foe  destroyers  or
arhats.

Those who are of an indefinite hearer’s lineage are those who may  initially
aspire to the  hearer’s  enlightenment,  wanting  to  become  a  hearer  foe
destroyer. They enter the hearer’s  path  from  the  path  of  accumulation,
progressing to the hearer’s path of preparation. Along  the  way,  they  may
meet with a virtuous friend, a guru of the solitary realiser’s path or  even
a Mahayana guru. They then switch their path. Let’s  say  that  this  person
who initially aspired  to  the  hearer’s  enlightenment  switches  path  and
enters the solitary realiser’s path. In doing so, he travels  that  path  to
the end and becomes a solitary realiser arhat. Such a person  is  considered
to be of an indefinite hearer’s lineage.

There are also those who are of definite  solitary  realiser’s  lineage  and
indefinite solitary realiser’s lineage.

There are also those who are of definite  Mahayana  lineage  and  indefinite
Mahayana lineage.

According to the True Aspectarians, there are two types of arhats:
1. Those who are definitely going to pass beyond sorrow  without  remainder.
   In so doing, their continua of awareness are  severed.  That  means  they
   will remain as arhats and die as arhats.
2. Those who, after having achieved  arhatship  and  before  passing  beyond
   sorrow without remainder, enter the Mahayana path.   In  so  doing,  they
   will become a buddha in the future.
This is what the  True  Aspectarians  say  of  the  hearer  arhats  and  the
solitary realiser arhats.

In short, these are the reasons why the Mind Only True  Aspectarians  assert
that there are three final vehicles.

   False Aspectarians do not assert that when hearer and  solitary  realizer
   foe destroyers pass beyond sorrow without remainder  their  continuum  of
   awareness is severed because, although they assert that,  at  that  time,
   the continuum of mere awareness that is included in true  sufferings  and
   true origins is severed, they assert that mere awareness goes on  to  the
   buddha ground. Therefore, they assert one final vehicle (Page 18).

The Mind Only False Aspectarians do not assert that the whole  continuum  of
awareness  is  severed  at  the  time  of  passing  beyond  sorrow   without
remainder. They assert that only that part of  the  continuum  of  awareness
that is included in true sufferings and true  origins  is  severed  and  the
mere awareness goes on to the buddha ground, i.e.,  mere  awareness  is  not
severed at the time of passing beyond sorrow without  remainder.  That  mere
awareness goes on to enlightenment. For that reason, the False  Aspectarians
assert one final vehicle.

From the discussion today, what you have to understand is that:
• The True Aspectarians assert three final vehicles.  From  your  side,  you
  have to know why they assert three final vehicles, what are the  rationale
  and the reasons they use to support their assertions?
• The False  Aspectarians  assert  only  one  final  vehicle.  You  have  to
  understand why they assert only one final vehicle.

That is it for the MOS. Next we will go on to the Middle Way School.

Remember I gave you some homework to do? Can I have a volunteer to read  out
what you have  written?  The  volunteer  should  be  someone  who  is  quite
confident that what he/she has written is  reasonably  good.  The  volunteer
should not be a student of the previous Basic Program but those enrolled  as
a new student.

Khen Rinpoche: If no one wants to read then I will stop here.

Definitive and interpretative teachings
According to the proponents of GES and  the  SS,  i.e.,  the  proponents  of
Hinayana tenets or Hinayana followers, I would say that  the  vast  majority
of them, if not all,  assert  that  the  Buddha’s  words  are  to  be  taken
literally. Therefore everything the Buddha said is true.

However the Mahayana tenets  such  as  the  MOS  assert  that  the  Buddha’s
teachings must be classified into (1) teachings that require  interpretation
and (2)
teachings of definitive meaning

Many followers of the Hinayana in the past and even till  this  day  do  not
accept that the Mahayana teachings are the teachings of the Buddha. I  think
it boils down to their worldview. According  to  most  of  these  followers,
they think that the Buddha only speaks the  truth.  To  them,  whatever  the
Buddha says  can  be  taken  literally  so  they  must  take  the  teachings
literally.

They then approach the Mahayana sutras with this kind  of  worldview.  Taken
literally, the Mahayana teachings do not make sense to them and  cannot  fit
their mind. On the one hand, they think that whatever the Buddha  said  must
be true. On the other hand, because these teachings cannot  fit  their  mind
and do not make sense to them, to them these  teachings  are  not  true  and
cannot be taught by the Buddha. Therefore they conclude  that  the  Mahayana
teachings are not taught by the Buddha.

The MOS divides the scriptures into two categories:
1. scriptures that are suitable to be read or taken literally
2. scriptures that are not suitable to be read or taken literally

The MOS says that all the  teachings  of  the  Buddha  are  not  necessarily
suitable to be taken literally. As there were three turnings  of  the  Wheel
of Dharma, the MOS accept that the scriptures from the first turning of  the
Wheel of Dharma and the second turning of the Wheel of  Dharma  were  taught
by Buddha but they do not accept that these teachings  are  suitable  to  be
taken literally. For the MOS, only the teachings  or  the  sutras  from  the
third turning of the Wheel of Dharma are suitable to be taken literally.

Take for example, the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras that belong to the  second
turning of the Wheel of Dharma. In the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras, you  can
find statements such as, “Form does not exist inherently” or  “Form  is  not
produced inherently.” The MOS accepts that these  statements  were  made  by
the Buddha but they say that these statements cannot be taken literally.

For the MOS, one cannot say, “Form does not exist  inherently”  because  for
the MOS, that is how form exists.

According to the MOS, one has to  understand  what  is  the  intent  or  the
meaning of these statements.  For  example,  the  statement,  “Form  is  not
produced   inherently,”   cannot   be   taken   literally    and    requires
interpretation. This statement means that form is not produced from a  cause
that is of the same nature as that form. Form and the cause of form  are  of
separate natures. The cause of form is a separate nature from form, so  form
is not produced from a cause that is of the  same nature as form.

In the Mahayana view, all the  Buddha  scriptures  or  teachings  cannot  be
taken literally. Therefore there is a division of the scriptures into:
1. sutras of interpretative meaning
2. sutras of definitive meaning
There is much discussion about the differences between these  two  kinds  of
sutras and also the various kinds of logic and reasoning that  are  used  to
establish  whether  a  teaching  or  scripture  is  a  sutra  that  requires
interpretation or is a sutra of definitive meaning.

We have to understand that  the  Buddha  gave  teachings  according  to  the
interests and dispositions of his disciples to fit their minds.  Because  of
that, the words that were used by the Buddha and what the  Buddha  said  are
not necessarily the final truth or even  necessarily  true.  They  were  not
necessarily indicative of the final intent of the Buddha.
I guess the proponents of Hinayana  tenets  saw  the  Buddha  as  an  honest
person. Of course the Buddha is honest. The Buddha is omniscient  and  knows
everything. So whatever the Buddha  says  must  be  true.  One  should  just
accept that.

However the Mahayana view is that the  Buddha  taught  to  benefit  sentient
beings and his teachings accorded with the dispositions of sentient  beings.
Therefore there is always the possibility that what the Buddha said may  not
represent what he really thought.

Now you have to decide which position is better:  the  Hinayana  perspective
or the Mahayana perspective. Is it better to take  everything  literally  or
is it better not to take  everything  literally?   There  is  a  competition
between these two positions. We should support whichever  position  is  more
reasonable and makes more sense.

Question: Usually we say that the substantial cause of consciousness has  to
be that which is clear and knowing. Here in the MOS whether it  is  form  or
consciousness, they both arise from the ripening  of  a  karmic  latency  or
predisposition, which is a non-associated compositional factor. So  now  the
cause  of  form  is  not  form  and  the  cause  of  consciousness  is   not
consciousness. It seems then that the notion of a  substantial  cause  falls
apart.

(Khen Rinpoche asks a senior student to answer the question).

Answer by student: A phenomenon does not only rely on  a  substantial  cause
but many other cooperative conditions for it to come about.

Khen Rinpoche: You did not answer her question did you?

Student:  She asked whether the substantial cause of a mind has to be mind?

Khen Rinpoche: So your answer is?

Student: Yes, the substantial cause of a mind has to be  a  previous  moment
of mind …

Khen Rinpoche: Has to be?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: In the MOS, isn’t  the  substantial  cause  the  ripening  or
awakening of one karmic latency  that  produces  both  the  object  and  the
subject apprehending the object?

Student: No.

Khen Rinpoche (quoting from a text) : The MOS refutes external objects.  The
main argument is that when one of the karmic latencies stored in  the  mind-
basis-of all is awakened or ripens, this acts as the substantial  cause  for
producing both the form and the eye consciousness apprehending the form.  It
is this karmic latency that is the substantial cause for producing both  the
object and subject. If we say the substantial cause of form  is  form,  that
will entail the acceptance of external objects.

Student: In the MOS, you do not  have  external  objects  but  you  have  an
object due to the ripening of a karmic seed. You have  the  previous  moment
of that form and  the  consciousness  that  apprehends  it.  Therefore  that
becomes the substantial cause for the next moment of form and  consciousness
arising  due  to  the  ripening  of  a  subsequent  imprint.  That   is   my
understanding.

Khen Rinpoche: Think about it. Does any one have another answer?

What we are trying to find out here is what exactly  the  substantial  cause
of consciousness is. It is very clear in all the MOS literature that  it  is
the latency that is deposited in the mind-basis-of-all.  That  latency  acts
as the substantial cause for the consciousness, producing both form and  the
consciousness apprehending that form.

Do you accept that or not? Is  the  substantial  cause  of  consciousness  a
karmic imprint? The point about this qualm is the implication if we were  to
say that the substantial cause of consciousness is  a  karmic  imprint.  The
main reason for  proving  reincarnation  or  rebirth  has  to  do  with  the
substantial cause of consciousness being that which is  clear  and  knowing.
What the MOS says seems to go against this commonly  accepted  position  and
what logicians like Dharmakirti mentioned in his  text.  This  is  something
that requires much  thought  in  order  to  come  out  with  a  coherent  or
reasonable answer.

Question: When the Mind Only True Aspectarians say that  the  hearer  arhats
and the solitary realiser arhats pass beyond sorrow, what is it that  passes
beyond sorrow?

Answer: When the hearer and solitary realiser become arhats, they achieve  a
nirvana with remainder. The person who achieved the nirvana  with  remainder
is the person who is going to die. When he dies,  he  achieves  the  nirvana
without remainder. When the arhats pass  beyond  sorrow  without  remainder,
i.e., when they achieve the nirvana without remainder, the continuum of  the
awareness is severed.

But that is not  the  same  as  saying  that  there  is  nothing  left.  The
continuum of the awareness is severed but that does not mean that  there  is
no basis. There is something that can be pointed to,  but  what  exactly  is
that something? We have to think  about  it  from  the  perspective  of  the
tenets that assert that the continuum of  awareness  is  severed  and  think
about what they may say. In reality there is no such thing.

Although the continuum of the awareness is  severed,  they  must  definitely
assert that there is something left over. There is  a  basis.  Why?  In  the
first place, they assert there  is  a  nirvana  without  remainder  that  is
emptiness. If there is emptiness, then you need a basis of  emptiness.  What
is that basis?

There are:
1. Nirvana with remainder
2. Nirvana without remainder
3. Non-abiding nirvana
These tenets have their  own  way  of  explaining  what  a  nirvana  without
remainder means. When  one  achieves  the  nirvana  without  remainder,  the
continuum of awareness is severed. Because  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a
nirvana without remainder, therefore there must be a basis.  There  must  be
something that you can point to.

Student: I was wondering what that basis is.

Answer: Perhaps one may get some idea from this. There  is  some  similarity
with  the  assertion  of  the  CMWS   with   regard   to   the   factor   of
disintegratedness. The factor of disintegratedness  is  the  past  tense  of
disintegration.  After  disintegration  what   follows   is   a   state   of
disintegratedness.

The CMWS is unique in asserting that that  factor  of  disintegratedness  is
impermanent, is a functioning thing, and a composed phenomenon. The  MOS  do
not assert this but maybe we can think about the  CMWS’s  assertion  of  the
factor of disintegratedness being a composed phenomenon.

Khen Rinpoche: OK. Next we start on the Middle Way School.



Questions for Sunday discussion:
1. After someone achieves a nirvana without remainder, what is the basis  of
   emptiness?

2.    a) What is the selflessness of phenomena according to  the  Mind  Only
School?
      b) What are the faults of asserting that phenomena possess a self?

3. Besides establishing the selflessness of person, what is the  purpose  of
   establishing the selflessness of phenomena?

4.  Why do the Mind Only True Aspectarians assert three final vehicles?

5.  Why does the Mind Only School divide the Buddha's scriptures into  those
   of  interpretive meaning and those of definitive meaning?

6.     a)  Why  is  it  that  the  Mahayana  tenets  are  able  to  posit  a
     presentation of the four bodies unlike the Hinayana tenets?
      b) How does understanding the presentation of the four bodies  enhance
     one's understanding of a buddha?






Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong

-----------------------
[1] Things being true means things existing in the way that they  appear  in
terms of appearing to be external to  the  consciousness  apprehending  them
and in terms of appearing to exist by way of their own characteristics as  a
basis for applying terms.

