Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L22 upload.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.546129
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 22                          Date: 30th May 2013

Question: The root text states on page 22: “The two conceptions of self  are
differentiated by way of the mode of apprehension and  not  by  way  of  the
observed object because through observing the  basis  –  the  person  –  and
apprehending it to be truly existent  it  is  a  conception  of  a  self  of
phenomena, and through observing the basis – the person –  and  apprehending
it to be self-sufficient substantially existent it  is  a  conception  of  a
self of persons.” Can you please explain what is meant by, “by  way  of  its
observed object”?

Answer: The two conceptions of self are:
1. the conception of a self of persons and
2. the conception of a self of phenomena.
These two conceptions of self are differentiated:
• by way of their mode of apprehension
• not by way of their observed object

The proof is given on the basis of one’s observed object, the person.
• Through observing the basis—the person—and apprehending  it  to  be  truly
  existent is the conception of a self of phenomena.
• Through observing the basis—the person—and apprehending  it  to  be  self-
  sufficient substantially existent is the conception of a self of persons.
• Through observing the basis—the person—and apprehending  it  to  be  truly
  existent is the conception of a self of phenomena.

In In relation to the person, depending on the  mode  of  apprehension,  the
conception could either be (1) the conception of a self of  persons  or  (2)
the conception of a self of phenomena.

But both these conceptions have the same observed object, the person:
• The mind that apprehends the person  to  be  truly  existent  becomes  the
  conception of a self of phenomena.
• But when the mind apprehends the same  observed  object—the  person—to  be
  self-sufficient substantially existent, that is a conception of a self  of
  persons.

The conception of a self  of  persons  and  the  conception  of  a  self  of
phenomena are different but in  this  case,  they  have  the  same  observed
object, the person.

|The two conceptions of |Through observing the  |Conception of a self  |
|self are               |basis – the person –   |of persons            |
|differentiated:        |and apprehending it to |                      |
|By way of the mode of  |be self-sufficient     |                      |
|apprehension           |substantially existent |                      |
|Not by way of the      |                       |                      |
|observed object        |                       |                      |
|                       |Through observing the  |Conception of a self  |
|                       |basis – the person –   |of phenomena          |
|                       |and apprehending it to |                      |
|                       |be truly existent      |                      |


Question: I find it difficult to distinguish between  “existing  by  way  of
its own characters” and “existing by way of its own side” for the AMWS.

Ven. Gyurme: According to the chart[1], these  two  terms  are  exactly  the
same. It is just a different way of saying the same  thing.  They  have  the
same meaning. The only term that is different is true existence.

Question: It says in the text that those of the hearer lineage attain  small
enlightenment  by  abandoning  the  conception  of  apprehending  the  self-
sufficient substantially existent person. Even when  he  abandons  that,  he
still has a view of the true existence of the  self  of  persons.  Why  does
that not give rise to afflictions that will prevent him from leaving  cyclic
existence?

Ven Gyurme: Are you asking why the conception of a truly existent person  is
not an afflictive obscuration?

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think he is asking that directly.  But  maybe  he  is
asking that indirectly.

Khen Rinpoche: He is basically asking how it can be possible for the  hearer
arhat to achieve liberation when he still conceives the  self  to  be  truly
existent.

(Khen Rinpoche asked a few students to attempt to answer this question).

The essence of the question is that although the  hearer  is  said  to  have
achieved liberation after having abandoned the conception  of  the  self  of
persons, he still apprehends the self to be truly  existent.  Therefore  the
The hearer arhat hasve not actually abandoned the afflictions completely.

To this student, if we were to follow the assertions  of  According  to  the
AMWS, the hearer arhat actually is not actually  an  arhat  because  he  has
not completely abandoned the afflictions. In the continuum  of  this  e  so-
called hearer arhat, there  is  still  the  conception  of  true  existence.
Therefore  so there are still afflictions.

(Some other students attempt to answer this question).

[A few students offer their answers to this question]

Khen Rinpoche (commenting on a student’s answer): You are  saying  that  the
hearers and the solitary realisers are not harmed by the appearance of  true
existence. This is not true. Whoever has not generated the  direct  antidote
to that conception,  the  wisdom  directly  perceiving  emptiness,  will  be
harmed by that conception.

From their perspective of the AMWS, they say  that  as  long  as  they  have
abandoned the conception of a self of persons, they can achieve  liberation.
But you added that they have achieved liberation,  yet  at  the  same  time,
they still have the appearance of true existence. They have  the  conception
of true existent yet they cannot be harmed by it. That cannot be  the  case.
They have the conception of true existence and they are harmed by it.

Student (in attempting answer): For the tenets below the CMWS,  they  assert
that to achieve liberation, you only need to  realise  the  selflessness  of
persons. The conception that  Swee  Kim  (the  student  who  originated  the
question) is talking about, the grasping at true existence, is actually  the
grasping at the self of phenomena. Therefore there is  no  need  to  realise
the emptiness of the truly existent person  because  this  grasping  at  the
truly existent person is, in the context of the AMWS, grasping at  the  self
of phenomena. That is an obstruction to omniscience.

Khen Rinpoche: If you all understand that, the answer is somewhere there.

All the different tenets have their own  respective  presentations  on  what
exactly areis a self of persons and a self of  phenomena.  You  have  to  be
clear regarding what these respective presentations are.

You also have to know their respective presentations on what constitutes  an
afflictive obscuration and what constitutes  a  knowledge  obscuration.  All
the tenets assert that, in order to become a foe destroyer ( or arhat),  one
must have destroyed or conquered the afflictions. They are all the  same  in
that regard but as to  what  constitutes  the  afflictions  are,  there  are
differences in the presentations of the different between the tenets.

The SMWAs posit the afflictive obscurations to be: (1) the conception  of  a
self of persons, i.e., the conception  of  a  self-sufficient  substantially
existent  person  and  (2)  the  afflictions  that  are  produced  by   that
conception. The main or root afflictive obscurations is the conception of  a
self-sufficient substantially existent person. According to the SMWAs,  this
conception of a person as being self-sufficient  substantially  existent  is
the subtlest affliction in that can existence. Therefore  the  antidote  has
to  be  the  mind  that  realises  the  emptiness   of   a   self-sufficient
substantially existent person.
• First one has to generate such the realisation of the emptiness of a self-
  sufficient substantially existent person.
• Once that realisation is generated, one familiariszes  oneself  with  what
  one has already realiszed.
• Through that,  one is said to be able to destroy the conception of a self-
  sufficient substantially existent person.
• When that conception is destroyed, one achieves  the  stateus  of  an  foe
  destroyer/arhat.
• When one achieves arhatship, the status of a  foe  destroyer/  arhat,  the
  afflictions together with their seeds are destroyed.


Essentially,  Tthe  conception  of  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
person together with their seeds  is  destroyed.  They  then  become  a  foe
destroyer. Once thate conception is ceased or destroyed,  it  is  impossible
for one that individual to experience any more afflictions.
When one becomes a foe destroyer,  you  can  say  one  that  individual  has
overcome,  conquered  or  destroyed  and  completely   abandoned   all   the
afflictions. The person has completely abandoned the afflictions.


Then Of course, the question brought up comes like what earlier by Swee  Kim
arises. Swee Kim has brought up earlier.
The arhat has overcome or vanquished all the  afflictions,  but  he  because
the  arhat  has  not  realiszed  the  emptiness  of   true   existencet.   ,
theTherefore refore that arhat individual still has the conception  of  true
existence s iin his continuum.   the conception of true existent.

If you were are asked, “: Does the arhat have the  conception  of  the  true
existencet?” Y  What are you going to say?
You have no choice but to have to say,  “Yes.”.


At the same time, you also have to say that there  is  no  fault  in  saying
that the arhat has already abandoned  all  the  afflictions.   Although  the
arhat has the conception of true existence, t but thate arhat does  not  n’t
have  any  more  afflictions  because  he  has   already   destroyed   them.
afflictions and Tthe conception of true existencet is not posited to  be  an
afflictive obscuration. Of course,  This is according  to  the  we  are  not
talking from the perspective of the AMWS.

In order to answer the question that Swee Kim has brought up, you just  have
to say: “
According to this tenet,  the  conception  of  true  existencet  is  not  an
afflictive obscuration. So there is no  contradiction  in  saying  that  the
arhat has  already  abandoned  the  afflictions.  Yes,  Hhe  still  has  the
conception of true existencet but that is a knowledge obscuration.” This  is
what the Autonomists would say.

Question: How  can  the  aAppearance  of  true  existencet  and  the  belief
believing in this appearance not lead to the , how would they  explain  that
this would not allow them to generation of e afflictions in their  mind?  Do
they have any explanation for on this qualm?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: They  would  say  that  the  root  of  attachment  is
conceiving the person to be self-sufficient substantially existent.  If  you
destroy the root, then you are not going to  have  any  attachment  and  the
afflictions.

Question: This would mean that someone wishing to  achieve  liberation  they
would not be harmed by the conception of true existencet.

 for someone who wishes to achieve liberation.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that the conception of  true  existencet  does
not harm? Does the conception of true existencet harm or not?  You  seem  to
be saying that the conception of true  existencet  does  not  n’t  harm  the
arhat.

Question: Among  Forthe  Mahayana tenets, only the YAMWASs  posit  a  coarse
self of phenomena[2]. W, why is this that is the case?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: This one doesn’t have reason.
It is clear that the Hinayana tenets do not  assert  a  self  of  phenomena.
Since the
The Mahayana tenets assert a  self  of  phenomena,  therefore  there  is   a
selflessness of phenomena.

When If you start with the MOS, the first of the Mahayana tenets, they  only
posit a subtle self of phenomena, i.e., ; which is the conception of  object
and subject being as different  substances.  For  them,  that  is  the  most
subtlest conception of a self of phenomena.

Then you have the AMWS. There are no isn’t a single Middle  Way  Autonomists
who will posit that the conception of object and subject being as  different
substances is to be the subtle self of phenomena.
The AMWS posits the conception of true existencet to be the subtle  self  of
phenomena.

The YMWAs do assert that there is  the  conception  of  object  and  subject
being as different entities. For them, they assert that this  conception  is
a coarse conception of a self of phenomena.
Just Llike the MOS, the YMWAs do not assert external objects.
With respect to the conception of object  and  subject  as  being  different
substances, for the  YMWAs,  this  such  a  conception  will  become  ais  a
conception of a self of phenomena. It is not  the  conception  of  a  subtle
self of phenomena. I. It is would be the conception  of  a  coarse  self  of
phenomena.

Then the question would likely to arises: “Why do the SMWAs do not assert  a
coarse self of phenomena?”   This is because they assert  external  objects,
just like the SS. The SMWAs do would not assert  an  object  of  abandonment
that is a conception of object and subject as being different substances  to
be an object of abandonment. Since they do not  assert  such  a  conception,
therefore they do not assert a self of phenomena other than the subtle  self
of phenomena.
School  |Coarse self of person  |Subtle self of person
 |Coarse self of phenomena
 |Subtle self of phenomena  | |Mind Only School  |Conception  if  permanent,
unitary and independent  person  |Conception  of  a  self-sufficient  person
|None |Conception of object and  subject  as  different  entities  |  |Yogic
Autonomy
Middle Way school |Conception if permanent, unitary and  independent  person
|Conception of a self-sufficient person |Conception of  object  and  subject
as different entities |Conception of true existent | |Sutra Autonomy
Middle Way school |Conception if permanent, unitary and  independent  person
|Conception of a self-sufficient person |None |Conception of  true  existent
| |
Question: Can a non-mistaken consciousness view an object dualistically?

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Why do you ask this question?

Student:  Different  schools  seem  to  have  different  views  regarding  a
mistaken consciousness. For mistaken, it seems like for  different  schools,
it seems to be different. For example, uncompounded phenomena—that ,  it  is
not really realiszed by a sense consciousness, am I right? For  example  the
, absence of permanence, it is realised  in  relation  to  realising  thatze
something is as impermanent . bBut the absence of permanence itself , it  is
actually a permanent phenomenon.

Is  it  not  the  case  that  oOnly   a   superior   being   can   realiszes
impermanencesubtle impermanence  directly, subtle impermanent, right?

Ven Gyurme: From the view of the MOS view?

Student: Yes, I am guessing that . In that  sense,  you  will  realisze  the
absence  of  permanence  at  the  same  time.  The  yogic  direct  perceiver
realizing the absence of permanence is actually  a  direct  valid  cogniszer
realiszing an  imputational  nature.  ,  butAn   external  object  does  not
appear. Is that it dualistic? The aAbsence  of  permanence  is  actually  an
imputational nature and , it is a conventional  truth.  That  is  why  I  am
wondering. It is said clearly in the text that yogic direct  perceivers  are
necessarily non-mistaken.

Ven  Gyurme:  Your  illustration  is  a  yogic  direct  perceiver   directly
realiszing  the  absence  of  permanence?  and   That  means  yogic   direct
perceiver implicitly realiszing impermanence. So the t?
Yyogic direct perceiver realiszes  impermanencet,  and  theat  yogic  direct
perceiver also realiszes permanence?

Student: Okay,  it  is  different.  Absence  of  permanence  is  actually  a
permanent phenomenon.

Ven Gyurme: Absence of permanence is a  construct.  It  is  an  imputational
nature.

Student: It is an existent imputational nature.  So,  So  there  that  is  a
realiszation of that.

Ven Gyurme: A yYogic direct perceiver directly  realiszing  an  imputational
nature, then ..…

Student: Is it correct to say that  fFor  that  kind  of  consciousness,  an
external object does not n’t appear? , right? It is just an absence.

Ven Gyurme: You are saying  among  out  of  the  three  types  of  dualistic
appearances, that one is missing.

Student: Yes.
Ven Gyurme: Back to the last class?
Student: At first, I didn’t  think  of  that.  I  actually  think  of  dream
elephant. mMy first illustration was a  dream  elephant.  Then  it  evolveds
into an imputational nature. If an unmistaken consciousness  can  also  have
be dualistic appearance,  then  a  yogic  direct  perceiver  realiszing  the
absence of permanence would not have an  external object  appearing  to  it,
am I , right?

Khen Rinpoche:  Basically  she  is  trying  to  ask:  “Can  a  nNon-mistaken
consciousnesses can have dualistic appearances or not?”

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: The answer is yes.

Student: So this It is an illustration  where  the  appearance  of  that  an
external object does not arise. n’t appear.

An  iImputational  nature   -  its  existence  is  a   conventional   truth.
Actually,With regard to the appearance of conventional phenomena, what is  a
conventional phenomenon?

Khen  Rinpoche:  Think  about  the  definition  of  a  conventional   truth.
According to the MOS and which is similar also in the AMWS,  the  definition
of a conventional truth is “- that  which  is  realiszed  through  dualistic
appearance by a direct valid cogniszer that directly realiszes it.”

A  dDirect  perceiver  is  non-mistaken.  For  ca  conventional  truth,  the
realiszation is accompanied with dualistic appearance.

Student: So an uUnmistaken consciousness can be dualistic.
Ven Gyurme: Unless your direct perceiver can be mistaken, otherwise no.
Student: What then  is a conventional phenomenon?

Khen Rinpoche: A cConventional truth and a conventional phenomenon  are  the
same thing.

Student: A dDream elephant is not an external object.  According  to  the  ,
right? Actually in SS, it is actually dream elephant is a phenomenon  source
form. It is not the aggregation of ed by partless particles nor . It  is  it
not atomically established. So wWhen we dream of a dream elephant, is  there
it an appearance of an as external object?

Ven Gyurme: Are Yyou are trying to find out whether the  dream  elephant  is
an external object or not. From  the  perspective  of  which  school?   From
which school perspective are you asking?


Student: The MOS.

Khen Rinpoche: Why do you want to say that it is  from  the  perspective  of
the MOS perspective? In the  first  place,  for  the  MOS,  there  areis  no
external  objects.  When  one  is  dreaming,  it  is  possible  to  have  an
appearance of an external elephant. If we are referring to  the  perspective
of the talking from the MOS perspective, then it is very easy.  ,  and  Yyou
don’t need to think because immediately,  you can say no,  because  they  do
not assert there is no external objects.

When we dream, anything can appear. There is the appIt appearance of s  like
something coming from the side of the object. Therefore, it is  possible  to
dream and to have an appearance of an external elephant in the  dream.  Yes,
Yyou can say that there is an appearance of an external object.

Student: How about when I dream about myself  in  my  dream?.  Should  there
There still should not be an appearance of an external object thenright?

Khen Rinpoche: There is no problem in saying that there  is  an  appearance.
Related to your earlier question, it is clear in the text that, ,  according
to the MOS, there are four types of  direct  perceivers:  “.  Self-cognizing
direct perceivers and yogic direct perceivers are  necessarily  non-mistaken
consciousnesses.” (Page 17)

The definition of a  self-knower  is  that  which  has  the  aspect  of  the
apprehender. Self-knowing direct perceivers and yogic direct perceivers  are
necessarily non-mistaken consciousnesses.
A self-knower then would be necessarily non-mistaken.
[Root text: page 17] There  are  four  types  of  direct  perceivers.  Self-
knowing direct perceivers and yogic direct perceivers are  necessarily  non-
mistaken consciousnesses.
If a self-knowing direct perceiver is  necessarily  non-mistaken,  then  the
self-knower would be necessarily be non-mistaken.
Now the question is this: “Do self-knowing direct perceivers have  dualistic
appearance or not?”

The  definition  of  self-knower  -  that  which  has  the  aspect  of   the
apprehender.
According to the MOS, self-knowing direct perceivers  are  necessarily  non-
mistaken. Do self-knowing direct perceivers  have  dualistic  appearance  or
not?
Self-knowing direct perceivers have consciousnesses as their object.
 What Athe self-knower realiseszing isa  mind. Is the  valid  cogniser  that
directly realises a consciousness a self-knowing direct valid perceiver?

The mMind is a conventional truth.
What is the definition of a conventional truth?
A cConventional  truth  is  “an  object  that  which  is  realiszed  through
dualistic appearance by a  valid  valid  ddirect   perceiver  that  directly
realiszes it.”
Is the valid cognizer that directly realizes a consciousness a  self-knowing
direct valid perceiver?
Consciousness is a conventional truth. Conventional truth is that  which  is
realized through dualistic appearance  by  a  valid  direct  perceiver  that
directly realizes it.
What are you going to posit to be the valid  valid  direct   perceiver  that
directly realiszes a consciousness?

Student: The mind of a bBuddha. mind

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: You mean that sSentient beings do  not  have
such a mindn’t have, you mean? Give me another example.

Student: A clairvoyance that reads another mind.

Khen Rinpoche: Does the clairvoyance that which  knows  another  mind  haves
dualistic appearance?

Question: For the MOS, all the permanent phenomena other than emptiness  are
imputational natures. Does that means uncompounded space  exists  as  merely
as  being  posited  by  thought?  If  so,  would  that  not  n’t  that  make
uncompounded space just a mental construct?

Ven Gyurme: You dDon’t have to go to the  MOS.  The  ,  SS  already  asserts
tsaid that.

Student: Uncompounded space is just a  mental  construct  or  Iis  there  an
uncompounded space that which is not a mental  construct  but  needs  to  be
realiszed through a mental construct?

Ven Gyurme: It follows then that there will be is infinite regression.

Student: So, uncompounded space is just a mental construct.  It  cannot  fit
my mind.

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Make your mind bigger.

The new students  must  also  train  in  also  asking   questions.  The  new
students must train and exercise in asking questions. You can ask  anything.
, Iit does not matter whether your question makes sense or not.  n’t  matter
whether it is rubbish or not. You can ask anything.

Question: How do the higher schools refute the lower  schools  with  respect
to theof  findability of the object being able  to  find  the  object  other
than saying that it is not found by a valid cogniszer?

AnswerKhen Rinpoche: Only the CMWS refutes the findability of  the  objects.
The rest of the tenets assert that things are findable,  i.e.,  ;  there  is
existence from their its own side.
Student: For the AMWS, they are more subtle in that sense. They  refute  the
assertion of the MOS, basically they refute  there  is  true  existent.  How
they refute the object to be true existent?
For the CMWS, how  do  they  refute  the  two  schools  findability  of  the
objects?
How the AMWS refuting MOS assertion  of  true  establishment?  Because  true
establishment is not refuted for the MOS, they  accept  that  but  the  AMWS
refute them.
Then the CMWS refutes both AMWS and MOS on object being established  by  way
of its own character. Other than saying that it is not realized by  a  valid
cognizer, how do they refute?
Ven Gyurme (paraphrasing question from  a  studentrephrased  the  question):
What other avenues ofr reasoning are there to refute  true  existence  other
than saying that it is not realiszed by a valid cognizer?

AnswerKhen Rinpoche: The MOS asserts true existencet  mainly  in  connection
with other-powered phenomena.

The MWS refutes that because, from their  MWS perspective, the  positing  of
other-powered phenomena is has the rooted in  the  mind.  According  to  the
MWS, the mind is not truly existent.

The MWS rrefutation of true existence by the MWS  t  covers  all  phenomena.
For them everything that exists does not exist truly, but,   in  particular,
this is a refutation of the view of the against  the  MOMOS  view  that  the
mind is truly existentce.  Mainly  they  are  refuting  the  mind  is  truly
existence.

According to the MOS, many things  are  truly  existent,  ;  especially  the
mind.  is truly existent.
According  to  the  MOS,  Wwhat  does  the  MOS   they  understand  by  true
existencet?  To them,  MOS, those things that are  truly  existent  are  not
merely imputed by thought but existing from their own side.

All the tenets Everybody talk about true existencet but they have their  own
different presentations of what it is.  on it.
The MOS understandsing on true existencet to be is this: it  is  not  merely
imputed by thought but existings from its own side.

In general, the MWS asserts that phenomena do not  exist  truly  but  are  ,
phenomena are imputed by mind.
This at means that there is non’t a  single  existent  that  exists  without
being merely imputed by mind.
Thisat is the general procedure of the MWS.

Of course, Yyou know thatere there  are two divisions in  the  MWS.  We  are
now looking at the position of the with AMWS.
How does the  AMWS explain  this?  They  explain  that  phenomena  exist  as
merely imputed by mind.
According to the AMWS, To them, phenomena are posited through the  force  of
them appearing to a consciousness.
You cannot talk about an existent without it appearing to  a  consciousness.
This is the meaning of imputation by mind. This particular assertion of  the
AMWS is a refutation of the position of the MOS position.

What  is  the  MOS  understanding  of  the  MOS  with  regard   ofto    true
existencet?  It is not merely imputed by thought but it  existsing  from  by
its own side.

The MWS got two divisions and all of them the same in saying that  phenomena
are merely imputed by mind. How do  the  AMWS  explain  that  phenomena  are
merely imputed by mind?
According to the AMWS, phenomena are merely posited through  the  appearance
of very phenomena appearing to a consciousness that, . iIn this case, it  is
the non-defective awareness. So, tThere is no n’t any  phenomenon  that  can
exist from its own side (or established by way of its own uncommon  mode  of
existence) without it appearing to a consciousness. Basically Ssuch a  thing
is not possible.

According to the AMWS, if there is a phenomenon anything that you can  point
toout, you can say that thing exists or  is established by way  of  its  own
uncommon mode of existence  without  being  posited  through  the  force  of
appearing to a non-defective awareness, . If there is  such  a  thing,  then
thaet phenomenon is truly existent.
BuBut there isn’t such a phenomenon t aaccording to the  AMWS,  there  isn’t
such a thing. If you assert true existencet, the AMWS, then  that  comes  up
with  many different kinds of reasoning to refute true existencet.

Question  from  Khen  Rinpoche  question:  Does  the   MOS  assert  s   true
existencet?

Students: Yes.
According to the MOS, m  ttrue  existencet  means   not  merely  imputed  by
thought but existsing from its own side. According to the  MOS,  Tthere  are
many things that exist from their own side and they are not  merely  imputed
by thought. ,  and  they  do  exist  from  their  own  side.  This  is  true
existencet to the . MOS do assert there  is  true  existent,  but  the  AMWS
refutes this.  that.

The general assertion of the MWS is that there is no n’t a single object  or
event or phenomenon that exists without being  merely  imputed  by  thought.
Everything that exists is merely imputed by thought.

It is good that  you  we  have  questions.  Those  students  who  have  just
enrolled in the Basic Program  P  sshould  be  asking  more  questions.  You
should put more effort into asking more questions because presently most  of
the time, it is the older students who are asking the  questions.  Sometimes
they tend to ask too many questions!.

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: I encourage the new students one to  put  in
effort into  asking questions. It can be  simple  questions.  Sometimes  the
senior students s ask difficult questions and you don’t get anything out  of
it at all. So, So you better ask questions yourself. T  then  you  will  get
something out of it.

I noticed that the so-called senior  students  What  I  notice,  the  called
‘seniors’, they ask  too  many  questions.  So,  you  don’t  get  all  these
talking. It is bBetter if the , the new ones must ask questions. Okay?  This
at is your homework. If you have questions,  then you ask them   when  there
is an opportunity to do so. If nobody wants to ask any questions,  then  the
senior students  can come up to ask questions. .




Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong


-----------------------
[1] Refer chart on Meaning of Terms Used to Describe the Mode  of  Existence
of Phenomena in the Mahayana Schools.
[2] Refer to chart on Selflessness of Person and Phenomena.

