Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/BP2 M3 L17 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.978549
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsün Chökyi Gyaltsen,  translated  by
Glen Svensson. Copyright: Glen Svensson, April 2005. Reproduced for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program with permission from Glen Svensson

Lightly edited and some footnotes added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama  Tzong
Khapa, October 2005.

All page references refer to this root text unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 17                         Date: 30th April 2013

We spent two to three lessons talking about the  selflessness  of  phenomena
in accordance with the MOS. We  also  talked  about  the  emptiness  of  the
object and subject as different entities and  the  emptiness  of  an  object
existing by way of its own character as the basis for the conception of  the
conceptual consciousness. From your own side, you must be able to  verbalise
what these two emptinesses are, i.e., at least you must be able to  say  the
words correctly.  Only on that basis can you  think  about  their  meanings:
what exactly is the emptiness of object and subject  as  different  entities
and so forth?  It is important that you gain that understanding.

Then we talked about the three natures or characteristics according  to  the
MOS:
1. Other-powered natures
2. Thoroughly established natures
3. Imputational natures
• In our discussion of other-powered  natures,  we  used  the  physical  and
  mental aggregates as an example of other-powered natures.
•  The  aggregates  are  the   bases   of   designation.    The   bases   of
  designation—the aggregates—do not exist by way of their own  character  as
  the basis of  conception  of  a  conceptual  consciousness.  An  aggregate
  existing by way of its own  character  as  a  basis  of  conception  of  a
  conceptual consciousness is its imputational nature.
• The emptiness of that imputational nature of an aggregate is a  thoroughly
  established nature.

I mentioned to you the purpose of looking at these three natures.
• The other-powered nature is the basis of emptiness.
• The object of negation, i.e., its  imputational  nature,  exists  on  this
  basis of emptiness.
• The emptiness or the non-existence of the imputational nature that  exists
  on any other-powered natures is the thoroughly established nature.

We have now completed the definition of ultimate truth.

Conventional truth


   The definition of a conventional truth is: that which is realized by  the
   direct valid cognizer directly realizing it by way of being together with
   dualistic appearance (Page 15).
Remember I gave you an  alternative  definition  of  an  ultimate  truth:  a
thoroughly established nature is the final object of observation of  a  pure
path. All phenomena that are not final objects  of  observation  of  a  pure
path are conventional truths.

When you think about the three natures in  terms  of  the  two  truths,  the
thoroughly established nature is the ultimate truth. Phenomena that are  not
ultimate truths are conventional truths. This means that both  other-powered
natures and imputational natures are  conventional  truths.  In  short,  all
phenomena that exist are either ultimate truths or conventional truths.

We have all these definitions of  ultimate  truth.  When  you  think  of  an
ultimate truth, what exactly is it? An ultimate truth is an object  whereby,
when you familiarise yourself  with  it,  you  can  remove  and  purify  all
obscurations from the root. This  very  object  is  the  ultimate  truth.  A
conventional truth is the opposite to this: when  you  familiarise  yourself
with a conventional truth, your obscurations  cannot  be  removed  from  the
root.

Let us look at the definition of an ultimate truth. An  ultimate  truth  is,
“that which is realised by the direct valid cogniser directly  realising  it
by way of the vanishing of dualistic  appearance.”  Here  “that”  refers  to
emptiness. Emptiness is realised by a particular  mind,   the  direct  valid
cogniser.  Specifically  it  refers  to  the  wisdom   directly   perceiving
emptiness.

• What  is  realised  by  this  wisdom  directly  perceiving  emptiness?  It
  realises emptiness.
•  How  does  it  realise  emptiness?  It  realises  emptiness  through  the
  vanishing or  subsidence of dualistic appearance.

Dualistic appearance
“Dualistic appearance” here refers to:
• the appearance of an external object,
• the appearance of object and subject, and
• the appearance of a conventional phenomenon.
When the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness realises  emptiness,  it  does
so without these dualistic appearances.

A conventional truth is any phenomenon that, when realised directly  by  the
direct valid cogniser realising it, that realisation comes with any  of  the
three dualistic appearances:
• the appearance of an external object,  or
• the appearance of object and subject, or
• the appearance of a conventional phenomenon.

Let us use blue  as  an  illustration  of  a  conventional  truth.  Blue  is
realised by a direct valid cogniser; in  this  case,  an  eye  consciousness
apprehending blue. How does it apprehend blue? It apprehends blue by way  of
dualistic appearance, i.e., the realisation of  blue  comes  with  dualistic
appearance. So in the case of the eye consciousness apprehending blue,  what
appears to that consciousness?
• There is an appearance of blue as an external object.
• There is also an appearance of object and subject.
• There is also an appearance of a conventional phenomenon,  a  conventional
  blue.
   There are two types of conventional truths:
      1. other-powered phenomena and
      2. conventional truths that are included  in  imputational  constructs
      (Page 15).

If it is a conventional truth, it is either an other-powered  phenomenon  or
an imputational construct. But whatever is an imputational construct is  not
necessarily a conventional truth because there are  imputational  constructs
that are non-existents. Therefore  only  imputational  constructs  that  are
existents are conventional truths. That is why it says  here,  “conventional
truths that are included in imputational constructs.”

   Other-powered phenomena and compounded phenomena are equivalent.


   Conventional truths that are  included  in  imputational  constructs  and
   uncompounded phenomena other than ultimate truths are equivalent.


   All things are accepted to be the common locus of  being  truly  existent
   and being a falsity; all final realities are accepted to  be  the  common
   locus of being truly  existent  and  being  true;  and  all  uncompounded
   phenomena other than final realities are accepted to be the common  locus
   of being falsely existent and being a falsity (Pages 15 – 16).


In the MOS, all things are accepted to be the common  loci  of  being  truly
established and falsities. In the MOS, only emptiness is asserted  to  be  a
truth. When we talk about emptiness, emptiness is a  truth.  A  conventional
truth is a falsity.

• “All final realities are accepted to be the common locus  of  being  truly
  existent  and  being  true”:  “final  realities”  can  be  translated   as
  suchnesses.
• “All uncompounded phenomena other than final realities are accepted to  be
  the  common  locus  of  being  falsely  existent  and  being  a  falsity”:
  uncompounded phenomena refer to permanent phenomena.

When you think about this, it is not complicated  because  we  have  covered
this already. If  you  memorise  them,  then  it  is  very  easy  as  it  is
straightforward. As mentioned before:
•  Thoroughly  established  natures  and  other-powered  natures  are  truly
  established.
• Imputational natures are not truly established.
What we read out earlier is just another way of saying this.

Falsities are conventional truths. Emptiness  or  suchness  is  an  ultimate
truth and it is a truth. So ultimate  truth  and  truth  are  the  same  and
conventional truth and falsity are the same.

   Final realities are necessarily non-affirming negatives. Illustrations of
   other non-affirming negatives are similar to those of the  Proponents  of
   Sutra.


   The five sense objects – forms and so forth – are produced on  the  basis
   of a substance that is an inner  consciousness  in  dependence  upon  the
   latencies of common and uncommon actions deposited upon the mind-basis-of-
   all. They are not established as external objects (Page 16).

Latencies of all kinds of actions are deposited  on  the  mind-basis-of-all.
It is through the ripening of these latencies that there is  the  appearance
of phenomena.

   According to the True Aspectarians, even though the five sense objects  –
   forms and so forth – are not external objects they are accepted to  exist
   as gross objects.


   According to the False Aspectarians, the five sense objects –  forms  and
   so forth – are not gross objects because if they were gross objects  they
   would necessarily be external objects (Page 16).

We have already talked about this.

   5 Way of asserting object-possessors
   True Aspectarians accept a collection of  eight  consciousnesses  because
   they assert that in addition to the  collection  of  six  consciousnesses
   accepted by the other proponents of tenets, there are the  mind-basis-of-
   all and the afflicted mentality, making a total of a collection of  eight
   consciousnesses (Page 16).


This section looks at the differences between  the  assertion  of  the  True
Aspectarians and the  False  Aspectarians  with  regard  to  the  number  of
consciousnesses. The True Aspectarians assert that there is a collection  of
eight consciousnesses whereas the False Aspectarians assert that  there  are
only six consciousnesses.

The six consciousnesses are the main minds that we studied in  the  previous
module on lo-rig.  The  six  consciousnesses  are  the  five  primary  sense
consciousnesses and the primary mental consciousness. When you add the mind-
basis-of-all and the afflicted mentality to these six  consciousnesses,  you
have the eight consciousnesses.

The mind-basis-of-all


   There are illustrations of both  a  mind-basis-of-all  and  an  afflicted
   mentality. The  consciousness  that  is  an  object  different  from  the
   collection of six consciousnesses and that does not depend upon  a  sense
   power which is its own empowering condition is asserted to be  the  mind-
   basis-of-all (Page 16).

Why do the True Aspectarians assert that there is a  mind-basis-of-all  that
is a repository of all  the  latencies  of  karma?  In  order  for  the  six
consciousnesses—the   five   sense   consciousnesses    and    the    mental
consciousness—to  be  produced,  there  must  be  an   uncommon   empowering
condition, i.e., their respective sense powers. It is only by  depending  on
their respective sense power that a consciousness is generated.  That  means
the consciousness is generated temporarily and that it does  not  exist  all
the time.
According to the True Aspectarians, because such a  consciousness  does  not
exist  all  the  time,  therefore   this   consciousness   cannot   be   the
consciousness that receives all the latencies of  the  karma  that  we  have
accumulated. The basis of infusion or the repository of all the imprints  of
our karma must be something that  is  stable  and  enduring  at  all  times.
Otherwise  it  is  difficult  to  account  for  karma.  Therefore  the  True
Aspectarians think that there must be a  consciousness  that  (1)  is  other
than these six consciousnesses and (2) does not depend upon  a  sense  power
that is its own uncommon empowering  condition.   Such  a  consciousness  is
called the mind-basis-of-all. The reason they assert  the  mind-basis-of-all
is to account for the need for a stable and enduring repository for all  the
imprints of the karma.
• The mind-basis-of-all is an awareness to which an object  appears  and  is
  not ascertained.
• It does not realise its object.
• It is neither virtuous nor non-virtuous, i.e., it is unspecified.
   o Why is the mind-basis-of-all not virtuous? If it  is  virtuous,  it  is
     very difficult to account for the mind-basis-of-all being a  repository
     of imprints of non-virtuous actions.
   o If the mind-basis-of-all is asserted to be  non-virtuous,  then  it  is
     difficult to explain how the mind-basis-of-all can act as a  repository
     of imprints of virtuous actions.

The afflicted mentality
Next  is  the  illustration  of  the  eighth  consciousness,  the  afflicted
mentality.

   The consciousness that observes  the  mind-basis-of-all  –  its  observed
   object – and apprehends it in the aspect of it  being  a  self-sufficient
   substantially existent I is asserted to be the afflicted mentality  (Page
   16).

According  to  the  MOS,  this  afflicted  mentality  is  the  view  of  the
transitory collection. The view of the transitory  collection  is  the  mind
that observes, in this case, the mind-basis-of-all and apprehends it  to  be
a self-sufficient substantially existent “I.”
• What does the afflicted mentality observe? It observes the  mind-basis-of-
  all.
• The mind-basis-of-all is the object of the afflicted mentality.
• The afflicted mentality apprehends the mind-basis-of-all  to  be  a  self-
  sufficient substantially existent “I.”

  The mind-basis-of-all is asserted to be the  illustration  of  the  person
  that is the support of actions (Skt. karma) and their results (page 16).


Meaning of “findable”
According to the True Aspectarians, who is the  “I”  or  person  that  moves
from life to life, who creates and experiences the  results  of  karma?  For
them, such an “I” or person is findable. It must be something that  one  can
point to. For the True Aspectarians, this is the mind-basis-of-all, the  “I”
that is findable.

With  the  exception  of  the  CMWS,  the  highest  school,  all  the  other
tenets—starting from the AMWS down to the MOS, the SS, and  the  GES—asserts
that the “I” or person is findable.  Not  only  is  the  “‘I”  findable  but
everything is findable.

What is the meaning of “findable”? It means  that  when  you  look  for  it,
definitely you will be able to point to something that is the object, be  it
a person, the “I,”  or anything else for that matter. If  there  is  nothing
that you can point to  as  the  object,  then  that  thing  does  not  exist
whatsoever. The GES, the SS, the MOS, and the AMWS all have their  own  take
as to what an “I” or person is. All of them accept that the  “I”  or  person
is findable as you can point to something that is the person.  To  the  Mind
Only True Aspectarians, the thing that you can point to as   the  person  is
the mind-basis-of-all.

   False Aspectarians assert a collection of six consciousnesses  and  posit
   the mere mental consciousness to be the illustration of the  person  that
   is the support of actions and their results (Page 16).

The Mind Only False Aspectarians on the other hand assert  a  collection  of
six consciousnesses. They do not assert the mind-basis-of-all and for  them,
the illustration of a person is  the  consciousness.   Who  exactly  is  the
person who  moves from life to life? To them, that “I”  or  person  must  be
the mental consciousness.

   [The Proponents of Mind Only] assert two types of awarenesses:
      1. valid cognizers and
      2. non-valid cognizers.
   They assert two types of valid cognizers:
      1. direct valid cognizers and
      2. inferential valid cognizers (Page 16).

The presentation is similar to what we have  covered  so  there  is  nothing
much to say about it.

   6 Way of asserting selflessness
   The way of positing illustrations of the coarse and  subtle  selflessness
   of persons is similar to the Autonomists and below.


   An illustration of the selflessness of phenomena  is,  for  example,  the
   emptiness that is a form and the valid cognizer  apprehending  that  form
   being empty of being different substances (Page 16).

“Everything is in the nature of mind”
• According to the MOS, a form and  the  valid  cogniser  apprehending  that
  form are of the same substance.
• According to the SS, a form and the valid cogniser apprehending that  form
  are of different substances. They have a cause and effect relationship.

The clairvoyant mind
The SS have difficulties with seeing how the object and the subject  can  be
of the same substance. Their argument is this: there can be a  clairvoyance,
which is a mind, knowing another mind, i.e. the mind of another person.  The
object that is realised by this  clairvoyant  mind  is  another  mind.  This
clairvoyance is the subject and the other mind is the object. If  these  two
minds are of the same substance that means the  clairvoyance  and  the  mind
that it realises would become one entity. That would necessarily  incur  the
fallacy that these two mind streams are one. It follows then that these  two
persons are one and the same person.  This is what the SS says to  the  MOS,
“Your mind and someone else’s mind is not one substance.  You  as  a  person
and the other person cannot be the same person. The clairvoyance that  knows
someone else’s mind is a valid cogniser. If  we  were  to  posit  that  this
clairvoyance and the mind that it knows are of  one  substance,  it  follows
that these two minds would be one entity. This would  lead  to  the  fallacy
that these two individuals are one person.”

If you were to think about this, it is  not  so  straightforward.  Even  the
theory is challenging at times. When you say, “Everything is in  the  nature
of mind,” what does this really mean? When we say that everything is in  the
nature of mind,  we  are  not  saying  that  everything  is  mind.  This  is
definitely not the meaning. But when we really  think  about  it,  there  is
some sense behind it and it can be explained.

Factor of appearance
As we discussed in the past, whether something is pleasant or unpleasant  is
determined by that object appearing to your mind as pleasant or  unpleasant,
not appearing to someone else. In order for  there  to  be  this  factor  of
appearance of a pleasant object, there must be a cause. In this case, it  is
the imprint for that appearance of a pleasant object to arise. Without  such
an imprint, you will not experience that appearance of the pleasant  object.
Likewise, in order for there to be an appearance of  an  unpleasant  object,
there must be an imprint for that particular appearance without which  there
cannot be the appearance of that unpleasant object.

Without the imprint for a particular appearance, there is no  way  for  that
appearance to arise.  There is an  imprint  that  ripens  in  terms  of  the
appearance of an object. The object is the  factor  of  appearance  of  that
phenomenon and it is that which performs the function of the object.

Take for instance time. When we are suffering or unhappy, regardless of  the
actual duration of our suffering or unhappiness, we feel that it  lasts  for
a very long time. There is this appearance of  time  going  on  forever  and
never ending. Based on  that  appearance,  we  have  the  feeling  that  the
suffering we are experiencing is lasting a long time. Whether we suffer  for
a short or long period of time—the actual duration  may  be  very  short—but
during the time that we are experiencing  those  unpleasant  feelings,  they
seem to last a very long time. There  is  an  appearance  of  our  suffering
going on and on and never ending. That appearance causes us to suffer.  What
causes our suffering is just that appearance. When we  are  suffering,  when
we really think about it, it has nothing to do with its actual  duration  in
terms of hours and minutes. Whether it seems to last for  a  short  or  long
period of time depends on what we feel. It is same as coming to class.  Most
of you probably think that these two hours are too long.   But  maybe  there
are some students who think that it is too short!

More on the clairvoyant mind
How does the MOS explain a clairvoyance knowing another mind? They  have  to
be able to explain coherently:
• how this clairvoyance is a direct valid cogniser,
• how it directly apprehends another mind, and
• how, at the same time, this direct valid cogniser and  the  mind  that  it
  realises are of one substance.
The way this clairvoyance  realises  another  mind  is  unlike  how  an  eye
consciousness realises a vase. An  eye  consciousness  realises  its  object
nakedly. But that is not how a clairvoyance knowing  another  mind  realises
the other mind.

According  to  the  MOS,  on  the  basis  of  developing   a   very   stable
concentration, there will come a point whereby another mind will  appear  to
this concentration.  The mind of another person  is  experiencing  different
things and has different aspects. How does the  mind  of  the  other  person
appear to this clairvoyance? An aspect that is similar to  this  other  mind
appears to this clairvoyance. Because of this, the  MOS  asserts  that  this
clairvoyance knowing the mind of another person knows exactly  the  mind  of
another person and therefore it can be a direct valid cogniser.

For example, it is possible to have a prophetic dream—a  dream  whereby  you
see clearly what  will  definitely  happen  in  the  future.  You  see  that
appearance in the dream. This prophetic dream can happen due  to  the  power
of karma or through the blessing of a deity. In the prophetic dream you  are
seeing something that has yet to happen. Provided it is  an  accurate  dream
and something definitely will happen, actually what you  are  perceiving  is
something that is similar to that will happen. You are  not  perceiving  the
event nakedly. What you are seeing is something that is  similar  in  aspect
to what will happen. What you see in  the  case  of  an  accurate  prophetic
dream is exactly what will happen.

This is similar to the earlier explanation of how a clairvoyance  knows  the
mind of another person and how that is a valid  cogniser  according  to  the
MOS. Although the clairvoyance that knows the mind of  another  person  does
not see nakedly the mind of the other person, an aspect that is  similar  to
that other mind appears.  Therefore this clairvoyance can be  posited  as  a
direct valid cogniser. So there is no danger  of  two  individuals  becoming
one individual. This is the explanation of how  the  clairvoyant  mind  sees
another mind according to the MOS.

More qualms from the SS
But the SS has more qualms. According to the SS, let us say that  there  are
two individuals looking at blue. There is a  shared  blue,  i.e.,  the  same
blue appears to these two individuals. According to the MOS, the  blue  that
is seen and  the  eye  consciousness  apprehending  blue  are  of  the  same
substance.

However the SS refutes this. According to their point  of  view,  for  these
two individuals, there is one blue. This blue is due to the ripening of  the
latency of a particular karma in the mind of person  A.  But  this  blue  is
also the result of the ripening of the latency of a particular karma in  the
mind of person B. If there is a common  blue  that  is  seen  by  these  two
persons, it follows then that the minds of person A and person B are of  one
entity. This is the criticism of the SS.  That  is  why  the  SS  says  that
things are not in the nature  of  the  mind  and  that  there  are  external
objects. If you posit external objects, then such problems will not arise.

The  explanation  by  the  MOS  is  this:  using  the  illustration  of  two
individuals looking at one vase, the vase that is appearing to person  A  is
not the vase that is appearing to person B. That is:
• What appears to person A does not appear to person B.
• What appears to person B does not appear to person A.

When person A says, “The vase is impermanent,” that is not what person B  is
saying. Likewise, when person B says, “The vase  is  impermanent,”  that  is
not what person A is saying. But both are similar in saying that a  vase  is
impermanent. Even though both persons A and B say the same  thing,  “A  vase
is impermanent,” what person A is saying is  not  the  same  thing  as  what
person B is saying. If you  understand  this,  it  will  be  quite  easy  to
understand that what person A sees is not what  person  B  sees.  Similarly,
what person B  sees  is  not  what  person  A  sees.  Therefore,  these  two
individuals are not the same individual.

• The vase that appears to person A is of one substance  with  the  mind  of
  person A.
• The vase that appears to person B is of one substance  with  the  mind  of
  person B.
This is because the vase that appears to person A does not appear to  person
B.  Therefore the vase that appears to person A is not one entity  with  the
mind of person B.

This is like giving you the answers to the three questions that I had  asked
you all in an earlier lesson.

Does hell fire appear to the Buddha? If hell fire appears  to  Buddha,  hell
fire will be one entity with the mind of the Buddha.

How is hell fire established? It is  established  from  the  ripening  of  a
karma to be born in the hell realm as this appearance can be only  be  found
in the hell realm.
But things and phenomena do not appear to the Buddha due to ripening of  the
karmic imprints. All phenomena appear  to  the  Buddha  due  to  the  Buddha
completing the accumulation of the two collections.

Because hell fire exists, it must also exist in  the  mind  of  the  Buddha,
i.e., he is a direct valid cogniser apprehending that fire. Similar  to  the
explanation of how clairvoyance  works,  there  is  hell  fire.   The  fully
qualified hell fire appears to a hell  being.  An  aspect  similar  to  that
appears to the  mind  of  the  Buddha.  Specifically  to  the  direct  valid
cognition of the Buddha apprehending hell fire, an  aspect  similar  to  the
hell fire that appears to the hell beings appear to that  mind.  The  Buddha
does not realise hell fire nakedly but through the appearance of  an  aspect
similar to the object. The reason why  the  Buddha  can  see  hell  fire  is
because hell beings see hell fire. The Buddha directly perceives  hell  fire
in dependence upon the hell beings seeing hell fire.

This is just an illustration to help us think over and over  again  what  is
meant by, “Everything is in the nature of the  mind,”  as  asserted  by  the
MOS.

As I mentioned some time ago,  you  have  to  experiment  and  discover  for
yourself whether—when you adopt the view of the MOS that  everything  is  in
the nature of the mind—your destructive emotions are weakened or not.  First
we have to understand the assertions of the MOS. After having gained a  good
understanding of their worldview, then we look at our  own  experiences  and
think according to that worldview.  We  then  check  for  ourselves  whether
there is any benefit in doing  that  and  whether  it  helps  us  to  become
calmer, less emotionally  involved  in  negative  actions,  and  reduce  our
destructive emotions. If we can see  that  such  a  worldview  can  help  us
lessen our afflictions, then there ust be some truth in it.

Homework
I have to go away for one  week.  There  will  be  no  classes  this  coming
Thursday but I would like all of you to come together next  Tuesday  with  a
short written essay.

We have been talking about the four seals. Imagine  someone  is  asking  you
about the four seals. How are you going to explain them to that person?  The
scenario is this. A person says to you, “Since you have  been  studying  the
Basic Program and also studying the tenets, I really  want  to  learn  about
the four seals. Can you please explain them to me in  an  easy-to-understand
and practical manner in an hour?”

The four seals are:
1. All compounded phenomena are impermanent.
2.  All  contaminated  phenomena  are  miserable  (or  in  the   nature   of
   suffering).
3. All phenomena are empty and selfless.
4. Nirvana is peace.

Your  explanation  should  be  based  on  the  self,  the  person,  and  our
contaminated body and mind. You should explain to the person in such  a  way
that he can think about them and then put them into  practice  in  order  to
help him to arrive  at  an  understanding  that  indeed  we  ourselves,  our
lifespans, and our bodies are impermanent and the  source  of  problems  and
our misery. You must be able to link the first and second links: because  it
is impermanent therefore it is suffering.

We  also  talked  about  the  third  seal,  “All  phenomena  are  empty  and
selfless.” Because of that therefore there is an end to  our  problems.  The
source of our problems is ego-grasping. When we can end that,  then  we  can
end our suffering and all our problems. We have  to  show  this  person  how
this is the case.

We talked a lot about this but how does that understanding lead  to  an  end
to  our problems? We have to show and explain this clearly  in  a  practical
way. The main purpose is  to  lead  the  listener  to  the  conclusion  that
enlightenment and nirvana exist and can be attained. How do you  prove  this
by using your  understanding of the four seals?

So write that essay before you come on Tuesday. You can write two  or  three
pages. Don’t write just what comes into your head. Don’t write for the  sake
of writing. The point is to be concise with your words  and  their  meaning.
You have to be very clear in your own mind first. It is only  when  you  are
clear in your own mind that you  can  be  clear  in  your  essay.  So  think
carefully and then write it up.

Bring whatever you have written on Tuesday.  Then you  find  another  person
and present your essay to him or her,  i.e.,  you  exchange  what  you  have
written and read what was written by the other person. If there is  anything
that you do not agree with or am not sure  about,  you  can  ask  the  other
party, “Why did you write this?”


From the discussion, you can help one another improve on  what  was  written
so as to raise the standard and improve the quality  of  what  was  written.
You can learn new ideas, new ways of expressing yourself, or new logic.  You
have to keep in mind that you should be able to  substantiate  whatever  you
have written.

If you were to read out what you have written to many  listeners,  naturally
people will have questions and ask; “Why do you write  this?  What  is  your
reason? Can you share with us?” You should be able to  explain  clearly  why
you wrote what you wrote. If you had to ask someone else why you wrote  what
you wrote, then that is not the way. For those of you  who  had  studied  in
university, it is the same as presenting your thesis to your professor.

Khen Rinpoche: This is the idea behind this.

The essence is that you have to be confident and be able to defend what  you
wrote. On Tuesday, come at 7.30pm. Start with the usual prayers that  we  do
in class. After that you chose the person with  whom  you  want  to  discuss
your essay. You can discuss until 9.00pm.

We may have studied but we may not be confident of what  we  know  and  when
someone asks, “What have you learnt?” we are not able to reply  confidently.
That is not good. I thought this exercise might be  helpful.  Keep  whatever
you have written. In the future  when  we  have  the  opportunity  and  time
perhaps some of you can share whatever you  have  written.  Perhaps  I  will
call one of you to present your essay.

It is possible that some of you cannot write for whatever  reason.  Then  it
is all right. You do not need to be stressed about it. But for those of  you
who really want to learn and have the interest to do  so,  especially  those
who are committed to this Basic Program, then you must write. It is  not  an
option. As there is no class on Thursday, there is  some  time  between  now
and next Tuesday. So bring along what you have written on Tuesday.



Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong
