Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson03.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.391290
================================================================================


In the last lesson we looked at what or who is the proponent of Buddhist
tenets. A person who propounds Buddhist tenets is, firstly, a Buddhist. As
we have discussed, whether someone is a Buddhist or not is determined by
whether that person accepts the Three Jewels as the object of refuge. On
top of that he accepts the four seals. The four seals are the four things
that attest the particular teaching or doctrine to be Buddhist. Essentially
these are the two features that constitute the person who propounds
Buddhist tenets.
|The proponent of Buddhist tenets is:                                         |
|Someone is a Buddhist                                                        |
|Someone who asserts the Three Jewels as the object of refuge                 |
|Must be someone who also accept the four seals                               |


How many divisions of proponent of Buddhist tenets are there?
There are four divisions of proponent of Buddhist tenets:
  1. The Proponents of the Great Exposition (Sanskrit: Vaibhasika),
  2. The Proponents of Sutra (Skt. Sautrantika),
  3. The Proponents of Mind Only (Skt. Cittamatra) and
  4. The Proponents of the Middle Way (Skt. Madhyamika).
These are the four divisions of proponent of Buddhist tenets and this
number is definite; there are only four and not more than four. These
divisions of proponent of Buddhist tenets are all followers of Buddha.
As I have mentioned in the previous lesson:
- The Proponents of the Great Exposition and the Proponents of Sutra are
the followers of the first turning of the wheel of the dharma.
- The Proponents of the Middle Way are the followers of the second turning
of the wheel of the dharma.
- The Proponents of the Mind Only are the followers of the third turning of
the wheel of the dharma.

(Root text page 2-3)
Great Exposition School
The explanation of the Great Exposition School (Skt. Vaibhasika) has seven
outlines:
   1. definition,
   2. divisions,
   3. etymology,
   4. way of asserting objects,
   5. way of asserting object-possessors,
   6. way of asserting selflessness and
   7. presentation of the grounds and paths.

1 Definition
The definition of a Proponent of the Great Exposition is: a person
propounding Lesser Vehicle (Skt. Hinayana) tenets who does not assert self-
cognizers but does assert truly existent*1 external objects.
*[?] Refer to page 179 in Cutting Through Appearances, Practice  and  Theory
of Tibetan Buddhism, by Geshe Lhundup Sopa and Jeffrey  Hopkins  (New  York:
Snow Lion Publications, 1989), henceforth referred  to  as  Cutting  Through
Appearances for short.  For the sake of clarity,  “truly  established”  will
be substituted for “truly existent.”
Self-cognizers is also translated as self-knower.
|The Proponent of Proponent of the Great Exposition are those who:            |
|• do not assert self-cognizers,                                              |
|• assert truly established external objects, and                             |
|• propound Hinayana tenets.                                                  |


In the traditional studies of the Buddhist philosophies, the study of Lorig
(Mind and Awarenesses) is usually done before the studies of Tenets. This
is why the Tenets module comes after the Lorig. In the Lorig module, one
would have studied the different kinds of mind such as self-knower. On the
basis of having that understanding, then when one looks at this definition
it is not so difficult. If you are looking at this subject without any
prior understanding of Lorig, then it will be more challenging.
The Proponent of the Great Exposition here does not assert self-knower
(also known as self-cognizer), but the Proponents of Sutra and the
Proponents of the Mind Only assert self-knower.
As covered in Lorig, when we talked about consciousnesses, we can look at
them in term of other-knower and self-knower. Consciousness is clear and
knowing.
According to those who assert self-knower, within the collection one
consciousness;
   - there is a part of consciousness that know an object other than
  itself. This is other-knower
   - there is another part of consciousness which know itself. This is self-
  knower
For example, for an eye consciousness apprehending blue, within the
collection of an eye consciousness apprehending blue:
  - there is a part of that mind that know itself. This part is self-
  knower.
  - there is another part of that mind to which the object blue appears
  clearly and this eye consciousness is cognizing the object blue. This
  part is called the other-knower.
The Proponent of the Great Exposition does not assert self-knower.
Essentially, they do not assert consciousness has the ability to see itself
clearly.
As you know that a self-knower is that which has the aspect of an
apprehender. So the Proponent of the Great Exposition does not assert self-
knower.
I would think that this is easy to understand for those who had studied
Lorig in the previous module.
To summarize, the Proponent of the Great Exposition assert that
consciousnesses are only other-knower. Consciousnesses do not have the
aspect that look at consciousness itself clearly.
The Proponent of the Great Exposition is someone who asserts truly
established external objects. They assert external object, and they assert
that external object are truly established.
What does it mean by external object?
An external object is a coarse object that is formed through the
aggregation of atoms and particles; which are subtle.
The coarse object is the aggregation of many subtle particles coming
together forming a coarse object which is suitable to be apprehended by
sense consciousness. Therefore is a condition for the production of, for
example, sense consciousness apprehending it.
Therefore external object exists before the consciousness apprehending it
can be generated. So the Proponent of the Great Exposition asserts external
object.
On top of that they assert that external objects are truly established.
This is because for them anything that exists has a substance about it.
There is something right there that exist independently as a substance.
There is nothing to do with the mind imputing it. They don’t know how to
explain or assert a position whereby the mind plays a part in the existence
of the object. For them, there is something right there that exist
independently as a substance. So, thing are truly established.
So the Proponent of the Great Exposition is not able to posit that there is
part of phenomena that is imputed by consciousness. Rather for them, if
thing exist, it is truly existent in the sense that there is something
right there independently which is called substance. Therefore, to the GES,
everything that exist is necessary substantially established.
If these couple of features do exists, then that makes the person in
question a Proponent of the Great Exposition.
If there is a person who does not assert self-knower but assert truly
established object and is a proponent of Hinayana tenets, then that make
him a Proponent of the Great Exposition.
Of course it is not possible to understand everything at once, but you have
to memorize the definition. If you don’t memorize the definition then there
is nothing for you to think about. For now, if you are able to say a person
who is a Proponent of the Great Exposition, he does not assert self-knower
but assert truly established object and is a proponent of Hinayana tenets,
then that is enough.
On the basis of be able to regurgitate these few points and on the basis of
having this information in your brain, then after a while naturally
question will arise; “What is self-knower, what an external object is and
what truly established is.” Then it will become clearer and clearer as you
start to think about all these. So the basis for you to be clear right from
the beginning about what is a Proponent of the Great Exposition is having
to memorize the definition. Without which there is no basis to learn and
understand.

2 Divisions
There are three divisions:
  1. Proponents of the Great Exposition from Kashmir,
  2. Proponents of the Great Exposition from the Western Region (Skt.
  Aparantakas) and
  3. Proponents of the Great Exposition from the Central Region (Skt.
  Magadhas).
When the Proponent of the Great Exposition is divided, the division is made
mainly because of geographical locations.

3 Etymology
Why are they called ‘Proponents of Particulars’?
They are called such because they propound tenets through following
[Vasumitra’s] Great Exposition of Particulars (Skt. Mahavibhasa) or,
alternatively, they are called Proponents of Particulars because they
propound the three times to be particulars [i.e., instances] of substances.
There a set of teaching called “The Seven Knowledge” which was composed
primarily by Buddha’s main chief disciples Arhat Shariputra and
Maugalyanana. This “The Seven Knowledge” is not the actual speech of the
Buddha. The Proponent of the Great Exposition takes this teaching to be the
Buddha’s teaching. The text “Great Exposition of Particulars” as mentioned
in the etymology is essentially the commentaries on “The Seven Knowledge”.
It is said that this particular text is huge and is composed of about
100,000 verses. Later in time Vasubandhu condensed the essential meanings
of this “Great Exposition of Particulars” and came out with Treasury of
Manifest Knowledge (Skt. Abhidharmakosa).
Here we are looking at the etymology why they are called ‘Proponents of
Particulars. One explanation is that they are followers of the text “Great
Exposition of Particulars”.
Alternatively, they are the called Proponents of Particulars because they
propound the three times to be particulars [i.e., instances] of substances.
Composed phenomena have the factors of production, abiding and
disintegration. For the Proponent of the Great Exposition, the three
factors can be related to the three times.
For the Proponent of the Great Exposition, the three times are particulars
or instances of substances.
The example to understand the three times of the particulars of substances:
a golden cup is essentially made from gold. If this golden cup is melted
and transformed into a golden plate, and later on the golden plate is again
melted and remolded into a statue.  As the golden cup becomes a golden
plate, its entity has changed as it is no longer a cup but a plate. When it
is melted again and remolded into a statue, its entity also change into
statue. While the golden things undergone transformation and theirs
entities have changed but the fact the substance being gold has not change.
Another example: the sprout of the past, present and future. The sprouts of
these three times are different and have changed as the past sprout is not
the present sprout and the present sprout is not the future sprout. But the
sprouts of the past, present and future are sprouts which being a substance
has not change.
Future sprout is posited at the time of the seed.
Present sprout is posited when the sprout first arises.
Past sprout is posited as when the sprout matured, become a tree and bear
fruit; the sprout ceased to exist. At the time of the fruit, there is no
sprout left.
If you think about of what has been explained about the past, present and
future sprout, their entities have changed but the substance of it being a
sprout has not change because the substance is there. The substance sprout
exist in the past, present and future sprout.
Another example:  A young girl can be said as a future mother. In future,
when she does conceive she becomes a mother. When she passes away from this
life then she is a past mother.
Just like the substance sprouts which exist in the past, present and
future, so in this substance mother also exist in the past, present and
future.
So somebody propound the three times to be a particular of substances is
called Proponents of Particulars.

4 Way of asserting objects
The definition of thing is: that which is able to perform a function.
Thing, existent, and object of knowledge are equivalent.
There are two types of things:
  1. permanent things and
  2. impermanent things.
Examples of permanent things are uncompounded space, analytical cessations,
and non-analytical cessations.
Examples of impermanent things are created phenomena, products, and
impermanent phenomena.
According to GES, thing, existent, and object of knowledge are mutually
inclusive.
The presentation of the GES is different from what we have learned in
Lorig.
According to GES, there are two types of things:
   1. Permanent things
   2. Impermanent things
We are not going into detail in the class. Those who are interested to know
little bit more about the GES’ idea of what constitute realities, then you
can do it in your own private discussion or in the Sunday class. For those
who have done the previous module there is not much thing to say about this
although there is some slight differences but generally we have covered
them. For those who are new and would like to learn, you can do it
privately.
Another way of dividing things is into:
  1. conventional truths and
  2. ultimate truths.
The definition of a conventional truth is: a phenomenon such that an
awareness apprehending it is cancelled if it is broken up or mentally
separated into its individual parts.
Illustrations [of conventional truths] are, for example, a vase and a
woollen cloth because if a vase is broken with a hammer, the mind
apprehending it is cancelled, and if a woollen cloth is separated into its
individual threads, the mind apprehending it is cancelled.
According to GES, a vase is an illustration of conventional truth because
when the vase is smashed with a hammer the valid cognizer apprehending the
vase ceased to exist.
When you conceived a vase you are conceiving it in term of the shape which
looks like a vase. When the vase is smashed by a hammer the mind
apprehending it is cancelled or ceased.
Another example which is more subtle: look at the water in a cup. According
to the Buddhist philosophy, water is an aggregation of eight different
kinds of particles. This is the Buddhist formation of what constitute
atomic reality. The particles are earth, water, fire and wind. There are
others four: form, smell, taste and touch.
Water is an aggregation of these eight particles. Let assume that water has
this nature. If the water is individually isolated into different parts,
i.e. we take away its smell, its taste, and so forth one by one, at the end
of it, there will be no water left and the mind apprehending the water is
cancelled.
So these are some of the examples that illustrate what a conventional truth
is; whether it is a vase that is smashed by a hammer or you mentally
isolate the eight particles that make up the water, then the mind
apprehending the vase or the water is cancelled or ceased.
For the Proponent of the Great Exposition, conventional truth is also
referred to as conventionally existent, conventionally established or
imputedly existent. According to this GES, this is the different ways of
saying the same thing.

The definition of an ultimate truth is: A phenomenon such that an awareness
apprehending it is not cancelled if it is broken up or mentally separated
into its individual parts.
Illustrations [of ultimate truths] are, for example, directionally partless
particles, temporally partless [moments of] consciousness, and uncompounded
phenomena.
The Treasury of Manifest Knowledge (Skt. Abhidharmakosa) says: “Those
things – such as a pot or water – that the mind cannot engage if they are
broken or mentally separated into other [things] exist as conventional
[truths]. Others exist as ultimate [truths].”
The three times are asserted to be substances. A pot is asserted to exist
also at the time of the past of the pot and at the time of the future of
the pot.
According to this school, they assert directionally partless particle which
basically refers to the smallest possible particle. In modern words, we can
say that it is the basic building block of matter. For them, this particle
is directionally partless. Such directionally partless particle is an
ultimate truth. It is the smallest evolute of form; smallest possible
particle. So for them, this smallest particle is directionally partless.
We cannot do anything to destroy this directionally partless particle or
mentally break it up to something smaller; because it is the smallest
possible. So for them, it is an ultimate truth.
Similarly, when we talk about consciousness, there are temporary partless
moments of consciousness. For GES, for the same reason, in term of time,
the smallest moment of time, is also an ultimate truth.
As for an uncompounded space, it would be an illustration of ultimate
truth. Perhaps the reason why it is an illustration of ultimate truth is
because uncompounded space is permanent therefore it does not undergo
change. So for that reason, it fit into the definition of being an ultimate
truth. Perhaps just as uncompounded space itself does not undergoes change
therefore the valid cognizer apprehending the uncompounded space will not
undergoes change as well; i.e. the valid cognizer cannot be cancelled.
According to this school, ultimate truth, ultimately existent, ultimately
established and substantially existent means the same thing.
According to the GES if it is an established base, which means it is an
existent, it is necessarily substantially established. Basically all
phenomena are necessarily substantially established, but whatever is
substantially established is NOT necessary substantially existent.
Substantially existent is related to ultimate truth.
In general, when we say something is substantially existent or substantial
established, they mean the same thing. But in this particular context, when
we are looking at the division of the established base, according to GES,
substantially existent and substantial established do not mean the same
thing. Although all phenomena are substantially established they are not
necessarily substantially existent.
So according to this school, all phenomena are necessary truly established;
but yet at the same it does not mean that everything is necessary
ultimately established.
For this school, if it an established base, it is necessarily truly
established but whatever is truly established is not necessarily ultimately
established. Because if something is ultimately established, it is
substantially existent; which is ultimate truth.
Going back to this school understanding of conventional truth, a vase is a
conventional truth. The word for conventional is “kun rdzob.”  In higher
school, “kun rdzob”, it is translated as obscurational. We cannot translate
it as conventional or obscurational all the times because it has to depend
on the context. English language does not have the flexibility as Tibetan
language.
The word for conventional is “kun rdzob”.  There are different ways of
looking at the word “kun rdzob.” In this context, the vase is the
conventional truth. It is conventional because its existence is the
aggregation of many factors coming together. When everything comes
together, that phenomenon comes into being and then that phenomenon correct
thing is being produced. Therefore it is a truth. So the vase, in this
sense, is a conventional truth.
A directionally partless particle is not a conventional truth because
directionally partless particle is the smallest possible particle and it
stand on its own alone without depending on anything else. The thing about
it depending on something else is not there. Therefore it is not
conventional, so it is ultimate.
|               |CONVENTIONAL TRUTH            |ULTIMATE TRUTH                  |
|Great          |A phenomenon which is such    |A phenomenon which is such that,|
|Exposition     |that, if it were broken or    |if it were broken or            |
|School         |mentally separated into parts,|mentally separated into parts,  |
|(Vaibhasika)   |the mind apprehending that    |the mind apprehending that      |
|               |object would cease            |object would not cease          |


Student: Referring to the definition of a Proponent of the Great
Exposition, it mentioned that they assert truly established external
objects. Is this truly established external objects same as inherently
existent object?
Khen Rinpoche: What the highest school says about thing that is being not
truly established is the very thing that GES says exist i.e. truly
establishment.
Student: What exactly are Hinayana tenets? Do Mahayanists hold such view?
As said in CMWS, all arhat realize the same emptiness at the point of
achieving liberation. Why is it being called Hinayana tenets when
eventually all arhats realize the emptiness as defined by CMWS?
Khen Rinpoche:  Literally, Mahayana is the Great Vehicle and Hinayana is
the Lesser Vehicle. As for the person who enters the path, whether he is
entering a Hinayana path or a Mahayana path, he has entered a path. The
difference between these two paths is dependent on whether there is
bodhicitta in the person mind or not. So there is a difference in term of
the vastness of the motivation of the mind. Someone who has bodhicitta is
someone who has entered the Mahayana path; else is someone who has entered
the Hinayana path. Therefore there is a Mahayanist and a Hinayanist.
Question: Is Mahayanist and Hinayanist the same as proponents of Mahayana
tenets and proponents of Hinayana tenets?
Earlier on, we saw that there are four proponents of Buddhist tenets.
   1. The Proponents of the Great Exposition
   2. The Proponents of Sutra
   3. The Proponents of Mind Only and
   4. The Proponents of the Middle Way
The Proponents of the Great Exposition and the Proponents of Sutra are the
proponents of Hinayana tenets.
The Proponents of Mind Only and the Proponents of the Middle Way are the
proponents of Mahayana tenets.
Is there a proponent of Great Exposition who has entered the Mahayana path?
If you think about it, there is no reason to say no as it is possible that
there is someone who is a proponent of Great Exposition (which is Hinayana
tenets) but is someone who has entered a Mahayana path.
It is possible to say that there are hearer arhats who are the Proponents
of the Middle Way or the Proponents of Mind Only. If you think about this
you should be able to see that a Hinayanist is not necessary a proponent of
Hinayana tenets. Likewise, a Mahayanist is not necessary a proponent of
Mahayana tenets.
What we have said so far is non- contentious and is quite clear. But if we
look at what exactly Hinayana tenets is and what defined the Hinayana
tenets, this is something that we need to think about.
Can we say that Hinayana tenets is a system that believe truly established
external object and not the self-knower? Can the system include the
assertion of truly established external object and self-knower, which is
the definition of the Sutra School?
When these defining characteristics are put together, can these defining
characteristics be the defining characteristics of what constitutes the
Hinayana tenets?
Is there someone who is a proponent of Mahayana tenets and a Hinayana
arhat? Yes, it is possible.
One can also say that there is a proponent of Hinayana tenets but who has
entered Mahayana path.
So there is a difference between a Hinayanist and a proponent of Hinayana
tenets; and so forth.
Student: Proponent of the Great Exposition is a person is who does assert
truly established external objects. In this context, is the external object
a conventional truth or ultimate truth?
Khen Rinpoche: In this school, conventional truth, conventionally existent,
conventionally established and imputedly existent are mutually inclusive
i.e. they mean the same things
Ultimate truth, ultimately existence, ultimately established and
substantially existent are mutually inclusive i.e. they mean the same
things.
In this school, anything that exists, a phenomenon is necessarily truly
established.
|Conventional truth, conventionally     |Ultimate truth, ultimately existence,  |
|existent, conventionally established   |ultimately established and             |
|and imputedly existent are mutually    |substantially existent are mutually    |
|inclusive                              |inclusive                              |


In general convention, truly established and truly existent means the same
thing.
We usually hear the word truly existent being mentioned. Even during the
teaching, the lama or the translator always say “truly existent” but “den
par grub” in Tibetan mean truly established; but it is translated as truly
existent. In the perspective of the higher school, especially the CMWS,
truly established, truly existent and inherently existent means the same
thing. Also for the higher school, substantially established and
substantially existent are the same. But in this school, one has to make a
different. In this school, although everything is substantially established
but it does not mean everything is substantially existent.
In general, established and existent means the same thing but when affix to
substantial in this school, then substantially established and
substantially existent does not mean the same thing.
In this school, truly existent means ultimate truth. So truly existent,
ultimate truth, ultimately existence, ultimately established and
substantially existent are mutually inclusive i.e. they mean the same
things.

|           |               |Ultimately |Truly     |Establishment|Inherent      |
|           |               |established|establishe|by           |existence     |
|           |               |Truly      |d         |way of its   |Existing from |
|           |               |Existent   |          |own character|its own side  |
|Great Exposition School              |Ultimate truth                         |
|Definition: that which has the aspect|Definition: that which has the aspect  |
|of an apprehender                    |of the apprehended.                    |
|Illustration: Self-knowing direct    |Illustration: Sense direct perceiver,  |
|perceiver                            |mental direct perceiver and yogic      |
|                                     |direct perceiver, as well as all       |
|                                     |conceptual consciousnesses             |
|Self-knower is a consciousness that: |Other-knower is a consciousness that:  |
|- engages an internal consciousnesses|- engages external objects             |
|                                     |- directed outwards                    |
|- directed inwards                   |- realize something other than itself  |
|- experiences the consciousness      |                                       |
|non-dualistically                    |                                       |
|Example: Eye consciousness apprehending blue                                 |
|Other-knower is the eye consciousness itself                                 |
|Self-knower is the consciousness which experienced that eye consciousness    |


Aspect of an apprehender & aspect of the apprehended
-A consciousness also has these two factors:
• The factor of a consciousness that is just mere experience  of  itself  is
having the aspect of an apprehender.
• The factor of  a  consciousness  that  experiences  something  other  than
consciousness itself is the aspect of the apprehended
-In the two-fold divisions of object and object possessor:
 -The apprehended refers to the object. If it is an established base, it is
 necessarily an object.
 -The apprehender refers to the subject,  consciousness  and  is  also  the
 apprehended
Example: Eye consciousness apprehending blue
• The object blue - the apprehended
• The eye consciousness - the apprehender
• The eye consciousness apprehending blue sees  the  aspect  of  blue  -  is
called which has the aspect of the apprehended
• Self-knower (the consciousness which experiences  that  eye  consciousness
apprehending blue)  sees  the  apprehender  itself  has  the  aspect  of  an
apprehender


















