Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson18.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.521273
================================================================================


(Root text page 17)
6 Way of asserting selflessness
The way of positing illustrations of the coarse and subtle selflessness of
persons is similar to the Autonomists and below.
An illustration of the selflessness of phenomena is, for example, the
emptiness that is a form and the valid cognizer apprehending that form
being empty of being different substances.
7 Presentation of the grounds and paths
This is explained in two parts:
1. objects of abandonment and
2. actual presentation of the grounds and paths.
The conception of a self of persons together with its seeds and the three
poisons arising due to the force of that [conception] together with their
seeds are posited to be afflictive obscurations.
The conception of [things] as being true*1 together with its seeds, the
latencies of that [conception], and all mistaken dualistic appearances that
arise due to the force of that are posited to be obscurations to knowledge.
Note 1: Things being true means things existing in the way that they appear
in terms of appearing to be external to the consciousness apprehending them
and in terms of appearing to exist by way of their own characteristics as a
basis for applying terms
According to the MOS, what are the objects of abandonment?
The conception of self of persons together with its seeds and the three
poisons arising due to the force of that conception together with their
seeds are posited to be afflictive obscurations.
I don’t think there is any need for me to explain that because we have been
talking about it over and over again. You shouldn’t have any problem with
the understanding of what I have just read.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Any people has problem? When you read, do
you understand?
Is there any part of the long sentence that you don’t understand? If all of
you understand that then there is no need for me to say anything. If there
is anything that you don’t understand then you have to say. I will try to
explain that. Otherwise I will just move on.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Do you understand when I read the part of
the sentence? Do I need to make more clear on the sentence or don’t need
to? Feedback, otherwise I won’t know. Just talking about this sentence.
The long sentence that I just read out is essentially telling us what an
affliction is.
Here what are the afflictions? In this case they are the afflictive
obscurations. Is there anything you want me to clarify?
The conceptions of phenomena as being true together with their seeds, the
latencies of that conception and all mistaken dualistic appearances that
arise due to the force of that are posited to be obscurations to knowledge.
We have talked quite a fair bit on the conception of self of person in the
GES.
According to the MOS, what is the conception of a self of persons?
The conception of a self of persons for MOS is just the conception of self-
sufficient substantially existent person.
So the conception of a self-sufficient substantially existent person is an
afflictive obscuration.
According to the MOS, what is the conception of true existent?
The conception of true existent refers to the conception of subject and
object as different substances/entities and that is posited to be a
knowledge obscuration, also known as obstruction to omniscience.
➢ The conception of self-sufficient substantially existent person is an
  afflictive obscuration.
➢ The seeds of that conception are also an afflictive obscuration.
➢ The three mental poisons that arise due to the force of the conception
  of a self-sufficient substantially existent person are also posited to be
  afflictive obscurations.
According to the MOS:
The conception of true existent (which is translated in the root text as
the conception of things as being true) is the conception of subject and
object as being different substances is the knowledge obscuration.
The seeds of that conception are also posited to be knowledge obscuration.
➢ The conception of subject and object as different substances, together
  with its seeds, are knowledge obscurations.
➢ The latencies that are deposited on the mental continuum by that
  conception are also posited as knowledge obscuration.
➢ The mistaken dualistic appearances that arise due to the force of those
  latencies -the latencies of conceiving subject and object as different
  substances- are posited to be knowledge obscuration.

|Afflictive obscuration|1. The conception of a self of persons, which is the |
|are:                  |conception of self-sufficient substantially existent |
|                      |person.                                              |
|                      |2. The seeds of that conception of self-sufficient   |
|                      |substantially existent person.                       |
|                      |3. The three mental poisons that arise due to the    |
|                      |force of the conception of a self-sufficient         |
|                      |substantially existent person                        |
|Knowledge obscuration |1. The conception of true existent, which is the     |
|are:                  |conception of subject and object as being different  |
|                      |substances                                           |
|                      |2. The seeds of that conception of subject and object|
|                      |as being different substances                        |
|                      |3. The latencies that are deposited on the mental    |
|                      |continuum by that conception                         |
|                      |4. The mistaken dualistic appearances that arise due |
|                      |to the force of those latencies, the latency of      |
|                      |conceiving subject and object as different substances|

Seed and Latency
I did explain a bit about the difference between the seed and latency. You
must know that there are times where these two are translated in the same
way i.e. using the same word in English.  A lot of time, they mean the same
thing, but there are also times they are different and they don’t mean the
same thing. So you must know what the difference between a seed and latency
is.
A “seed” is pretty straight forward in English, and nobody translate it as
something else.
But for “latency”, there are many translations on the word “bag chags” such
as latency, procreativity, predisposition, and imprint.
Let’s take the conception of subject and object as different substances.
This is the conception of true existent, according to MOS.
There is the seed of this conception.
There is also the latency of this conception.
Both the seed and the latency of this conception are similar in that both
are planted or placed on the mental continuum by the same conception.
There is a difference between the seed of that conception and the latency
of the conception.
The seed of the conception of subject and object as different substances
has the potential to produce that same conception again.
The latency of the conception of subject and object as different substances
do not have the power to produce that conception, but what it produces is
the mistaken dualistic appearances
|         |Seed                          |Latency                                |
|Similarit|Placed on the mental continuum by the conception of truly existent    |
|y        |which is the conception of subject and object as different substances |
|Differenc|Has the potential to produce  |Does  not has the potential to produce |
|e        |that same conception again.   |that conception, but produces is the   |
|         |                              |mistaken dualistic appearances         |


(Root text page 18)
7B Actual presentation of the grounds and paths
Those of the hearer lineage conjoin the view realizing the selflessness of
persons with a small accumulation of merit for the sake of their own
welfare, while those of the solitary realize lineage conjoin the view
realizing the selflessness of persons with a middling accumulation of merit
for the sake of their own welfare, and, in dependence on having cultivated
that for at least three lifetimes, one hundred eons, and so on, actualize
their respective enlightenments.
Earlier on I did talked about the three yanas i.e. the three vehicles, and
the five paths. They are the same.
What are the three vehicles?
They are:
   1. The Hearer’s Vehicle
   2. The Solitary Realizer’s Vehicle
   3. The Great Vehicle or the Mahayana
The Hearer and the Solitary Realizer have:
 - the selflessness of person as the main object of meditation.
 - the conception of self of person (which is the afflictive obscuration)
 as the main object of abandonment
They meditate on selflessness of person in order to abandon the conception
of self of person for purpose of their own welfare.
The Hearer and the Solitary Realize are the same in having the conception
of self of person as the object of abandonment, and they are the same in
having the selflessness of person as the main object of meditation.
They are the same in that they meditate on this selflessness of person in
order to accomplish their own welfare.
Having said this, in what way they are different?  There is a difference
between the Hearer and Solitary Realizer.
The Solitary Realizers are able to conjoin the view realizing the
selflessness of person with an accumulation of merit over a period of
hundred eons, whereas the Hearers are not able to do that.
Since there is a difference in their abilities to accumulate merit, then
definitely there must be a difference in the result they achieve. In term
of the result that they can achieve, we can talk about a superior result
and a result that is lesser than that.
(Root text page 18)
Bodhisattvas conjoin the view realizing apprehenders and apprehendeds being
empty of being different substances with a great accumulation of merit for
the sake of others’ welfare, and, in dependence on having cultivated that
for at least three countless great eons and so on, actualize their
respective enlightenment.
The main object of meditation of the bodhisattva is the selflessness of
phenomena.
The main object of abandonment of the bodhisattva is the knowledge
obscuration.
Their purpose of cultivating the path is for the welfare of others.
It is said that bodhisattva accumulate merits over a period of three great
countless eons.
|                   |Hearer             |Solitary Realizer |Bodhisattva         |
|Object of          |Selflessness of    |Selflessness of   |Selflessness of     |
|meditation         |person             |person            |phenomena           |
|Object of          |Afflictive         |Afflictive        |Knowledge           |
|abandonment        |obscuration (the   |obscuration (the  |obscuration         |
|                   |conception of self |conception of self|                    |
|                   |of person)         |of person)        |                    |
|Accumulation of    |Not able to do that|Able to conjoin   |Able to conjoin the |
|merits             |as the Solitary    |the view realizing|view realizing      |
|                   |Realizer           |the selflessness  |apprehender and     |
|                   |                   |of person with an |apprehended as being|
|                   |                   |accumulation of   |empty of being      |
|                   |                   |merit over a      |different substances|
|                   |                   |period of hundred |with an accumulation|
|                   |                   |eons              |of merit over a     |
|                   |                   |                  |period of three     |
|                   |                   |                  |great countless eons|
|Purpose of         |For their own      |For their own     |For the welfare of  |
|cultivating the    |welfare            |welfare           |others              |
|path               |                   |                  |                    |


(Root text page 18)
True Aspectarians assert that when hearer and solitary realizer foe
destroyers pass beyond sorrow without remainder their continuum of
awareness is severed. They assert that it is impossible to sever the
continuum of awareness of a buddha superior because they assert that for
the bodhisattva who attained enlightenment initially as a complete
enjoyment body in Akanishta, the continuum of similar type of aspect of
that complete enjoyment body is not severed as long as samsara is not
empty, but rather it enacts the welfare of others through various
emanations in accordance with the fortunes of each individual disciple. The
individual lineages of the three vehicles are definite because they assert
that sentient beings, since beginningless time, are of three different
lineages or dispositions and thus have three different aspirations, and
thus have three different ways of practicing, and thus will attain three
different results.
The Mind Only True Aspectarians is similar with the proponent of Great
Exposition and the proponent of Sutra in that when the Hearer’s arhats and
the Solitary Realizers’ arhats passed beyond sorrow without remainder,
their mental continuum is severed.
The Hinayana tenets also assert that when someone achieves buddhahood, i.e.
when one becomes a Buddha, and when the Buddha passes beyond sorrow, the
continuum of awareness of a Buddha is severed. But the Mahayana tenets do
not assert that the continuum of awareness of a Buddha is severed when
Buddha passes beyond sorrow without remainder.
So there is a difference between the Hinayana tenets and Mahayana tenets
explanation of a Buddha.
According to Hinayana tenets, the continuum of awareness of Buddha is
severed when Buddha passes beyond sorrow without remainder. That is not
what is asserted in the Mahayana tenets. According to the Mahayana tenets,
one travels through all the ten bodhisattva grounds and then one achieves
enlightenment. One achieves enlightenment initially in the pureland called
Akanishta. When one achieves enlightenment one achieves the sambhogakaya,
or the complete enjoyment body. This complete enjoyment body is the basis
of emanations i.e. from this complete enjoyment body, various emanations
are sent to work for the welfare of sentient beings.
The Mahayana teachings say that once enlightenment is achieved, the Buddha
works uninterruptedly for the happiness and welfare of sentient beings.
The Mahayana teachings explain the enlightenment or buddhahood in terms of
the four kayas or four bodies.
In general, there are the two bodies, the Truth Body (the embodiment of
truth) and the Form Body (the embodiment of form).
The Truth Body (dharmakaya) has two divisions:
  -the Wisdom Truth Body
  -the Nature Truth Body
The Form Body (rupakaya) can be divided as:
-  the Complete Enjoyment Body (sambhogakaya)
-  the Emanation Body (nirmanakaya)
These are the four bodies. Such a presentation of the four kayas is not
found in the Hinayana teachings.
What is the Wisdom Truth Body?
Wisdom Truth Body is the mind that directly perceives all phenomena.
The Buddha’s mind that directly perceives all phenomena as they are is the
Wisdom Truth Body.
What is the Nature Truth Body?
According to the MOS, the Nature Truth Body is the emptiness of the mind of
a Buddha superior existing by way of its own character as the basis for
applying the term ‘mind of a Buddha superior’.
Here we are just changing the object, but the attribute is the same.
Many times we talked about form not existing by way of its own character as
the basis for applying the term ‘form’. Here, the attribute is the same,
but the object that we are using this time is ‘the mind of a Buddha
superior’.
So the attribute: the mind of a Buddha superior does not exist by way of
its own character as the basis for applying the term ‘the mind of a Buddha
superior’.
What you need to get is if it exists by way of its own character, then what
is the problem?
Once you understand the attribute is something that cannot exist by way of
its own character as the referent of a term then the non-existence of that
is emptiness.
In short, the emptiness of the mind of a buddha superior of a self of
phenomena is the Nature Truth Body.
So the Buddha’s mind, the non-existence of the self of phenomena is the
Nature Truth Body.
To make it shorter, the suchness of the Buddha mind is the Nature Truth
Body.
As for the Complete Enjoyment Body, when one achieves enlightenment, it is
said that one first achieves enlightenment in the pureland called Akhanista
in the aspect of this Complete Enjoyment Body.
This Complete Enjoyment Body is the basis of emanation. From this Complete
Enjoyment Body, various emanations are sent out to help sentient beings. It
is said that this Complete Enjoyment Body to last forever until samsara is
emptied.
The Complete Enjoyment Body possesses five certainties:
1. Certainty of place - the Complete Enjoyment Body abides only in
   Akanishta
2. Certainty of retinue -  only bodhisattva superiors
3. Certainty of dharma - the Complete Enjoyment Body teaches only Mahayana.
4. Certainty of time - the Complete Enjoyment Body lasts forever until
   samsara is emptied.
5. Certainty of body - the Complete Enjoyment Body is ornamented by the 32
   signs and the 80 exemplifications.
The Complete Enjoyment Body possesses these five certainties. The Complete
Enjoyment Body is the basis of emanations of the Emanation Body.
There are different Emanation Bodies. One of the divisions of the Emanation
Body is called the Supreme Emanation Body, such as our kind founder
Shakyamuni Buddha. This Supreme Emanation Body teaches all kinds of Dharma,
not necessary only Mahayana, and has all kinds of disciples who have pure
karma are able to meet with the Supreme Emanation Body.
Unlike the Complete Enjoyment Body, there is no certainty that the Supreme
Emanation Body will abides until the end of samsara. The Emanation Body
(nirmanakaya) is not necessary adorned with the signs and exemplification.
In short, the Complete Enjoyment Body possesses the five certainties, and
it is not the case for the Emanation Body.
The whole basis of the presentation of the four kayas is made on the
premise that the continuum of awareness of the Buddha is not severed after
passing beyond sorrow without remainder, because you cannot talk about the
four kayas when the Buddha disappear. Perhaps this is one of the things
that set the Hinayana and Mahayana tenets apart from one another. The
Mahayana tenets have a detailed presentation of the four kayas, whereas the
Hinayana tenets do not have presentation of the four kayas.
The True Aspectarians asserts that there are three final vehicles.
What is the reason for the True Aspectarians asserting that there are three
final vehicles?
The reason is because they assert that sentient beings, since beginningless
time, are of three different lineages or dispositions and thus have three
different aspirations, and thus have three different ways of practicing,
and thus will attain three different results.
Here we are talking about Mind Only True Aspectarians. They assert that
there are three final vehicles. Of course they have to assert that there
are three final vehicles, because they have already asserted that when a
Hearer arhat passes beyond sorrow without remainder, his continuum of
awareness is severed. When your continuum of awareness is severed, there is
nothing beyond that, and basically you die as a Hearer arhat.
The True Aspectarians asserts that when a Solitary Realizer arhat passes
beyond sorrow without remainder, their continuum of awareness are also
severed, and they die as a Solitary Realizer arhat.
That is one different result from the Hearer arhat. They are not going to
achieve anything more than that. In that sense, that is definite. Then
there is the Buddha. So that is why they assert three final vehicles.
Another reason why the Mind Only True Aspectarians assert that there are
three final vehicles, it has to do with sentient beings being of different
dispositions.
They assert mind-basis-of-all. On this mind-basis-of-all, the
predispositions are deposited. So the mind-basis-of-all is the repository
of the imprints.
According to the True Aspectarians, the mind-basis-of-all is truly
established. In the sense of lineage, there is the predisposition or
imprint of being a Hearer and this imprint is stored in the mind-basis-of-
all which is truly existent.
There is an imprint that is stored in the mind-basis-of-all, and this
imprint predisposes that person to be a Hearer. So that imprint makes the
person definite to be a Hearer. If that person enters the path, he enters
the Hearer’s path, then that is the path he will travel on. He will achieve
the Hearer’s enlightenment, and becomes a Hearer foe destroyer. In that
sense, the lineage is definite for that person.
Likewise, it is the same with the imprint that predisposes someone to be a
Solitary Realizer and to be a Bodhisattva who wants to be a Buddha. These
imprints are stored in the mind-basis-of-all, and this imprint predisposes
that person to be of a certain lineage. In that sense, it is certain that
sentient beings are organized into these three different lineages: some
will definitely only become Hearers, some will only become Solitary
Realizers and there are others who will become only Buddhas. This is their
explanation but is not necessary the truth. As we are just talking about
their explanation, it is not necessary the reality.
Of course there are some Hearers who have the predisposition somehow able
to achieve enlightenment. Therefore, we talk about the Hearer’s lineages:
definite Hearer lineage and indefinite Hearer lineage.
What is the Hearer lineage?
The Hearer lineage refers to the lineage or the potential that enables one
to achieve the Hearer’s enlightenment. Having said this, there is the
definite Hearer lineage and there is the indefinite Hearer lineage.
Those who are of the definite Hearer lineage refers to those sentient
beings who definitely enters the Hearers’ path, travel on it to the end and
achieve the Hearer’s enlightenment, i.e. becoming a Hearer foe
destroyer/arhat.
What about those who are of an indefinite Hearer’s lineage?
Those who are of an indefinite Hearer lineage are those who may initially
aspires to the Hearer’s enlightenment, and want to become a Hearer foe
destroyer. So they enter the Hearer’s path; path of accumulation, and
progress to the Hearer’s path of preparation. Perhaps along the way, they
meet with a virtuous friend, a guru of the Solitary Realizer’s path or even
a Mahayana guru, they then switch their path.
Let’s say that this person who was initially aspire to Hearer’s
enlightenment, then switch path and enters into the Solitary Realizer’s
path. In doing so, he travels the path to the end and become a Solitary
Realizer arhat. Such people are considered to be those who are of an
indefinite Hearer’s lineage.
There are also those who are of definite Solitary Realizer lineage and of
indefinite Solitary Realizer lineage.
There are also those who are of definite Mahayana lineage and of indefinite
Mahayana lineage.
According to the True Aspectarians, the arhats are also of two types:
1. Those who are definitely going to pass beyond sorrow without remainder.
   In so doing, their continuums of awareness is severed.
2. Those who, after having achievwd arhatship or become a foe destroyer and
   before passing beyond sorrow without remainder, enter the Mahayana path.
    In so doing, they will become Buddha in the future.
This is what the True Aspectarians say of the Hearer arhats and the
Solitary Realizer arhats.
The Hearer arhats and Solitary Realizer arhats are of two types:
1. Those arhats that are definitely going to pass beyond sorrow without
   remainder. When that happens, their continuum of awareness is severed,
   that means they will remain as arhats, and die as arhats when they are
   finished.
2. Those arhats who after becoming arhats and before passing beyond sorrow
   without remainder enter the Mahayana path. In so doing, they will
   achieve enlightenment and become a Buddha.
In short, these are the reasons why the Mind Only True Aspectarians assert
that there are three final vehicles.
The reason why there are three final vehicles is because there are sentient
beings that are of different dispositions, therefore different lineages.
There are three lineages because of their different dispositions.
Therefore, they divide them into three lineages. Therefore, they also talk
about three different results.
[Root text: page 18]
False Aspectarians do not assert that when hearer and solitary realizer foe
destroyers pass beyond sorrow without remainder their continuum of
awareness is severed because, although they assert that, at that time, the
continuum of mere awareness that is included in true sufferings and true
origins is severed, they assert that mere awareness goes on to the buddha
ground. Therefore, they assert one final vehicle.
The Mind Only False Aspectarians do not assert that the whole continuum of
awareness is severed at the time of passing beyond sorrow without
remainder. They assert that only the continuum of awareness that is
included in true sufferings and true origins is severed; not the whole
mind/awareness in general. Only the awareness that is included in true
sufferings and true origins is severed, and the mere awareness goes on to
the Buddha ground.
So, the mere awareness is not severed at the time of passing beyond sorrow
without remainder. That mere awareness goes on to enlightenment. For that
reason, the False Aspectarians assert one final vehicle.
From the discussion today, what you have to understand is that:
- the True Aspectarians assert three final vehicles. From your side, you
have to know why they assert three final vehicles, what is the rationale
and what is the reason that they show to support their assertions?
- the False Aspectarians assert only one final vehicle. You have to
understand why do they assert only one final vehicle?
That is about it for the MOS. Next, we will go on to be the Middle Way.
Remember I gave you the homework to do? Can I have a volunteer to read out
what you have written? Of course, the volunteer should be someone who is
quite confident that what he/she has written is something reasonable or
something good. The volunteer should not be the previous BP students, but
those enrolled as a new student.
[After waiting for some time, no volunteer]
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Nobody wants to read then I stop here.
According to the proponents of GES and the proponents of Sutra, essentially
the proponents of Hinayana tenets or Hinayana followers, I would say that
vast majority of them, if not all, assert that the Buddha’s words are to be
taken literally, therefore everything the Buddha say is true.
However, the Mahayana tenets such as the MOS assert that the Buddha’s
teachings must be classified into:
   1. Those teachings that require interpretation
   2. Those teachings of definitive meaning
Many followers of the Hinayana in the past and even till this day do not
accept the Mahayana teachings are the teachings of the Buddha. I think it
boils down to their world view. According to most of these followers, they
think that the Buddha only speaks the truth, so whatever the Buddha say,
the teachings can be taken literally. So they must take the teachings
literally.
They then approach the Mahayana sutras with that kind of world view, but
when they look at these many teachings and read it and take it literally,
the teachings do not make sense to them and cannot fit their mind. On the
other hand, they think that whatever the Buddha say must be true, but
because the teachings cannot fit their mind and do not make sense to them,
so to them the teachings are not true and cannot be taught by Buddha. They
then conclude that the Mahayana teachings are not taught by Buddha.
The MOS divide the scriptures into two categories:
   1. Those scriptures that are suitable to be read or taken literally
   2. Those scriptures that are not suitable to be read or taken literally
The MOS say that all the Buddha teachings are not necessarily suitable to
be taken literally. As there were three turnings of the wheel of the
Dharma, the MOS accept that the scriptures from the first turning of the
wheel of Dharma and the second turning of the wheel of Dharma were taught
by Buddha but they do not accept the teachings or the sutras from these two
turnings of the wheel of Dharma are suitable to be taken literally.
For the MOS, only the teachings or the sutras from the third turning of the
wheel of Dharma are suitable to be taken literally.
The MOS assert that all the teachings or the scriptures or the sutras from
the first turning of the wheel of Dharma and the second turning of the
wheel of the Dharma are not suitable to be taken literally. Take for
example, The Perfection of Wisdom Sutras belong to the second turning of
the wheel of Dharma. In The Perfection of Wisdom Sutras, you can find
statement such as “Forms do not exist inherently”, “Forms do not exist by
way of their own character”. The MOS accept that these were spoken by the
Buddha but they say that this statement cannot be taken literally.
For the MOS, one cannot say “Form does not exist inherently” because for
the MOS, that is how form exists.
According the MOS, such statements that were made by the Buddha but such
statements require an explanation of the Buddha’s intent behind the whole
statements.
The MOS say that the sutras from the second turning of the wheel of the
Dharma cannot be taken literally. One will find statement such as “Forms do
not exist inherently”, “Forms are not produced inherently”. According to
the MOS, one has to understand what is the intent or the meaning of that
verse. For example, “Forms are not produced inherently” means that form is
not produced from a cause that is of the same nature as that form.
“Form is not produced inherently”, according to MOS, this statement cannot
be taken literally and it requires interpretation. What it means is that
because form and the cause of form are of separate natures. The cause of
form as a separate nature from form, so form is not produced from a cause
that is of a same nature as form.
In the Mahayana view, all the Buddha scriptures or teachings cannot be
taken literally. Therefore there is a division of scriptures into:
   1. Those sutras of interpretative meaning
   2. Those sutras of definitive meaning
Of course, there is a huge discussion about the differences between these
two kinds of sutras and also the various kinds of logic and reasoning that
are used to establish whether a teaching or scripture is a sutra that
requires interpretation or is a sutra of definitive meaning.
We have to understand that the Buddha give teaching in order to fulfill the
needs of the listeners, so the teachings are given in accordance with the
dispositions of the listeners. Because of that, therefore the words that
are used by the Buddha and the things that the Buddha says are not
necessarily the final truth or not even necessarily true.
The Buddha has to teach according to the interests and the dispositions of
the disciples. He has to fit the mind of that person. So, not everything
that the Buddha says is necessarily the truth and also not necessarily the
Buddha’s final intent.
I guess the proponents of Hinayana tenets look at the Buddha as an honest
person. Of course, the Buddha is an honest person. The Buddha is
omniscient, and the Buddha knows everything. So whatever the Buddha says
must be true, and one just accepts it. However, the Mahayana view is that
the Buddha teaches to benefits sentient beings and the teachings are in
accord with the dispositions of sentient beings. Therefore, there are
always the possibilities that whatever the Buddha says may not represent
what he really thinks.
Now you have to elect which position is better: the Hinayana perspective or
the Mahayana perspective. Is it better to take everything literally or is
it better not to take everything literally?  There is a competition between
these two positions, so whichever position that has more reasoning and make
more common sense, then we support that position.
Question: (Summarized by Ven Gyurme) Usually we say that the substantial
cause of consciousness has to be that which is clear and knowing. Here in
the MOS whether it is form or consciousness, they both arise from the
ripening of a karmic latency or predisposition, which is a non-associated
compositional factor. So now the cause of form is not form and the cause of
consciousness is not a consciousness. It seems then that the notion of a
substantial cause fall apart.
Answer by Senior Student: A phenomenon that comes about doesn’t just rely
on a substantial cause but many other factors, many other cooperative
conditions for it to come about.
Khen Rinpoche spoke In English: You answering her question? You didn’t
answer her question isn’t it?
Senior Student:  She asked about whether the substantial cause of a mind
has to be mind?
Khen Rinpoche spoke In English: So, your answer is what?
Senior Student: Yes, substantial cause of a mind has to be a mind, a
previous moment of mind.
Khen Rinpoche spoke In English:  Have to be?’
Senior Student: Yes
In the MOS, it is the ripening or awakening of one karmic predisposition/
latency produces both the object and subject apprehending the object, isn’t
that the substantial cause?
Senior Student: No
Khen Rinpoche spoke In English: I have to read a quotation somewhere there.
The MOS refutes external object. The main argument is that, it is that one
karmic latency among the much other latency that is stored in the mind-
basis-of-all. So when one of these karmic latencies is awakened or ripened,
this acts as a substantial cause producing both the form and the eye
consciousness apprehending the form.
So, it is this karmic latency that is the substantial cause for producing
both the object and subject. If we say the substantial cause of form is
form that will entail the acceptance of external objects.
Senior Student: In the MOS, you don’t have an external form or external
object but you have an object due to ripening of a karmic seed, you have
the previous moment of that form and a consciousness that apprehends it.
Therefore that becomes the substantial cause for the next moment of form
and consciousness due to the ripening of, for example the second or
subsequent imprint.
Khen Rinpoche spoke In English: So, think about it. Anybody has other
answer for that?
What we are going to find out here is what exactly the substantial cause of
consciousness is.
It is very clear in all the MOS literatures that it is the latency that is
deposited in the mind-basis-of-all. That latency acts as the substantial
cause for consciousness producing both form and consciousness apprehending
that form.
Do you accept or not? Is the substantial cause of consciousness imprint?
The point about this qualm is that there is implication if we say the
substantial cause of consciousness is imprint. The main only reason to
prove reincarnation or rebirth has to do with the substantial cause of
consciousness being that which is clear and knowing. So, what the MOS says
seems to go against this commonly accepted position and it seems to go
against of what the logician like Dharmakirti mentioned in his text. So,
this is something that requires much thought in order to come out with a
coherent or a reasonable answer.
Question: In the Mind Only True Aspectarians, when the Hearer arhats and
Solitary Realizer arhats pass beyond sorrow, what passes beyond sorrow?
Answer: When the Hearer and Solitary Realizer become foe destroyers/
arhats, they achieve a nirvana with remainder. The one who has achieved the
nirvana with remainder is the one who passes beyond sorrow without
remainder.
The person who achieved the nirvana with remainder is the one who is going
to die. When he dies, he achieves the nirvana without remainder. When the
nirvana without remainder is achieved, the continuum of the awareness is
severed.
When the arhats pass beyond sorrow without remainder, i.e. when they
achieve the nirvana without remainder, the continuum of the awareness is
severed. But that is not the same as saying that there is nothing left.
The continuum of the awareness is severed, but that doesn’t mean that there
is no basis. There is something that is pointable, but what exactly is
that? We have to think about it. Of course, we think about it from the
perspective of the tenet that asserts that the continuum of awareness is
severed. In reality, there is no such thing. If we have to adopt the
perspective of the tenet who asserts this, we have to think what they may
say. Although in reality, there is no such a thing.
Although the continuum of the awareness is severed but still they must
definitely assert that there is something left over - there is a basis.
Why? In the first place, they assert there is a nirvana without remainder
which is emptiness. If there is emptiness then you need a basis of
emptiness. What is that basis?
There are:
   1. Nirvana with remainder
   2. Nirvana without remainder
   3. None abiding nirvana
The way of explaining what a nirvana without remainder by these tenets is
that in their own way of explaining what a nirvana without remainder means.
When one achieves the nirvana without remainder, the continuum of awareness
is severed. Because there is such a thing as nirvana without remainder
therefore there must be a basis; there must be something that you can point
to.
Student 2: Just wondering what is that basis?
Answer: Perhaps one may have some ideas. There is some similarity with the
CMWS assertion of the factor of disintegratedness. The factor of
disintegratedness is the past tense of disintegration. After
disintegration, that is a state of disintegratedness. So, the CMWS is
unique in asserting that factor of disintegratedness is impermanent, is a
functioning thing, and a composed phenomenon. Of course, the MOS do not
assert this but maybe when we think about the CMWS assertion on the factor
of disintegratedness being a composed phenomenon.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Okay, next we start the Middle Way School.
BP Sunday discussion questions:
1. After someone achieves a nirvana without remainder, what is the basis of
emptiness?
2.    a) What is the selflessness of phenomena according to the Mind Only
School?
      b) What are the faults of asserting that phenomena possess a self?
3. Besides establishing the selflessness of person, what is the purpose of
establishing the selflessness of phenomena?
4. Why do the Mind Only True Aspectarians assert three final vehicles?
5. Why does the Mind Only School divide the Buddha's scriptures into those
of interpretive meaning and those of definitive meaning?
6.    a) Why is it that the Mahayana tenets are able to posit a
presentation of the Four Bodies that are unlike the Hinayana tenets?
      b) How does understanding the presentation of the Four Bodies enhance
one's understanding of
Buddha?
