Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson06.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.214201
================================================================================


If we talk about the self or I or person, it is the self or I or person
that want to be happy, doesn’t want problem and doesn’t want suffering. It
is obvious that there is a self or I or person. But when we do investigate
the nature of this self or I or person i.e. what exactly this self or I or
person is then the four Buddhist tenets (the four schools) have their own
explanations as to what exactly this self or I or person is. In particular,
for those of us who assert past and future lives i.e. those of us who
believe in reincarnation then it is more important to find out exactly what
is this I or person that move from life to life. We believe that there is a
person that move from life to life and it is the I or person or self that
accumulates karma. It is the I or person or self that moves from life to
life. It is the I or person or self that experiences the result of the
karma accumulated.
Leaving aside the Buddhist, even among those non-Buddhists who assert
reincarnation also have to account for the I or person that move from life
to life.  Many of them have thought about it and based on their own
conclusion they come to believe that there is an I or self that is
permanent, unitary and independent. For them, this is the only way to
express the I or self. There is an I or self that moves from life to life.
Then the self or soul or person has to be permanent, unitary and
independent. This is the thought of the many non-Buddhist schools. However,
Buddhism refutes such a permanent, unitary and independent self.
Many of the non-Buddhist schools who believe in reincarnation assert that
there is a person that is permanent, unitary and independent. Essentially,
what they are saying is that the person or self is something that is
completely distinct from the body and mind, i.e. something that has a
completely separate/different entity from the body and mind. The self is
completely unrelated and not dependent on the body and mind whatsoever.
Basically the non-Buddhist schools do not know how to relate the self to
the body and mind. They are unable to talk about a self or I or person that
is dependent on the body and mind. For them they cannot figure out how the
I or person or self can be related or dependent or to be of the same entity
with the body and mind.
Here in Buddhism, we look at the proponents of the Buddhist tenets starting
from the proponents of the GES and all the way up to the CMWS. All
proponents of the Buddhist tenets are the same in ascertaining that a
permanent, unitary and independent self does not exist whatsoever. All the
proponents of the Buddhist tenets assert unanimously that there cannot be
an I that is not dependent on the body and mind, i.e. there isn’t an I or
person that is of different entity from the body and mind.
Next we are looking at the GES way of asserting selflessness.

(Root text page 4)
6 Way of asserting selflessness
Subtle selflessness and subtle selflessness of persons are asserted to be
equivalent.
A selflessness of phenomena is not accepted because it is accepted that if
it is an established base it is necessarily a self of phenomena.
Among them, the Followers of Vatsiputra, [one of the eighteen sub-schools,]
accept a selflessness of person that is [a person] being empty of being
permanent, unitary, and independent. However, they do not accept a
selflessness of person that is [a person] being empty of being self-
sufficient substantially existent because they accept a self-sufficient
substantially existent self that is inexpressible even in terms of being
one entity with or a different entity from the aggregates, and being
permanent or impermanent.
There are four Buddhist tenets and all four are similar in asserting the
non-existence of the permanent, unitary and independent self. So, all
proponents of the Buddhist tenets assert the non-existence of the
permanent, unitary and independent self.
Here we are looking at the GES way of asserting selflessness. There are
many divisions in the GES. One of the sub-divisions of the GES is called
the Followers of Vatsiputra. They, being a proponent of Buddhist tenets, do
not assert a permanent, unitary and independent self.
Having say that, this particular sub-school -Followers of Vatsiputra-
assert a self-sufficient substantially existent person. This Vatsiputran
does not know how to posit a person that is of the same entity with the
body and mind. For them, if the I or person is of the same entity with body
and mind, they have the difficulty of explaining reincarnation. Perhaps
they do not know how to explain how the I move from life to life, and yet
at the same time they cannot not assert that the I is of the same entity
with the body and mind because the Buddha has taught in a couple sutras
that the I is of the same entity with the body and mind, i.e. there isn’t
an I that is of different entity from the body and mind. So they say that
this self-sufficient substantially existent person exist but is neither one
entity with nor a different entity from the aggregates.
As they find it difficult to assert a person is of the same entity with
body and mind, therefore they accept that there is a self-sufficient
substantially existent person that is inexpressible even in terms of being
one entity with or a different entity from the aggregates. The Vatsiputran
also find it difficult to say that the self is permanent or impermanent.
Therefore, they say that the self is inexpressible even in terms of being
permanent or impermanent.
The Vatsiputran, which is the sub-divisions of GES, is the only proponent
of Buddhist tenets who assert the self-sufficient substantially existent
person, whereas the other sub-divisions of the GES and the proponents of
other tenets such as the SS, MOS and AMWS assert that the self-sufficient
substantially existent person does not exist whatsoever.
We claim that the self cannot be permanent, cannot be unitary and cannot be
independent. But it is important to know why the self or the person cannot
be permanent, cannot be unitary and cannot be independent. This is
something we have to think about. The concept of permanent, unitary and
independent self or atman or also known as soul in some other religions
essentially is talking about permanent, unitary and independent self. This
is asserted by many non-Buddhist philosophers or non-Buddhist religions.
This is in contrast to what Buddha has taught. In Buddhism, we say such a
soul or self does not exists whatsoever.
In Buddhist teaching, we always hear about selflessness and there isn’t a
self. For the sake of simplicity, we can take this to mean that the Buddha
has taught a permanent, unitary and independent self does not exist
whatsoever. Such a self does not exist.
We can take the non-existence of permanent, unitary and independent self to
be the coarse selflessness.
Then we also talked about the non-existence of self-sufficient
substantially existent person and it is the subtle selflessness of person,
according to GES, SS, MOS and AMWS. So the non-existence of the self-
sufficient substantially existent person is the subtle selflessness of a
person as asserted by all Buddhist tenets, with the exception of CMWS. The
CMWS has a different presentation of what is the subtle selflessness of the
person.



















What is the problem if we say the I or self is permanent? Why that
permanent self does not exist? Why isn’t there a unitary person? Why can’t
there be a self that is unitary? Why can’t there be an I or person that is
independent? As a proponent of Buddhist tenets there is this assertion that
the permanent, unitary and independent self does not exist.  Why? We should
be able to explain all these.
If we assert a self that is a person that is permanent that means the
person, I or self is unchanging. But we have to be able to posit a self or
person that experience happiness and suffering. If we assert the self or
person is permanent then how do we explain that there is a self that
experiences happiness and suffering? If the I is permanent, which means the
I is unchanging, then how does it experiences happiness and suffering? If
the I or person does not change, then how does the I achieve liberation?
How the person can achieves enlightenment?
In this context, the I is said to be independent. If you assert that there
is an I that is independent, in this context, independent means independent
of causes and conditions, then you have to be able to explain how such an I
that is independent of causes and conditions can exist? Basically you
should be able to account for an I that is independent of causes and
conditions. For the Buddhist, it is extremely difficult to account for an I
that is independent of causes and conditions.
We Buddhist assert that there is no soul. So there is no permanent self, no
unitary self and no independent self. The part that the self is not
permanent and is not independent is quite straight forward. What about the
self that is not unitary i.e. the self that possess parts? What is the
problem if we say the self is unitary i.e. partless?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Is there any answer? I don’t know the
answer myself.
What is wrong when we say the self or person is unitary or partless?
According to the GES, partless moment of consciousness does exist and
partless particles also exist as well.  What is wrong with saying partless
self?
According to the GES, the I, self or person are truly established and
ultimate truth. According to the GES, the self, I or person is not a
phenomenon such that an awareness apprehending it is cancelled when it is
mentally separated into its individual parts. This means to say that it is
not a conventional truth but is an ultimate truth, and is substantially
existent.  There is an I that has to come from the previous lives, in fact
since beginningless lifetime up to now and there is an I that move from
this life to the next life.
According to the GES such an I is truly existent. If you think about this,
one would probably have to say that the I, self or person is an ultimate
truth. In this system, if it is an ultimate truth, is it necessary
partless? If it is a partless phenomenon such as directionally partless
particles it is necessarily an ultimate truth. If it an ultimate truth, is
it necessarily partless? In this discussion, it seems that we have to say
that the person, I or self is an ultimate truth in this system, but yet we
cannot say that the person, I or self is partless.
The main thing here is to explain why the person, I or self cannot be
partless, because being a proponent of Buddhist tenets you cannot claim
that there is a soul, and in this case, the soul is partless/ unitary. What
is the problem of saying that the self is partless? So this remains
something to be talked about.
In short, in Buddhism, a permanent, unitary and independent self, soul or
atman does not exist whatsoever. The non-existence of such a self is the
coarse selflessness of a person. What you have to memorize is what a coarse
selflessness of persons is. For now, you just need to remember that a
permanent, unitary and independent self does not exist whatsoever. On this
basis, then you continue to analyze; “Why that self cannot be permanent?
Why that self cannot be unitary? Why that self cannot be independent?”
On the basis of remembering the coarse selflessness of persons means the
non-existence of the permanent, unitary and independent self, then you
think; “What is the problem of saying the person is permanent? What is the
problem of saying the person is unitary? What is the problem of saying the
person is independent?” So through thinking about these using many reasons
then you will come to an ascertainment; “The person cannot be permanent
because of this and that…”, and that kind of understanding constitutes an
understanding of a coarse selflessness of person.
For us, if we look at our own experience of how we look at ourselves, we do
have this strong belief inside us that the I of yesterday and the I of
today is the same person; exactly the same and nothing has change. So there
is this appearance of permanent I or unchanging I or the person that is so
real and we believe in it. But the point is that such a permanent self or I
does not exist.  Although we have this appearance of an I that has not
change over time, the I of yesterday and the I of now is exactly the same,
in reality, the I has changed because the I is not permanent. The I of
yesterday does not exist now as the I of yesterday has already ceased and
has disintegrated. In that sense the I has changed. This is nothing very
special as it is just a coarse impermanence; not subtle impermanence.
Having said that, even if we have such an understanding that I of yesterday
has already ceased and the new I now is not the I of yesterday, and
although this is just an understanding of coarse impermanence, it is very
helpful because it can help us to counteract many of our afflictions.
The I of yesterday does not exist now, and having an understanding of that
constitute an understanding of coarse impermanence. That understanding
alone is quite helpful in counteracting the afflictions.  On top of that
understanding, we can come to an understanding that we are in fact
undergoing change in every single moment down to the smallest moment of
unit of time. If we can understand how the I does not exist for even one
moment and change from one moment to moment, that constitute the real
understanding of subtle impermanence.  That understanding can really be of
big help in counteracting our afflictions, which are the three mental
poisons. In reality, the I does not exist for more than one smallest unit
of moment. In each and every single moment it is different. That is the
reality. But that reality does not appear to us. What appear to us is the
non-changing I that remain the same. When we come to realize the non-
existence of the permanent, unitary and independent self, that realization
is very helpful in counteracting our coarse afflictions, coarse anger,
coarse attachment and coarse ignorance. The non-existence of the permanent,
unitary and independent self is coarse selflessness of persons. After that,
comes the subtle selflessness of persons which is the non-existence of self-
sufficient substantially existent person.
Now you are at the initial stage of training. We have no choice but have to
memorize the terms. It is the basis for you to engage in discussion and
thinking analysis. You have to be able to pick it up and have to be able to
say, for example, non-existence of the self-sufficient substantially
existent person. This is non-negotiable.
There are four Buddhist tenets and vast majority of them, starting from the
GES up to the AMWS, with the exception of CMWS, conduct their investigation
of the I on the basis of asserting the I exist on its own side. On the
basis of that assertion then they investigate how there isn’t a self-
sufficient substantially existent person.   In their investigation they
look into what are the problems if they say that there is a self-sufficient
substantially existent person. They basically focus on that.
If we look into our own experience on the idea of ourselves, meaning as the
person or I, we have this idea that I am the possessor of the aggregates.
(Ven Gyurme: Technically it is the aggregates but I used the term body and
mind which is easier to understand) We have this belief; “I own my body and
mind”, “I am the utilizer/ user of my body and mind”. The world view of
ourselves and how we relate it to our own body and mind is similar to the
relationship between a businessman or trader and the goods that he trades
in. We have the idea that we are the businessman owning the goods to be
traded and, in this case, the goods to be traded are our body and mind. We
are like the owner of the body and mind, the I, person or self. This belief
that the I or self or person being the owner of the body and mind is
innate, which just arises naturally and is not taught.
How do we know we do actually operate in such a way? Just imagine, at time
when we are not feeling well especially when we are down with some
sicknesses and not feeling well. Then, when we see someone with a healthy
body and is free of pain, we then have this idea; “How nice if I can have
that body?” We have the wish to exchange the body, but not the wish is to
exchange the self. Another example, when we see someone who is attractive,
especially we ourselves who is not as physically attractive or handsome as
that person, we may have the idea “How nice if I can have that beautiful
body” and have the wish to exchange the body if given a choice.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Not possible
This is how we believe that the I is the owner of the body and the body is
like something that can be traded or exchange, just like what a businessman
can do with his goods that he own. He can sell it away or exchanging it for
something better. This is how we think.
It is the same thing as how we look at our mind. We feel as if we own our
mind. We have different kinds of mind such as our intelligence, our wisdom
and so forth. For someone who is not so intelligent or so wise, when he see
a smart person who is so intelligent, so fast and so forth, he envies that
person and thinking; “How wonderful if I can be like him and having his
wisdom and his intelligence?” Then he has the wish to exchange it if it is
possible. Such wish is innate and is not taught.
In this case the I doesn’t seem to be dependent on the body and mind
whatsoever but rather we have the idea that the body and mind are the one
that are dependent on the self. In this case, the I, person or self  is
like the owner. We have such an idea of self. We believe that the I exist
in such a way; the I being the owner/ possessor of the body and mind. The I
is not dependent on the body and mind whatsoever, but is the possessor/
owner of the body and mind. Such a belief, in technical language, is called
apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person.
A permanent, unitary and independent self doesn’t exist. A person that is
the owner/ possessor of the body and mind doesn’t exist. Back to the
apprehension of permanent, unitary and independent self. When we talk about
permanent, unitary and independent self in this context, essentially what
we are saying is that the self is not dependent/ related on the body and
mind. Then we say the self is permanent, unitary and independent.
We talk about permanent, unitary and independent self. The permanent,
unitary and independent here has the connotation that the I or self is
completely unrelated to the body and mind i.e. there is no relationship.
When we talk about self-sufficient substantially existent person, it is
something similar but not exactly the same like the previous example. When
there is an apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person
there is an idea that there is an I or person that is the possessor of the
aggregates. In this sense the I or self is not dependent on the body and
mind. But in this relationship, the body and mind is in some kind of
dependent or relying on the I. There is a slight difference between these
two apprehensions: the apprehension of a permanent, unitary and independent
self and the apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent
person.
I think it is very important to get an understanding of what we have been
discussing. Once you get this right then there is nothing much else to say
about the selflessness of persons later on, with the exception of the CMWS,
because the presentation of the selflessness of persons in the GES, SS, MOS
and AMWS is the same. So for now, what you have to remember is this: For
all the tenets, with the exception of the CMWS, all of them are the same in
saying that:
 ➢ the non-existence of a permanent, unitary and independent self is the
   coarse selflessness of persons, and
 ➢ the non-existence of a self-sufficient substantially existent person is
   the subtle selflessness of persons.
There are quite a few non-Buddhist philosopher systems and many other major
religion traditions of the world who assert a soul or atman. Essentially
what they are saying is that there is a permanent, unitary and independent
self. What are they saying? Basically they are saying that there is soul, a
self, something that is completely unrelated to body and mind i.e. that is
separate from body and mind and of different entity from the body and mind
that goes to heaven. All Buddhist tenets say unanimously that such a soul
does not exist whatsoever. Such a self that is completely unrelated to the
body and mind, that is of different entity from the body and mind does not
exist. The non-existence of this self is the coarse selflessness of
persons. So, in this case, when we say selflessness of persons, it is the
coarse selflessness of persons. The word selflessness means the lack of a
self, the non-existence of a self, the self that doesn’t exist. Here, in
this context, is the self that is permanent, unitary and independent self
and such a self does not exist. The non-existence of such a self is called
the coarse selflessness of persons.
It is easy to say this but it is not easy to gain an ascertainment or
conviction because you have to prove to your own mind that the person is
not permanent. You have to prove to your own mind that the person is not
unitary and the person is not independent.
We have to think and ask ourselves; “What is the problem if I say the I is
permanent? What is the problem if the I is partless? What is the problem if
the I is independent?” This is something that you have to work at it
through thinking about it and through discussion. As long as you are able
to get an understanding in your heart; “Oh that such a self does not
exist”, then I think that is sufficient. If you are able to arrive at an
understanding through such a process of reasoning then you can say; “I have
gained an understanding of the coarse selflessness of persons.”
The non-existence of the self-sufficient substantially existent person is
more subtle than the non-existence of the permanent, unitary and
independent self, because the object of negation is more subtle, which
means more difficult to understand. When we say we know the technical term
“the apprehensions of the self-sufficient substantially existent person,”
we have to look at own experience and see how such a mind operates. What
does this mind think when it apprehends the person like an owner/ possessor
of the body and mind and how does it work? When we look at our own
experience, we will be able to see that we innately believe that we are the
owner of the body and mind. In this case, it is not that the I that is
completely unrelated to the body and mind, but yet the I is like the owner/
possessor of the body and mind.
The manner of the apprehension is: the I seem to be completely not
dependent on the body and mind. If we look at the body and mind, the body
and mind seem to be dependent on the I. So this particular way of
apprehending the I can be understood through the examples that were given
earlier about how innately we have the wish to exchange our body and/or
mind with somebody else. It is innate and natural. We believe that there is
an I that is owner/ possessor of the body and mind and the I is independent
of the body and mind. So that is the meaning of the self-sufficient.
Does the I exist in the way that we believe it to exist? In this case, we
innately believe that:
    ➢ there is an I that is the owner/ possessor of the body and mind and
    ➢ there is an I that not dependent on the body and mind.
There is this appearance of an I and we believe in it. The question is:
Does such an I exist in reality? Does the I exist in the way it appears to
our mind? Is there a self-sufficient person or I that is the owner/
possessor of the body and mind and the owner does not dependent on the body
and mind? The answer is NO!
It is one thing to say NO but it is another thing to be able to establish
in your heart and mind that such a self-sufficient substantially existent
person does not exist. That is another completely different matter.
Student: Can you give an example of an ultimate truth that is partless?
Answer: Directionally partless atom, the shortest moment of consciousness.
The examples are given in the root text
Student: (Summarized by Ven Gyurme). When we talk about afflictions, there
are intellectually acquired afflictions and innate afflictions. In the case
of the apprehension of self-sufficient substantially existent person, there
are two forms:
   1. intellectually acquired apprehension
   2. innate apprehension
The antidote to these two apprehensions is said to be the same. If that is
the case, then why we need to abandon the intellectually acquired
apprehension before we can abandon the innate one.
Answer: The mode of the apprehension of these two is different. The mode of
apprehension of the intellectually acquired apprehension of the self-
sufficient substantially existent person and the mode of apprehension of
the innate apprehension of the self-sufficient substantially existent
person are different.
To keep it simple, the mode of apprehension of the intellectually acquired
apprehension of the self-sufficient substantially existent person is
basically similar to the apprehension of the permanent, unitary and
independent self.
In short, what is the intellectually acquired apprehension of the self-
sufficient substantially existent person? It is the apprehension of the
self-sufficient person that is of different entity from the aggregates.
What is the manner of apprehension of the intellectually acquired
apprehension of the self-sufficient substantially existent person? It is
basically this mind that apprehends a self that is different entity from
the aggregates.
It is similar to an apprehension of a permanent, unitary and independent
self.
The intellectually acquired apprehension of the self-sufficient
substantially existent person actually clings on to the I or self that is
of different entity from the body and mind.
But in the case of the innate apprehension of the self-sufficient
substantially existent person, this particular mind does not apprehends a
self or person that is of different entity from the body and mind, but
rather it apprehends a self or I that is the owner/ possessor/ controller
of the body and mind. So the modes of apprehension are different.
Here we are comparing two different minds:
   1. The intellectually acquired apprehension of the self-sufficient
      substantially existent person
   2. The innate apprehension of the self-sufficient substantially existent
      person
 ➢ For the intellectually acquired apprehension of the self-sufficient
   substantially existent person, that mode of apprehension involves
   apprehending the I or self that is of different entity from the body and
   mind.
 ➢ For the innate apprehension of the self-sufficient substantially
   existent person, there isn’t an apprehension of a self or I that is of
   different entity from the body and mind.
This thing is extremely challenging and difficult. It is something that we
need to work at it over years of thinking. There are materials available in
English and one can look at them but it is still difficult to really
decisively to say “this is this and is not that.” It doesn’t matter whom we
are talking about as it is difficult for anyone to exactly say “It is like
that, it is not like.”
Student: Is the partless particles an ultimate truth and form at the same
time?
Answer: It is not a non-associated compositional factor. It is form.
Aggregates, for example, aggregate of form, would be form.
Student: The partless particle which cannot be destroyed is an ultimate
truth and at the same time it is form which is impermanent thing.
Answer: Yes
Student: A person is substantially existent but yet in this school it says
that it is devoid of self-sufficient substantially existent. It sounds a
bit contradictory. Is it trying to say that the person is substantially
existent but not self-sufficient?
Answer: If you remember, according to the GES, if it is an established
base, it is necessarily substantially established, which make the person
necessarily substantially established.
The person is substantially established but the self-sufficient
substantially existent person does not exist. So obviously there is a
difference. When we use the word in the context of saying that a self-
sufficient substantially existent person does not exist, that is to help us
to understand how we innately view ourselves as being an owner/ possessor/
controller of the body and mind. It is not unrelated to the body and mind,
but it is more like an owner of the body and mind.
Let’s look at the partless particles, are the partless particles self-
sufficient substantially existent? It is substantially established. Is it
self-sufficient? Yes.
Then there is self-sufficient substantially establishment. So, there is
self-sufficient substantially existence. But we say that the self is not
self-sufficient substantially existent.
We have to prove or establish the partless particle is self-sufficient. If
the partless particle is self-sufficient, then it would mean that it does
not depend on a previous moment of a partless particle to come about. This
would mean that it is permanent. If the partless particle is permanent,
then it would not be form as form is necessarily impermanent.


















