Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson22.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.648611
================================================================================


Question: In the root text [page 22]: The two conceptions of self are
differentiated by way of the mode of apprehension and not by way of the
observed object because through observing the basis – the person – and
apprehending it to be truly existent it is a conception of a self of
phenomena, and through observing the basis – the person – and apprehending
it to be self-sufficient substantially existent it is a conception of a
self of persons.
Can you please explain what is “by way of its observed object”?
Khen Rinpoche: The two conceptions of self are:
   1. The conception of a self of persons
   2. The conception of a self of phenomena
These two conceptions of self are differentiated:
 ➢ by way of their mode of apprehension
 ➢ not by way of their observed object
The proof:
 ➢ through observing the basis – the person – and apprehending it to be
   truly existent it is a conception of a self of phenomena,
 ➢ through observing the basis – the person – and apprehending it to be
   self-sufficient substantially existent it is a conception of a self of
   persons
The proof here is given on the basis of one’s observed object. The observed
object is the person.
In relation to the person, depending on the mode of apprehension, the
conception could either be:
 ➢ the conception of a self of person or
 ➢ the conception of a self of phenomena.
But these two conceptions have the same observed object - the person.
The observed object here is the person:
 ➢ the mind which apprehend the person to be truly existent become a
   conception of a self of phenomena,
 ➢ but when the mind when apprehend the same observed object – the person-
    to be self-sufficient substantially existent makes that conception a
   conception of a self of persons.
The conception of a self of persons and the conception of a self of
phenomena are different. In this case, they have the same observed object –
the person.

|The two conceptions of    |Through observing the     |Conception of a self of  |
|self are differentiated:  |basis – the person – and  |phenomena                |
|By way of the mode of     |apprehending it to be     |                         |
|apprehension              |truly existent            |                         |
|Not by way of the observed|                          |                         |
|object                    |                          |                         |
|                          |Through observing the     |Conception of a self of  |
|                          |basis – the person – and  |persons                  |
|                          |apprehending it to be     |                         |
|                          |self-sufficient           |                         |
|                          |substantially existent    |                         |


Question: It is difficult to distinguish between “existing by way of its
own characters” and “existing by way of its own side” for the AMWS.
Ven Gyurme: According to the chart, these two are exactly the same. It is
just a different way of saying the same thing, same meaning. The only thing
difference is true existent.

Question: Here it says: The hearer lineage actually attains small
enlightenment by abandoning conception of apprehending the self-sufficient
substantially existent person. When he abandons that he still has a view of
true existent of self of a person.
Why doesn’t that give raise to afflictions which prevent him from leaving
the cyclic existence?
Ven Gyurme: Are you asking why the conception of a person as truly existent
is not an afflictive obscuration?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: I don’t think he is asking directly that
one but maybe indirectly.
Khen Rinpoche: He is basically asking how it can be possible for the Hearer
arhat to achieve the liberation when he still conceives the self to be
truly existent, according to AMWS. The Hearer arhats have not actually
abandoned the afflictions completely. According to the AMWS, the Hearer
arhat actually is not an arhat because he hasn’t abandoned the afflictions.
In the continuum of the Hearer arhat there is still the conception of true
existent, so there is still afflictions.

[Few students trying to give answer]

Khen Rinpoche: Essentially you are saying the Hearers and the Solitary
Realizers are not harmed by the appearance of true existent. This is not
true. Whoever has not generated the direct antidote – wisdom directly
perceiving emptiness- to that conception, will be harmed by that
conception.
From their perspective, they say that as long as they have abandoned the
conception of a self of persons, they can achieve liberation. But you added
that they achieve liberation and at the same time they still have the
appearance of true existent. They have the conception of true existent yet
they cannot be harmed by it. That cannot be the case. They have the
conception of true existent and they are harmed by it.
There are different tenets. All of them have their own respective
presentations on what exactly is a self of persons and self of phenomena.
In the first place, you have to be clear what the respective presentations
are.
We also have to know their respective presentations on what constitute an
afflictive obscuration and what constitute a knowledge obscuration.
All the tenets say that in order to become a foe destroyer/ arhat, one must
have destroyed or conquered the afflictions. They all are the same in
saying that, but what constitute the afflictions, there are differences
between the tenets.
The SMAW posit the afflictive obscurations to be the conception of a self
of person, which is the conception of a self-sufficient substantially
existent person and the afflictions that are produced by that conception.
The main/root of all the afflictions is the conception of a self-sufficient
substantially existent person.
According to the SMAW, such a conception of a person has been self-
sufficient substantially existent is the most subtle affliction that can
ever exist.
The main/root afflictive obscuration is the conception of a self-sufficient
substantially existent person. Therefore the antidote has to be the mind
which realizes the emptiness of a self-sufficient substantially existent
person.
 • First, one has to generate such a realization - the realization of
   emptiness of a self-sufficient substantially existent person.
 • Once that realization is generated, one familiarizes with what one has
   already realized.
 • Through that one is said to be able to destroy the conception of a self-
   sufficient substantially existent person.
 • When that conception is destroyed, one achieves the status of a foe
   destroyer/arhat.
 • When one achieves the status of a foe destroyer/ arhat, the afflictions
   together with their seeds are destroyed.
Essentially, the conception of self-sufficient substantially existent
person together with their seeds is destroyed. They then become a foe
destroyer. Once the conception is ceased or destroyed, it is impossible for
that individual to experience any more afflictions.
When one becomes a foe destroyer, you can say that individual has overcome,
conquered or destroyed all the afflictions. The person has completely
abandoned the afflictions.
Of course, the question comes like what Swee Kim has brought up earlier.
The arhat has overcome or vanquished all the afflictions, but because the
arhat has not realized the emptiness of true existent, therefore that
individual still has in his continuum the conception of true existent.
If you are asked: Does the arhat have the conception of the true existent?
What are you going to say?
You have no choice but have to say “Yes”.
At the same time, you also have to say that there is no fault in saying
that the arhat has already abandoned all the afflictions.  Although the
arhat has the conception of true existent but the arhat doesn’t have any
more afflictions because he has already destroyed the afflictions and the
conception of true existent is not posited to be an afflictive obscuration.
This is according to the perspective of the AMWS.
In order to answer the question that Swee Kim has brought up, you just have
to say:
According to this tenet the conception of true existent is not an
afflictive obscuration. So there is no contradiction in that the arhat has
already abandoned the afflictions. Yes, he still has the conception of true
existent but that is a knowledge obscuration. This is what the Autonomists
would say.

Question: Appearance of true existent and believing in this appearance, how
would they explain that this would not allow them to generate afflictions
in their mind? Do they have explanation on this qualm?
Khen Rinpoche: They would say that the root of attachment is conceiving the
person to be self-sufficient substantially existent. If you destroy the
root, then you are not going to have any attachment and the afflictions.

Question: This would mean they would not be harmed by the conception of
true existent for someone who wishes to achieve liberation.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that the conception of true existent does not
harm? Does the conception of true existent harm or not?  You seem to be
saying that the conception of true existent doesn’t harm the arhat.

Question:  For Mahayana tenet, only the YAMWS posit a coarse self of
phenomena, why that is the case?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: This one doesn’t have reason.
It is clear that the Hinayana tenets do not assert a self of phenomena.
The Mahayana tenets assert a self of phenomena, therefore a selflessness of
phenomena.
If you start with the MOS, the first of the Mahayana tenets, they only
posit a subtle self of phenomena; which is the conception of object and
subject as different substances. For them, that is the most subtle
conception of a self of phenomena.
Then you have the AMWS. There isn’t a single Middle Way Autonomists who
posit that the conception of object and subject as different substances to
be the subtle self of phenomena.
AMWS posit the conception of true existent to be the subtle self of
phenomena.
The YMWA do assert that there is the conception of object and subject as
different entities. For them, they assert that this conception is a coarse
conception of a self of phenomena.
Just like the MOS, the YMWA do not assert external object.
With respect to the conception of object and subject as being different
substances, for the YMWA, such a conception will become a conception self
of phenomena. It is not the conception of a subtle self of phenomena. It
would be the conception of a coarse self of phenomena.
Then the question would likely to arise: Why SMWA do not assert a coarse
self of phenomena?  This is because they assert external object, just like
the SS. The SMWA would not assert an object of abandonment that is a
conception of object and subject as being different substances. Since they
do not assert such a conception, therefore they do not assert a self of
phenomena other than the subtle self of phenomena.

|School     |Coarse self of    |Subtle self of  |Coarse self of  |Subtle self of |
|           |person            |person          |phenomena       |phenomena      |
|Mind Only  |Conception if     |Conception of a |None            |Conception of  |
|School     |permanent, unitary|self-sufficient |                |object and     |
|           |and independent   |person          |                |subject as     |
|           |person            |                |                |different      |
|           |                  |                |                |entities       |
|Yogic      |Conception if     |Conception of a |Conception of   |Conception of  |
|Autonomy   |permanent, unitary|self-sufficient |object and      |true existent  |
|Middle Way |and independent   |person          |subject as      |               |
|school     |person            |                |different       |               |
|           |                  |                |entities        |               |
|Sutra      |Conception if     |Conception of a |None            |Conception of  |
|Autonomy   |permanent, unitary|self-sufficient |                |true existent  |
|Middle Way |and independent   |person          |                |               |
|school     |person            |                |                |               |


Question: Can a non-mistaken consciousness view object dualistically?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Why do you ask this question?
Student: For mistaken, it seems like for different schools, it seems to be
different. For example, uncompounded phenomena, it is not really realized
by sense consciousness, right? For example, absence of permanence, it is in
relation to realize something as impermanent. But absence of permanence, it
is actual a permanent phenomenon. Only a superior being realizes
impermanence directly, subtle impermanent, right?
Ven Gyurme: From the MOS view?
Student: Yes, I am guessing. In that sense, you will realize the absence of
permanence at the same time. The yogic direct perceiver realizing the
absence of permanence is actually a direct cognizer realizing an
imputational nature, but external object does not appear. Is it dualistic?
Absence of permanence is actually an imputational nature, it is a
conventional truth. That is why I am wondering. It is said clearly in the
text that yogic direct perceivers are necessarily non-mistaken.
Ven Gyurme: Your illustration is yogic direct perceiver directly realizing
absence of permanence? That means yogic direct perceiver implicitly
realizing impermanent?
Yogic direct perceiver realizes impermanent, and that yogic direct
perceiver also realizes permanence?
Student: Okay, it is different. Absence of permanence is actually a
permanent phenomenon.
Ven Gyurme: Absence of permanence is a construct. It is imputational.
Student: It is an existent imputational nature. So, that is a realization
of that.
Ven Gyurme: Yogic direct perceiver directly realizing an imputational
nature, then..
Student: For that kind of consciousness, external object doesn’t appear,
right? It is just an absence.
Ven Gyurme: You are saying out of the three, that one is missing.
Student: Yes.
Ven Gyurme: Back to the last class?
Student: At first, I didn’t think of that. I actually think of dream
elephant. My first illustration was a dream elephant. Then it evolves into
imputational nature. If an unmistaken consciousness can also be dualistic
then yogic direct perceiver realizing absence of permanence would not have
external object appearing, right?

Khen Rinpoche: Basically she is trying to ask: Non-mistaken consciousnesses
can have dualistic appearances or not?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: The answer is yes.
Student: It is an illustration that an external object doesn’t appear.
Imputational nature - its existence is a conventional truth. Actually, what
is a conventional phenomenon?
Khen Rinpoche: Think about the definition of a conventional truth.
According to the MOS and which is similar also in the AMWS, the definition
of a conventional truth - that which is realized through dualistic
appearance by a direct valid cognizer that directly realizes it.
Direct perceiver is non-mistaken. For conventional truth, the realization
is accompanied with dualistic appearance.
Student: Unmistaken consciousness can be dualistic.
Ven Gyurme: Unless your direct perceiver can be mistaken, otherwise no.
Student: What is conventional phenomenon?
Khen Rinpoche: Conventional truth and conventional phenomenon are the same.

Student: Dream elephant is not an external object, right? Actually in SS,
dream elephant is a phenomenon source form. It is not aggregated by
partless particles. It is not atomically established. When we dream of a
dream elephant, is it an appearance as external object?
Ven Gyurme: Are you are trying to find out whether the dream elephant is an
external object or not?  From which school perspective are you asking?
Student: MOS
Khen Rinpoche: Why do you want to say that is from the MOS perspective? In
the first place, for MOS, there is no external object. When dreaming, it is
possible to have an appearance of an external elephant. If we are talking
from the MOS perspective, then it is very easy, and you don’t need to think
because immediately you can say no, because there is no external object.
When we dream, anything can appear. It appears like something coming from
the side of the object. Therefore, it is possible to dream and to have an
appearance of an external elephant in the dream. Yes, you can say that
there is an appearance of an external object.
Student: How about I dream about myself in my dream. There should not be an
appearance of an external object right?
Khen Rinpoche: There is no problem in saying there is an appearance.
Related to your earlier question, it is clear in the text, according to the
MOS, there are four types of direct perceivers. Self-knowing direct
perceivers and yogic direct perceivers are necessarily non-mistaken
consciousnesses.
A self-knower then would be necessarily non-mistaken.
[Root text: page 17] There are four types of direct perceivers. Self-
knowing direct perceivers and yogic direct perceivers are necessarily non-
mistaken consciousnesses.
If a self-knowing direct perceiver is necessarily non-mistaken, then the
self-knower would be non-mistaken.
Now the question is: Do self-knowing direct perceivers have dualistic
appearance or not?
The definition of self-knower - that which has the aspect of the
apprehender.
According to the MOS, self-knowing direct perceivers are necessarily non-
mistaken. Do self-knowing direct perceivers have dualistic appearance or
not?
Self-knowing direct perceivers have consciousness as their object.
What the self-knower realizing is mind. Mind is a conventional truth.
What is the definition of a conventional truth?
Conventional truth is that which is realized through dualistic appearance
by a valid direct perceiver that directly realizes it.
Is the valid cognizer that directly realizes a consciousness a self-knowing
direct valid perceiver?
Consciousness is a conventional truth. Conventional truth is that which is
realized through dualistic appearance by a valid direct perceiver that
directly realizes it.
What are you going to posit to be the valid direct perceiver that directly
realizes consciousness?
Student: Buddha mind
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Sentient beings don’t have, you mean? Give
another example.
Student: A clairvoyance that reads another mind.
Khen Rinpoche: Does the clairvoyance which knows another mind has dualistic
appearance?

Question: For MOS, all the permanent phenomena other than emptiness are
imputational nature. Does that means uncompounded space exists merely as
being posited by thought? If so, wouldn’t that make uncompounded space just
a mental construct?
Ven Gyurme: Don’t have to go to MOS, SS already said that.
Student: Uncompounded space is just a mental construct or is there an
uncompounded space which is not a mental construct but needs to be realized
through a mental construct?
Ven Gyurme: It follows that there is infinite regression.
Student: So, uncompounded just a mental construct. It cannot fit my mind.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Make your mind bigger.
The new student must also ask questions. The new students must train and
exercise in asking questions. You can ask anything, it doesn’t matter
whether it is rubbish or not. You can ask anything.
Question: How do the higher schools refute the lower schools of being able
to find the object other than saying that it is not found by a valid
cognizer?
Khen Rinpoche: Only the CMWS refutes the findability of the objects. The
rest of the tenets assert that things are findable; there is existence from
its own side.
Student: For the AMWS, they are more subtle in that sense. They refute the
assertion of the MOS, basically they refute there is true existent. How
they refute the object to be true existent?
For the CMWS, how do they refute the two schools findability of the
objects?
How the AMWS refuting MOS assertion of true establishment? Because true
establishment is not refuted for the MOS, they accept that but the AMWS
refute them.
Then the CMWS refutes both AMWS and MOS on object being established by way
of its own character. Other than saying that it is not realized by a valid
cognizer, how do they refute?
Ven Gyurme (rephrased the question): What other avenues or reasoning are
there to refute true existence other than saying that it is not realized by
a valid cognizer?
Khen Rinpoche: The MOS asserts true existent mainly in connection with
other-powered phenomena.
The MWS refutes that because, from the MWS perspective, positing of other-
powered phenomena has the root in the mind. According to the MWS, the mind
is not truly existent.
The MWS refutation of true existent covers all phenomena.  For them
everything that exists does not exist truly, but in particular this is a
refutation against the MOS view that the mind is truly existence. Mainly
they are refuting the mind is truly existence.
According to the MOS, many things are truly existent; especially the mind
is truly existent.
According to the MOS, what do they understand by true existent?  To the
MOS, those things that are truly existent are not merely imputed by thought
but existing from their own side.
Everybody talk about true existent but they have their own different
presentation on it.
The MOS understanding on true existent is this: not merely imputed by
thought but existing from its own side.
In general, the MWS assert that phenomena do not exist truly, phenomena are
imputed by mind.
That means there isn’t a single existent that exist without being merely
imputed by mind.
That is the general procedure of the MWS.
Of course, you know there are two divisions in the MWS. We are now with
AMWS.
How do AMWS explain this? They explain that phenomena exist as merely
imputed by mind.
According to the AMWS, phenomena are posited through the force of them
appearing to a consciousness.
You cannot talk about an existent without it appearing to a consciousness.
This is the meaning of imputation by mind. This particular assertion of the
AMWS is a refutation of the MOS position.
What is the MOS understanding of true existent?  It is not merely imputed
by thought but existing by its own side.
The MWS got two divisions and all of them the same in saying that phenomena
are merely imputed by mind. How do the AMWS explain that phenomena are
merely imputed by mind?
According to the AMWS, phenomena are merely posited through the very
phenomena appearing to a consciousness. In this case, it is the non-
defective awareness. So, there isn’t any phenomenon that can exist from its
own side (or established by way of its own uncommon mode of existence)
without it appearing to a consciousness. Basically such a thing is not
possible.
According to the AMWS, if there is anything that you can point out, you can
say that thing exists or  is established by way of its own uncommon mode of
existence without being posited through the force of appearing to a non-
defective awareness. If there is such a thing, then the phenomenon is truly
existent.
But according to the AMWS, there isn’t such a thing. If you assert true
existent, the AMWS, then that come many different kinds of reasoning to
refute true existent.
Khen Rinpoche question: Do MOS asserts true existent?
Student: Yes

According to them true existent means not merely imputed by thought but
existing from its own side. According to the MOS, there are many things
that exist from their own side and they are not merely imputed by thought,
and they do exist from their own side. This is true existent. MOS do assert
there is true existent, but the AMWS refute that.
The general assertion of the MWS is that there isn’t a single object or
event or phenomenon that exists without being merely imputed by thought.
Everything that exists is merely imputed by thought.
It is good that we have questions. Those who have just enrolled the BP
should be asking more questions. You should put more effort into asking
more questions because presently most of the time, it is the older students
who are asking the questions. Sometimes they tend to ask too many
questions.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: I encourage the new one to put in effort in
asking questions. It can be simple questions. Sometimes the seniors ask
difficult questions and you don’t get anything at all. So, you better ask
yourself then you will get something. What I notice, the called ‘seniors’,
they ask too many questions. So, you don’t get all these talking. Better,
the new one must ask questions. Okay? That is your homework. If you have
questions then you ask when there is opportunity. If nobody wants to ask
then the senior can come to ask.





