Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson16.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.368405
================================================================================


In Lama Tsongkhapa’s master piece called The Essence of Eloquence, there is
a line that says that the other-powered natures are empty of imputational
natures. That essentially is talking about the three natures. We have
talked about:
   1. Other-powered natures
   2. Imputational natures
   3. Thoroughly established natures
I did talk a little bit about other-powered natures earlier. One way of
understanding the other-powered is that other-powered natures refers to
those phenomena that are under the control or influence of their own causes
and conditions. In that sense, they are other-powered.
When we look at other-powered natures, there are:
   1. Pure other-powered natures
   2. Impure other-powered natures
It is in the reference text (Cutting Through Appearances by Geshe Lhundup
Sopa and Jeffrey Hopkins pp 263).
What are the impure other-powered natures?
When you think about it, it mainly refers to the contaminated appropriated
physical and mental aggregates; basically our contaminated existents. Such
a contaminated existent is under the control of its causes; mainly karma
and afflictions.
If you do remember the Four Seals that attest a particular doctrine to be
Buddhist, the second seal that says: “All contaminated phenomena are
misery”. Here, our contaminated appropriated physical and mental aggregates
or the contaminated existent are an impure other-powered nature.
Our contaminated existent, the contaminated body and mind, is misery and is
in the nature of suffering. Why? Because it is other-powered, and it is
under the control of its own causes and conditions – the karma and
afflictions. Because our contaminated appropriated physical and mental
aggregates are under the control of karma and afflictions, therefore it is
in the nature of suffering.
We can think about this teaching and apply it to our practice. First, we
gain an understanding of other-powered natures in general, and then we use
an illustration. The illustration that we use is basically our contaminated
existent or contaminated appropriated physical and mental aggregates. You
can see how our contaminated appropriated physical and mental aggregates is
the other-powered, and how it is under the control or influence of our own
karma and afflictions, then you can see that it is in the nature of
suffering. If you are able to see that your own contaminated existent is
under the control of your own karma and afflictions then you will be able
to see that it is in the nature of suffering.
When we say our contaminated appropriated physical and mental aggregates
are other-powered nature, it means that we totally have no freedom
whatsoever. Our contaminated existent has no freedom. We have to experience
our contaminated existents because we are under the control of our karma
and afflictions. There is no independence and there is no freedom because
it is other-powered.
When our contaminated existent, this contaminated appropriated physical and
mental aggregates, become the object to be observed or focused upon then it
acts as a basis for us to get upset, to get angry or to be attached. Then
through that we accumulate karma.
We get upset, angry, generate hatred or have attachment/desire. By having
this contaminated existent and with this as the focus, we develop all these
afflictions and through that we experience problems, unhappiness,
suffering, and basically we have samsara/cyclic existence. When we focus on
these impure other-powered natures, our contaminated appropriated body and
mind, we should observe how it appears to our minds, how it presents
itself, and how it projects itself to our mind. We should check whether
that is an accurate representation of reality or not. Is that how our
contaminated appropriated body and mind exists?
When we get upset or we get attached, these contaminated appropriated body
and mind of ours become an object of focus and act as a basis for these
afflictions to arise. So when anger or attachment arises, we should examine
our own experience of how this contaminated existent presents itself to us.
It presents itself to us in a particular way, and what we have to do is to
examine whether that presentation or that appearance accords with reality
or not.
We just look at our own experience and focus on how our contaminated
appropriated body and mind projects itself to us, and how it presents
itself to us. We have to check whether this is an accurate representation
of reality or not. According to the MOS, for example, based on our own
experience, when we think of our contaminated appropriated body and mind,
we have an appearance of an external body and mind; something that is of a
separate or different nature from the mind. It is not in the entity of the
mind. It presents itself as something of a separate entity from the mind.
So, there is an external contaminated body and mind. Although this is how
it presents itself to us, and this is what appears to us but according to
the MOS’s perspective, such an appearance is false because that is not how
the body and mind exists in reality. Although it appears to be an external
object, but in fact, the body and mind are not external objects. Of course,
the MOS have their own many reasons for saying external objects do not
exist. This is one example of how, according to the MOS, there is a
disparity between how our contaminated body and mind appears to us and how
it actually exists in reality.
The MOS says that although things appear to us as existing as a separate or
different entity from the mind, that is what an external object is.
Although there is such an appearance, however that is not how things exist.
According to them, there are no external objects. If there are external
objects, then these objects should exist as the basis for applying the term
“this and that” from the side of the object.
According to the MOS, “this and that” phenomenon does not exist as the
basis for applying the term “this and that” phenomenon from the side of the
object. According to the MOS, if there are external objects then phenomena
would naturally be the basis for applying the term “this and that” from the
side of the object and has nothing to do with the conceptuality imputing it
to be so. Therefore, for the MOS, the very fact that “this and that”
phenomenon which is the basis for applying the term “this and that” exist
as something that is imputed by conceptuality, and not from the side of the
object.
We are not talking about “this and that” phenomenon. We are talking about
“this and that” phenomenon which is the basis for applying the term “this
and that”. It is only an appearance to mind. It is only an imputation by
conceptuality.
You can talk about whatever other-powered natures as there are many
examples for it. If you can understand “this and that” other-powered nature
is the basis for applying the term “this and that” exists as imputation and
not from the side of the object, then it is helpful for managing and
dealing with the afflictions, because suddenly one of the basis for the
arising of the afflictions disappear.
Those other-powered natures are the conditions for us to get upset or be
attached. When we understand that these other-powered natures, whatever the
objects maybe, cause us to get upset or to be so emotionally involved, are
only the basis for applying the term “this and that”, and the very fact
that the basis for applying the term “this and that” is not coming from the
side of the object but rather it is just a mere imputation by mind.
If you think about the impure other-powered natures, in particular our
contaminated body and mind, you can see that our contaminated appropriated
physical and mental aggregates, is empty of the imputational natures, which
is the object of negation.
An object that exist by way of its own character as the basis for applying
the term “this and that”, let’s say form existing by way of its own
character as the basis for applying term “form” is an imputational nature
and it is a non-existent imputational nature. It is also the object of
negation. The emptiness of this is a thoroughly established nature.
Emptiness of what?
For example, emptiness of form as existing by way of its own character as
the basis of applying the term “form”, and emptiness of that imputational
nature is a thoroughly established nature.
Therefore, in the MOS, what is the purpose of the presentation of the three
characteristics?
The three natures:
   1. Other-powered natures
   2. Imputational natures
   3. Thoroughly established natures
The purpose of presenting this is to arrive at the emptiness, and to
understand the thoroughly established natures.
The whole point of arriving at the presentation of the ultimate nature of
reality –emptiness- is because it is the antidote to an apprehension of
self.
Therefore, thoroughly established nature is the other-powered nature being
empty of imputational nature.
In the explanation that I have just given, other-powered nature is just the
subject, the basis of inquiry.
The illustration of other-powered natures is our contaminated body and
mind, and that is not emptiness.
In this case, we are just using it as the basis of inquiry, the subject,
which is the basis upon which we are trying to establish emptiness. Our
contaminated body and mind is not emptiness.
An other-powered nature, for example, our contaminated body and mind, is
empty of the imputational natures.
The emptiness that is the other-powered nature emptiness of imputational
nature is the thoroughly established natures.
If the other-powered nature emptiness of imputational nature is the
thoroughly established natures then we have to find out what exactly is the
imputational nature (kun btags).
In order to really understand thoroughly established natures we have to
understand what exactly is the other-powered nature empty of the
imputational nature?
Then what exactly is the imputational nature?
If you don’t understand that, we cannot understand what is the thoroughly
established nature?
The object of negation here is the imputational nature.
By using form as an example, the imputational nature is form existing by
way of its own character as the basis for applying the term “form” and the
emptiness of that is the thoroughly established nature.
What I have been explaining so far is pointing to the main reason why there
is this presentation of the three characteristics (other-powered natures,
imputational natures, thoroughly established natures). Our contaminated
body and mind is the other-powered nature. Due to our contaminated body and
mind being the object of focus, a lot of time we get upset or attach, and
that brings lot of problems, sufferings and unhappiness.
What is the evolution of us getting upset or angry or attached that leads
to many other problems? When we get upset or get attached, our contaminated
body and mind appears to us to exist in a particular way. The problem is we
believe it and we completely trust that appearance. This is how the
situation.
For example, we can conceive of this contaminated body as very beautiful
and pleasant. There is a conceptual thought conceiving of that. When we
focus on the body, it is possible to conceive it as very pleasant and
beautiful. The question is how does the body appear in the perspective of
this thought conceiving of a beautiful body? According to the MOS, this
body that is the basis for the thought conceiving beautiful body does not
exist from its own side.
We are not saying it is the body. We are saying there is a thought
conceiving a beautiful body, and this thought conceiving a beautiful body
is focusing on the body.
We are not saying the body does not exist from its own side. We are saying
that the body which is the basis for the thought conceiving beautiful body
does not exist by way of its own character.
According to the MOS, although that is the reality, in the perspective of
this thought conceiving beautiful body, this body which is the basis for
thought conceiving beautiful body seems to appear to exist independent of
the thought, but that does not exist. That is the object of negation.
The body by way of its own character as the basis for the thought
conceiving beautiful body does not exist. That is the object of negation,
which is an imputational nature.
What is the object of negation in this example?
As what I have said to you in the previous lesson, you have to at least be
able to speak up the words. Whether you know the meaning or not, at least
you should be able to say it out. You should be able to say, for example,
the form existing by way of its own character as the basis of applying the
term “form” is the imputational nature, the emptiness of that is the
thoroughly established natures. It is very simple. Just like that.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: It is good to know because in the monastery
when you debate or go to class, there is no way you can take the book.
Nobody allows for you to take the book. You have to debate for two hours
about this subject, for example. Of course, if you don’t memorize this book
then there is no way you can debate. What are you going to discuss? You are
not able to discuss. In monastery, they really put in so much effort to
memorize the words. It takes a lot of time. Last time, I memorized Lama
Tsongkhapa’s master piece called Essence of Eloquence distinguishing
between the definitive and the interpretative. That text is quite long and
also the words are very difficult to memorize because there are many
similar words all the time. I did memorize that. I think it took me more
than one year to memorize the whole text of about 115 pages. In English, if
you count, it becomes double pages, it becomes 230. Everybody put some much
effort to memorize because if you go to class, you don’t have the quotation
then it is very difficult to debate.
The basis for understanding the words, for example form, form existing by
way of its own character as the basis for applying the term “form”, form
existing by way of its own character as the basis for a conception of form,
and that  is the imputational nature. Then the emptiness of form existing
by way of its own character as the basis for applying the term “form” or
the emptiness of form existing by way of its own character as the basis for
the conception of form is the thoroughly established natures. On the basis
of knowing these words very clearly then you can start to see the meaning.
To summarize again, if we talk about other-powered natures, the impure
other-powered natures, what we are concerned about is our suffering, our
contaminated existent, our contaminated body and mind. So, our contaminated
body and mind does not exist in the way it appears to us. For example, our
contaminated body and mind appears as external object. According to the
MOS, although it appears as external object, this is not how it exists in
reality. This contaminated body and mind is not an external object.
This body and mind can be the object of conceptual consciousness
apprehending it, so it is the conceived object. This conceptual thought
focuses on the body and mind, and this body and mind becomes the object of
conception. It is the basis for the thought conceiving body and mind. But
that it being the basis for thought conceiving is something that is posited
from the side of the thought, not from the side of the body and mind. For
that reason, therefore there are no external objects. Objects are basis of
conceiving by thought that is not established from the side of the objects,
but by the power of the conceptuality.
What is the object of negation here, the imputational nature?
(Student attempted to answer)
Ven Gyurme: For example, form existing by way of its own character as the
basis of applying the term “form”.
What I have just said is the object of negation, which is the imputational
nature. Does this exist or not?
Does form existing by way of its own character as the basis of applying
term “form” exists?
You should able to speak up the answer there and then.
Form existing by way of its own character as the basis of applying the term
“form” does not exist.
First, you must be able to say: Form existing by way of its own character
as the basis of applying the term “form”. Only when you can say that, then
the next thing you should be able to say: Form existing by way of its own
character as the basis of applying the term “form” doesn’t exist.
Only then can you start to doubt: Don’t exist? Who say that? What is the
reason? Why cannot exist like that?
Only then, can you then see the differences between the SS and the MOS.
-The SS say that form does exist by way of its own character; it is the
basis of applying the term “form”.
-The MOS say no.
Only then you will see the reason. What are the reasons for this different
position? Both sides have their reasons.
Let’s imagine that there is a young boy and is called Tashi.
According to MOS, Tashi -the person- exists. Tashi does exist by way of its
own character. So Tashi exists. Tashi is also truly established because
Tashi is an other-powered nature.
The SS has the same position. Tashi exists. In order for Tashi to exist,
Tashi has to exist by way of its own character. Tashi is truly established.
According to the MOS, because Tashi exists by way of its own character
therefore Tashi is not merely imputed. In MOS, if Tashi exists by way of
its own character, Tashi cannot be merely imputed.
There are all these terms and they do mean different things in different
schools, which you can refer to the charts in the handout.
According to the MOS, Tashi exists by way of its own character, therefore
Tashi is not merely imputed. Why? Because according to the MOS, existing by
way of its own character means not merely imputed by thought but existing
from its own side.
Tashi is a person. Tashi is an other-powered nature. In MOS, other-powered
natures are necessarily established by way of its own character. That makes
Tashi necessarily existing by way of its own character. So Tashi is not
merely imputed by thought.
The word “Tashi” refers to the object. Tashi exists by way of its own
character, and the factor of Tashi being an expression is an imputation.
The thing that is expressed by the term “Tashi”, the expression, is not
Tashi. It is very clear that Tashi is a person. Because it is a person, it
exists by way of its own character.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Mui Cheng is a person. That is no question
for that. See Yong is a person. So, no doubt. Okay? I am just using
different names.
When we say Tashi, something is being expressed. That thing that is being
expressed “Tashi”, that is not the actual Tashi. When we say Tashi, of
course it is pointing to the person but the thing about the term “Tashi”,
the sound expresses something. That is not Tashi. That is an imputation.
Tashi exists by way of its own character. It is not merely imputed by mind
but the thing that is expressed by the term “Tashi” is merely imputed, and
that does not exist by way of its own character.
    ➢ Tashi, as a person, exists by way of its own character
    ➢ The thing that is expressed by the term “Tashi” does not exist by way
      of its own character
    ➢ “Tashi” which is the basis for conceiving Tashi by thought does not
      exist by way of its own character.
Khen Rinpoche (English): Hope to leave more imprints.
Now we are trying to say the same thing but in the different way.
“Tashi” which is the basis for conceiving Tashi by a thought does not exist
from the side of Tashi. That is not an uncommon mode of subsistence of
Tashi.
If Tashi exists from its own side or by way of its own character as the
basis of applying the term “Tashi”, then you have the problems. It will
lead to some logical fallacies.
We impute “Tashi” onto a basis of designation, a set of body and mind. We
impute this is Tashi. So the thing that is imputed is Tashi. The term
“Tashi” is referring to something. The term “Tashi” engages an object.
Now you need to think what this process of engagement is when the term
“Tashi” engages its object.
Is the process of engagement coming from the side of the term “Tashi” or is
it coming from the side of the basis of designation -the object?
When you say Tashi, it refers to an object. Is this process of it referring
to an object:
- coming from the side of the term “Tashi”? or
- coming from the side of the object?
The term “Tashi” engages in the object Tashi. This engagement is coming
from the side of the term, not from the side of the object.
The term “Tashi” is referring to object Tashi. If the term “Tashi”
referring to the object Tashi is coming from the side of the object then
you are going to have problems.
The term “Tashi” is referring to something. The term “Tashi” is engaging in
the object. The thing that is being referred to by the term “Tashi” is an
object, the actual Tashi. This term refers to “Tashi”; not a ham sandwich.
Is this reference coming from the side of the object or the side of the
word?
It is not from the side of the object.
If the term “Tashi” referring to Tashi is coming from the side of the
object then whoever sees the object should see Tashi, without even telling
you what the label is.
The very fact that the word “Tashi” is referring to the actual person Tashi
is coming from the side of the word, not from the side of the actual Tashi.
The name “Tashi” engaging in the object is due to the power of the term or
the conception conceiving Tashi, not from the basis of designation’s side
Tashi.
Tashi exists from its own side/ by way of its own character. You have to
differentiate between these two, we are not talking about the same thing.
Tashi exists from its own side, but the term “Tashi” referring to the
person “Tashi” is coming from the side of the term, not from side of the
actual Tashi.
Whether it is a thief or an ugly person, the person does exist. That ugly
person or that thief exists from its own side/ exists by way of its own
character is a real thief. No doubt about it, there is a real thief.
The fact about the term “thief” referring to the object thief, this
referent of the term to the object is coming from the side of the term, not
from the side of the actual thief. The term “thief” being able to refer to
the actual thief, and this power or function is coming from the side of the
term “thief” , not from the side of the actual thief.
If the very word “thief” refers to the actual thief, this function or power
is coming from the side of the object (instead of coming from the side of
the word) then whoever see the object should be able to see thief.
Therefore a name does not exist as its basis of engagement of name. That
means the name does not exist by way of its own character from its own side
as the basis of engagement of the name.
When we say the form does not exist by way of its own character as the
basis of applying the term “form” you have to think about how the term
“form” engages its object. The term “form” engages in the object form by
power of term “form” or by power of the actual object? So, the very term
“form” engaging the object form, this engagement to the actual object is
coming from the side the term “form”.
We have spent two to three lessons talking about these. It is difficult but
it is an important understanding and one of the assertions of the MOS. Not
only do they assert the non-existent of external objects, the MOS basically
say that things and events do not exist by way of their own characters as
the basis for conceiving those phenomena by thought.
Question: The person who exists from its own side, who is called Tashi, is
that person a gross object or an external object?
Answer: We haven’t even begun because in order to answer the question, you
have to sort a couple of thing out. When we say Tashi exists by way of its
own character, Tashi exists, right? Is Tashi the body?  Is Tashi the mind?
We haven’t begun. This is one of the mother of all questions. Is Tashi the
body? Is Tashi the mind? Everybody is trying to find the imputed object.
When we say Tashi, Tashi is imputed object and Tashi exists. It is an
existential question, philosophically, “What is Tashi? Who is Tashi?” We
are trying to find out what exactly Tashi is? What is the imputed object?
With the exception of the CMWS, the highest school, everybody else says
that the imputed object, in this case Tashi, can be found if you look for
it. It can be found and will be found. That is the position of everybody
except the CMWS. Everybody says that imputed object when sought is
findable. What it means? It means that at the end of the discovery, you
will definitely be able to find something that you can point to and say
that is Tashi. So, this is the position of everybody except the highest
school, CMWS. CMWS says that no matter how you look, you will not able to
find the imputed object. So, the CMWS says that the imputed object when
sought cannot be found. There is nothing that you can point to at the end
of day is the object. This is the highest school’s view, and it is very
difficult. Everybody else says; “No, definitely if you look for the object,
you will be able to find. At the end of the day there must be something
that you can point to; “That is the object.” If you cannot point to
something that is the object then how can you say it exists? Basically that
is the position of everybody else. So, in the first place, you must be able
to figure out who or what is Tashi. This is going to come soon. What is
Tashi? From the MOS point of view, Tashi is either the mind basis of all,
for those who assert that there are eight consciousnesses. For those
proponents of MOS who assert eight consciousnesses, at the end of the day,
they say; “It is the mind basis of all, there is such a consciousness, and
that is the person, that is the “I” and that is the self.” For those MOS
who assert only six consciousnesses, they assert it is the mental
consciousness. At the end of the day, you want me to tell you who the
person is, who the ‘I’ is, it is the mind – the mental consciousness.
Basically, Tashi is not the body. Whether it is the mind basis of all or
the mental consciousness, the point is, it is the mind that is the person,
depending on which mind. It is not the body, so how to talk about Tashi as
the gross object?
Khen Rinpoche (English): You have to think a lot.
Question: What is the meaning of:
- existing from its own side?
- existing by way of its own character?
Answer: Now, let’s look at the difference between existing from its own
side and existing by way of its own character from the MOS perspective.
According to the MOS, when you search for the imputed object and if you are
able to find it, then the object exists from its own side. According to the
MOS, everything exists from its own side whether it is a thoroughly
established nature, imputational nature or other-powered nature. Everything
exists from its own side because everything can be found when you look for
it. So that is the meaning of existing from its own side.
What about existing by way of its own character?  From the MOS perspective,
existing by way of its own character is this, that object cannot exist as
merely being posited by thought but is something from the side of the
object, is something peculiar to the object, in technical term, it has its
uncommon mode of subsistence.
It is established through its uncommon mode of subsistence without being
merely imputed by thought, that is the meaning of existing by way of its
own character from the MOS perspective.
Now we are looking at the MOS view as to what is establishment by way of
its own character.
If we use other-powered natures as an example, other-powered natures do not
exist through being merely imputed by thought, but rather other-powered
natures come about through the causes and conditions which is their
uncommon mode of subsistence.
Other-powered natures are established by their own uncommon mode of
subsistence. This means that for other-powered natures, they are
established by their own causes and conditions. It is from the side of the
causes and conditions, it is not just become a label. According to MOS, it
doesn’t come into establishment just by labeling it. It is coming from the
side of the causes and conditions.
Question:  According the MOS, existing by way of its own character is it
the same as truly existence and truly established in the chart?
Ven Gyurme: I think the answer is in the chart.
Khen Rinpoche in English: All the same.
That is enough about existing by way of its own side as the basis of …. We
will just move on and try to finish off with the MOS and so forth. From
your own side, you have to read and think about it, but as class wise, we
just have to move on.

|Other-powered natures         |Refers to those phenomena that are under the     |
|                              |control or influence of their own causes and     |
|                              |conditions.                                      |
|Impure other-powered natures  |It mainly refers to the contaminated appropriated|
|                              |physical and mental aggregates. Our contaminated |
|                              |appropriated physical and mental aggregates are  |
|                              |under the control of karma and afflictions, and  |
|                              |in the nature of suffering.                      |
|Thoroughly established        |The other-powered nature being empty of          |
|natures.                      |imputational nature.                             |
|Form existing by way of its own character as the basis for applying term “form”|
|is an imputational nature and it is a non-existent imputational nature.        |
|It is also the object of negation.                                             |
|The emptiness of form existing by way of its own character as the basis for    |
|applying the term “form” or the emptiness of form existing by way of its own   |
|character as the basis for the conception of form is the thoroughly established|
|natures.                                                                       |
|Being the basis for thought conceiving something that is posited from the side |
|of the thought, not from the side of the body and mind. For that reason,       |
|therefore there are no external objects.                                       |
|Objects are basis of conceiving by thought that is not established from the    |
|side of the objects, but by the power of the conceptuality.                    |
|Exists from its own side      |When you search for the imputed object and you   |
|                              |are able to find it                              |
|Existing by way of its own    |That object cannot exist as merely being posited |
|character                     |by thought but is something from the side of the |
|                              |object.                                          |
|                              |It has its uncommon mode of subsistence.         |
|                              |It is established through its uncommon mode of   |
|                              |subsistence without being merely imputed by      |
|                              |thought                                          |

