Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson11.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.312007
================================================================================


We have looked at the two truths in accordance with the SS.
According to the SS, conventional truth is a phenomenon that is posited by
the conceptuality imputing that phenomenon. Examples of conventional truth:
space and true cessation.
Uncompounded space is essentially a mere negation of obstructive contact.
True cessation is just that factor of abandonment of the afflictions.
Uncompounded space and true cessation are basically that which are merely
imputed by conceptuality. There is nothing more to the phenomena other than
that.
Any other phenomenon whose existence cannot be posited by conceptual mind
imputing it is an ultimate truth. According to this school, illustrations
of ultimate truth would be a person, a vase, a pillar. The existence of
these objects cannot be posited by conceptuality imputing them.
According to the SS, a vase is an ultimate truth. This means that the
vase’s existence cannot be posited merely by a conceptual mind imputing it,
but rather the existence of a vase is posited by an ultimate awareness. So
the existence of a vase can only be posited by an ultimate awareness. The
ultimate awareness here, in the case of the vase, is the direct valid
cognizer apprehending vase.
What is it that posits the vase to exist? The mind has to be an ultimate
awareness. The ultimate awareness here is a direct valid cognizer
apprehending vase.
To this ultimate awareness, in this case, is a direct valid cognizer
apprehending vase, the way in which the vase exists and the way it appears
are in accord. According to this school, just as the vase appears as exist
by way of its own character, this is how the vase exists in reality.
In short, in this school, an ultimate truth has to be posited by an
ultimate awareness.
 ➢ Conventional truth cannot be posited by ultimate awareness.
   Conventional truth has to be posited by a conventional awareness.
 ➢ Conventional truth is posited by a conventional awareness.
 ➢ Conventional awareness refers to conceptual consciousness.
 ➢ Conceptual consciousness can only posit conventional truth.
 ➢ Conceptual consciousness is not an ultimate awareness, it is a
   conventional awareness.
If we think about the two truths in accordance with the definition of this
school, if the phenomenon in question by nature has the potential to
produce an effect, that would be an ultimate truth. If not, then it would
be a conventional truth.
 ➢ Ultimate truth has to be composed phenomena; functional thing.
 ➢ Conventional truth has to be uncomposed phenomena.

(Root text page 14)
Mind Only School
The explanation of the Mind Only School (Skt. Cittamatra) has seven
outlines, as before.
1 Definition
The definition of a Proponent of Mind Only is: a person propounding Great
Vehicle tenets who does not accept external objects but does assert truly
existent self-cognizers.
Proponent of Mind Only (Skt. Cittamatrin), Proponent of Cognition (Skt.
Vijnaptivadin), and Yogic Practitioner (Skt. Yogacarin) are equivalent.
If you do remember, the GES and SS assert external objects; they are truly
established.
Now we have the MOS, a proponent of Mind Only, does not assert external
object.
Proponent of Mind Only does not assert external objects but they do assert
a self-knower; just like proponent of Sutra. On top of asserting self-
knower, MOS assert that self-knower is truly existent.
Unlike the proponent of Sutra, the proponent of Mind Only does not assert
external objects.
|                    |GES     |SS       |MOS      |
|Assert external     |Yes     |Yes      |No       |
|object?             |        |         |         |
|Assert self-knower? |No      |Yes      |Yes      |


What exactly is an external object? The proponent of Sutra asserts
directionally partless particles.
That is the basis of aggregation. Through the aggregation of these
particles, gross object is formed, which then can act and become an object
that is apprehended by a sense consciousness.
So, according to proponent of Sutra, first there must be an object, in this
case, a gross object/form. Only then you can have a sense consciousness
apprehending it.
In terms of form, the object comes before the subject apprehending it.
This is how the proponent of Sutra asserts that a sense consciousness
apprehending form is generated.  It is generated after the form itself
comes into existent. The gross form comes into existence through the
aggregation of directionally partless particles. So that is the meaning of
external object.
The proponent of Mind Only differs greatly, they do not assert that first
must have such an object existing there, then you have the consciousness
apprehending it.  Therefore, the proponent of Mind Only, the Chittamatrin,
does not accept there is such a thing as external form. There is form, but
is not external form. What is form? It is none other than that which is of
the same entity with the consciousness.
Rinpoche (spoke in English): Quite difficult to understand. Myself also, I
don’t know, if not careful, not easy. Little bit complicated to explain.
Sometime look like understand, and sometime I don’t understand also.
We are now talking about MOS. The proponent of Mind Only, the Chittamatrin,
asserts form; but they do not assert that there is a form that is outside
the mind i.e. of a different nature/entity from the mind. There isn’t an
external form, so to speak.
For them, how does form exists? The form that they posit is a form that has
the same entity/nature with consciousness. According to proponent of Mind
Only, form is none other than the factor of appearance which appears to
that consciousness as form.
There isn’t an external form. External form means a form that is of a
different entity from the mind.
MOS does assert form, but what exactly is form? According to MOS, it is
none other than the factor of appearances to that consciousness. Everything
is in the entity of mind.
Illustrations that help us to understand this:
-Dream appearances - in the dream, there are all kind of appearances, but
those appearances in the dream are not outside of the mind. They are not
separate from the dream consciousness. Essentially it is mind.
-The appearance of two moons - while in reality there is only one moon, but
nevertheless there is the appearance of two moons to some people. That
appearance is not something that exists outside of the mind, that
appearance is essentially an appearance to the mind.
-The appearance of a cup of liquid -when we see a cup of liquid, we have
the appearance of water. That appearance of water is just that factor of
appearance to the mind. There isn’t an external water right out there that
is of different entity from the mind. So there isn’t such a phenomenon that
can exist without depending on the mind. There isn’t an external object.
Through the force of karma, we see there is an appearance of water.
According to the MOS, the appearance as water is none other than the factor
of appearance. There is no external water that is of different entity from
the mind
When a hungry ghost sees the same cup of liquid, they do not have the
appearance of water. What they see is pus.
The MOS use this example to prove that there isn’t any external object out
there that is of a different/separate entity from the mind. Because of
that, due to the different imprints, different beings see different things.
There is no external water, what we see as water appears as nectar to the
gods and that same cup of liquid appears as molten iron to the hell beings.
If we think about this example, one cup of liquid appearing as different
things to different beings, and if we have to ask “What exactly is this
water that is appearing according to the perspective of MOS?” At the end of
the day, what we can say about the water is that it is just a factor of
appearance. That appearance to the mind, there is what water is; there is
no external water out there.
We see our own home as pleasant and attractive. We see our own body as
attractive. Perhaps we also think our own clothing as attractive. This is
what we see. “I have a nice house, a nice body, a nice dress,” we have the
appearance of a nice house, nice body and nice possession. While we have
these nice appearances, according to the MOS, there really isn’t nice house
that is appearing to us. It does not exist externally as a different entity
from the mind. So when the gods look at the house or the body that we have,
what they see is disgusting.
A pigsty does not have bedroom or living room. Everything is in one. The
pigs eat there and shit there. They do everything in one area. That is what
the pig does, but the pig is quite happy with it. When we look at the
pigsty, it is disgusting. We wouldn’t want to stay there. We couldn’t even
stand the smell. The way the gods look at us, our possessions and our
belongings, it is kind of similar to how we as a human being would regard
the pigsty.
This is not straight forward, and it is complicated.
We have an appearance of a nice house, nice body. For us, this is what
exists, isn’t it? You cannot say it doesn’t exist. It does exist. The same
thing for the pig, there is an appearance of a nice little pigsty. We
cannot say the pigsty is not nice. To the pig, it exists as a nice pigsty.
We cannot say the pig is solely mistaken and we are hundred percent
correct.
Just like the cup of liquid which appears as water to human being and pus
to a hungry ghost, you cannot say what appears to human being as water is
the only truth. For us, what appears as water exists as water and that is
how we regard it. But that is not the only truth because for a hungry ghost
what they see is pus. This is what exists. So what exists as pus and what
exists as water is none other than just that factor of appearance to a
hungry ghost and a human being respectively.
The appearance of the cup of liquid as water to a human being is due to the
ripening of karma. Likewise, what the hungry ghost see the cup of liquid as
pus, and that appearance is due to the ripening of a particular karma. So
in that sense both appearances are not mistaken.
Even we talk about one individual, for example, a person. That person’s
enemy has a certain view of that person. That person’s friend would have a
different view from the enemy. Someone who is a stranger has a completely
different view of that person. So this one person is viewed differently by
three different people. It is not as if there are different objects but the
same object is viewed differently to three different people. What this
means is that there is no external enemy. How the enemy exists is just that
which appears to our mind. Based on these reasons, the MOS does not accept
external objects. To them, external objects do not exist, and everything
that exists is in the nature of the mind. According to the MOS, everything
arises from the awakening of the latencies or imprints. When the imprints
ripen, one would have all these different appearances of different
phenomena. So these are essentially the appearances of the mind. According
to MOS, the mind is truly existent and that would also make a self-knower
truly existent.
The proponent of Mind Only asserts that form and eye consciousness
apprehending form are produced simultaneously. The production is not
serial, it is simultaneous. That means both the object that is apprehended
and the subject apprehending it, comes into being at the same time.
The MOS does not assert any object that is separate from mind. Everything
is none other than the nature of mind.
If everything is none other than mind itself, how do you posit an object
that is apprehended by mind?
There has to be an object of the consciousness, so how do you explain this?

The proponent of Mind Only says, “Not a problem, for example, an
illusionist conjuring different kinds of illusions, such an illusory
elephant. Although there is the appearance of an elephant, but there isn’t
any real elephant outside there. We do see an appearance of elephant. That
appearance of elephant is just a factor of appearance.”
But nevertheless when this illusory elephant is conjured, there can be a
consciousness apprehending it. In this case it is an eye consciousness
apprehending the illusory elephant. When the illusory elephant is conjured,
what exactly is that illusory elephant? It is just an appearance to the
mind. Although it is an appearance to the mind, nevertheless an eye
consciousness apprehending it is being generated.
Another qualm, if external objects do not exist, then how the main mind and
mental factors arise?
The MOS again say; “No problem, for example, a mirage. Although there is
mirage appearing as water, but there is no real mirage out there other than
what is appearing to the mind.”
The proponent of Mind Only asserts that external objects do not exist. But
for us, we believe that there are external objects. There is an appearance
of external objects. We have the appearance of external objects, we also
believe in it. Then how does the proponent of Mind Only explain this?
The MOS say that there is no external object, how do they account for this
appearance of external objects?
They say the appearance of external object is due to the mind being
polluted by the latency of ignorance.
According to the MOS, there are no external objects, but due to the mind
being polluted by the latency of ignorance, so this is mistake.
Although there isn’t any external object, but due to the latency of
ignorance, the external object appears to the mind, for example, the vision
of falling hairs. This comes up from the classic texts. I don’t know and I
have never seen that before and I don’t know how it feels like; maybe we
can say it is floaters.
There is this appearance of falling hairs, while in reality there is no
falling hair. Overall in reality there is no such a thing but there is
still that appearance. Likewise, according to the MOS, while there aren’t
any external objects, it doesn’t mean that you cannot have the appearance
of external objects. It happens, and basically it is a mistake. This is
something we have to think about over and over again.
What does the Chittamatrin, the MOS, means when they say that there are no
external objects and everything is in the nature of mind? What does it mean
“Everything is in the nature of mind”?
All the different examples that I have mentioned earlier are to help us to
understand this crucial MOS' position, so just think the example of form.
How does form appear differently to different beings? For the MOS, this
means that everything is appearance of the mind. If there is an external
form that is of a separate entity from the mind, then everybody who looks
at it should see the same thing.

Assertions of the basis
So according to the MOS' presentation of basis, they also talk about the
reality, what exists.
In English, the basis is “What is reality? What exist?”
MOS talk about the basis in the terms of the two truths:
   1. Ultimate truths
   2. Conventional truths
There is also a classification of everything that exists into one of the
three natures, which are:
   1. Other-powered natures
   2. Thoroughly established natures
   3. Imputational natures
So the proponents of MOS divide the phenomena into the three natures:
   1. Other-powered natures
   2. Thoroughly established natures
   3. Imputational natures

Other-powered natures
In this context, other-powered natures refer to composed phenomena.
Why are composed phenomena other-powered natures?
This is because composed phenomena/ impermanent phenomena / functional
things cannot come into being by depending on itself; it is not self-
powered. Composed phenomena are creation, and it comes into being by
depending on causes and conditions. Therefore they are other-powered.
In connection with the MOS explanation of other-powered natures, you have
to know that some proponents of MOS assert the collections of the eight
consciousnesses. On top of the usual six:  the five senses and one mental
consciousness, they add two more: the afflicted consciousness and the mind-
basis-of-all.
|The collections of eight        |
|consciousnesses are:            |
|Five sense consciousnesses      |
|Eye consciousness               |
|Ear consciousness               |
|Nose consciousness              |
|Tongue consciousness            |
|Body consciousness              |
|Mental consciousness            |
|Afflicted consciousness         |
|Mind-basis-of-all               |


The mind-basis-of-all is the repository of all the imprints. It is the
holder. The imprints/predispositions are deposited on the mind-basis-of-
all. Through the awakening of the imprints that is planted on the mind-
basis-of-all, composed phenomena come into existence. So, this is how
composed phenomena are other-powered.
In the very first moment the composed phenomena come into being, they
cannot exist beyond that moment. The first moment they come into being,
that is as long as they can remain. It disintegrates in the next moment.
Composed phenomena have no power to remain for more than one moment.
Because composed phenomena don’t have power to remain for more than one
moment, therefore they are other-powered.
In short, other-powered natures here refer to composed phenomena. Composed
phenomena/other-powered natures are under the control of their own causes.

Thoroughly established natures
There is a thoroughly established nature which is a:
   1. Selflessness of person
   2. Selflessness of phenomena
The emptiness of a self-sufficient substantially existent person is a
thorough established nature; which is a selfless of person.
The emptiness of object and subject that is of different entities is a
thorough established nature which is a selfless of phenomena.
Here, thorough established natures and emptiness means the same thing.
According to the MOS, thorough established natures, emptiness and ultimate
truths are synonymous
|Thoroughly Established Natures (synonymous with emptiness and ultimate  |
|truth)                                                                  |
|Emptiness of a self-sufficient           |Selflessness of persons       |
|substantially existent person            |                              |
|Emptiness of object and subject that is  |The selflessness of phenomena |
|of different entities                    |                              |


Why is it called thorough established natures? This is because it will
never change its aspect into something else; it is thoroughly established
as it is.
I am not talking about the definition of a thorough established nature. I
am only talking about etymology.

Imputational nature
What are imputational natures? They are those phenomena that are imputed by
the conceptual consciousness that apprehends it. You could say imputational
natures are those phenomena that are established as merely imputed by
conceptuality.
Illustration of an imputational nature: uncompounded space. Uncompounded
space is an imputational nature because uncompounded space does not exist
by way of its own character. Uncompounded space is just the factor of
superimposition by conceptuality.
According to the MOS, when reality is divided up, what exist? All the
phenomena that exist are divided into these three natures:
   1. Other-powered nature
   2. Thoroughly established nature
   3. Imputational nature
When these three natures are subsumed under the two truths:
   1. Ultimate truths:
        a. Thoroughly established nature
   2. Conventional truths:
        a. Other-powered nature
        b. Imputational nature
According to the MOS:
   1. Thoroughly established natures and other powered natures are
      ⇨ truly established, they exist by way of their own character
   2. Imputational nature are
      ⇨ not truly established, they do not exist by way of their own
        character.
All three natures are inherently existent and exist from their own side.
|           |                      |Ultimately established  |Truly established      |
|Mind Only  |Three natures         |Truly existent          |                       |
|School     |                      |                        |                       |
|True       |Polluted by latencies |Not polluted by         |Not polluted by        |
|Aspectarian|of ignorance          |latencies of ignorance  |latencies of ignorance |
|s          |                      |                        |                       |
|False      |Polluted by latencies |Polluted by latencies of|Polluted by latencies  |
|Aspectarian|of ignorance          |ignorance               |of ignorance           |
|s          |                      |                        |                       |


Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Okay that is. If you don’t understand
then ask.
It is complicated. Even sometimes I also wonder whether what I said is
exactly what it is but I try to base my explanation on the texts and then
try to explain that.
Question: Is the factor of appearance of blue as gross form and blue as a
term blue, for the True Aspectarians, the other-powered nature as a
conventional truth?
Is the factor of appearance of blue as gross form and blue as a term blue,
for the False Aspectarians, a non-existence imputational nature?
Answer: Seems like the True Aspectarians assert gross form; whereas the
False Aspectarians do not assert gross form.
(Root text: page16)
According to the True Aspectarians, even though the five sense objects –
forms and so forth – are not external objects they are accepted to exist as
gross objects.
According to the False Aspectarians, the five sense objects – forms and so
forth – are not gross objects because if they were gross objects they would
necessarily be external objects.
Going by this, you can say that:
- For the True Aspectarians, the factor of appearance of gross blue and the
factor of appearance of blue as blue can be asserted to be other-powered
nature; whereas
-For the False Aspectarians, because they don’t assert gross object,
therefore you cannot say that it is other-powered nature.
Question: The imputational nature that is in the category of non-existence
is subsumed under imputational nature by way of terms but not fully
qualified conventional truths. They are just subsumed there but they are
not conventional truths. They are not conventional truths because they are
non-existence. My question is why do they put it there and not categorised
the non-existence outside established base?
Answer: Earlier, I have talked about the imputational nature. I said that
the imputational nature is a phenomenon that comes into existence by merely
imputed by conceptual consciousness. That is an explanation of an
imputational nature which is an existence. That is not the definition of an
imputational nature per say.
The imputational nature in general is that which is merely imputed by
conceptual consciousness. So whatever that is merely imputed by the mind
does not necessarily exist.
The point here is that there are:
   1. Imputational nature which is existence would fall under conventional
      truths
   2. Imputational nature which is non-existence would not fall under any of
      the two truths because, in the first place, they do not exist.
The phenomena that are subsumed by the two truths have to be existence.




