Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson07.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.058458
================================================================================


Now we are studying Tenets. As you know for the various proponents of
Buddhist tenets, starting from the proponents of the Great Exposition, the
proponents of the Sutra, the proponents of Mind Only, the proponents of the
Autonomy Middle Way and the proponents of the Consequence Middle Way, all
of them assert that the apprehension of a self, ego grasping, is the basis
of all the sufferings and problems. So this ego grasping or apprehension of
a self is essentially a mistaken mind; a mind that apprehends the self of
person or I to exist in a way that is in contradiction to reality. So this
apprehension of a self, in this case is the apprehension of a self of a
person is the root/ basis/ source of all the problems and sufferings. The
GES and all the way up to AMWS have their own particular presentation of
what constitute the selflessness of person. As discussed in the previous
lesson, there are two:
   1. The coarse selflessness of person
   2. The subtle selflessness of person
Although we are not permanent, the I, self, or person is not permanent, but
we believe and apprehend ourselves to be permanent and unchanging. We can
tell from our experiences. On this basis, we believe that we would never
change and we are permanent. Also from our own experience we can tell that
this acts as a basis for the arising of afflictions such as anger, strong
anger, and strong attachment.
We believe that we will never change and we are permanent. It is a very
strong belief. This is what we call an apprehension of permanence -
grasping at things which are impermanent to be permanent. For example, we
think that we will live forever, or we will live for a very long time,
maybe for hundred years. So this is a coarse apprehension of permanence.
Based on this apprehension of permanence, it gives rise to all kinds of
afflictions.
We believe we will live for a very long time, for hundreds years or
forever. We believe that things are never changing and always remain
static. The basis for such an apprehension of permanence comes from an
innate belief that there is a person that is able to stand on its own- a
self-sufficient person.
According to GES, and in fact all the way up to the AMWS, these tenets
assert that the subtle apprehension of a self, which is an apprehension of
a self-sufficient substantial existent person, is the root of samsara i.e.
the root of all the problems and sufferings. In order to eradicate
sufferings, we must eradicate the source/root of all the sufferings.
The root of suffering here is an apprehension of a self. In this case,
according to the GES and all the way up to the AMWS, it is an apprehension
of a self-sufficient substantial existent person. So this is posited to be
the root of samsara i.e. the root of all the problems and sufferings. If we
want to eradicate suffering, we have to eradicate the ego grasping, and
apprehension of a self-sufficient substantial existent person. The way to
do that is to generate the wisdom realizing the selflessness of person.
This is what we are trying to do here.
Forming an understanding of what we have just discussed is very important.
Now we are talking about what constitutes an apprehension of a self of
person. The GES and all the way up to the AMWS agree that:
 - The coarse apprehension of a self is the apprehension of a permanent,
   unitary and independent self.
 - The subtle apprehension of a self is the apprehension of a self-
   sufficient, substantially existent person.
These two forms of grasping of the self of a person, or these two
apprehensions of a self of person, are different -one is coarse and one
subtle. We need to have a good understanding of these two different minds.
How do they apprehend their respective objects? What is their mode of
apprehension?
What I am going to say is nothing new as we have talked about this before.
You should put effort into paying attention. If you try to pay attention,
then your understanding of this subject will become clearer.
When we talk about the self, I or person, we are talking about the same
thing - the self, I or person. There is this belief that the self is
permanent, there is this belief that the self is also unitary, and there is
also this belief that the self is independent. So there is such a self, a
permanent, unitary and independent self. There is such an apprehension
believing in this. This apprehension is called the coarse apprehension of a
self of person.
This apprehension of a coarse self of person is a mind. What is it
apprehending? What is it grasps at?
This coarse apprehension of a self of person apprehends the person, I or
self to be permanent, to be unitary and to be independent. Such a mind is
called a coarse apprehension of a self of person.
When this particular mind apprehends a permanent, unitary and independent
self:
    ➢ it apprehends such a self to be of a different entity from the body
      and mind, and
    ➢ it apprehends such a self is completely unrelated to the body and
      mind
This coarse apprehension of a self of person apprehends basically the I to
be of a different entity from the aggregates/ the body and mind and
completely unrelated to the body and mind i.e. something that is separate
and completely different. As said in many treaties, such an apprehension of
a permanent, unitary and independent self is an intellectually acquired
affliction. Such a mind that conceives the person to be permanent, unitary
and independent, i.e. conception of a soul/ atman, is intellectually
acquired. That means something that is formed through thinking.
Wherever you looked in the great treaties, they all state that such an
apprehension of a permanent, unitary and independent self is an
intellectually acquired one. Having said that, we have to think: why is
such a mind an intellectually acquired? Why is it not natural? Why is it
said to be something that is a construct, or something that comes about
through thinking?
Then you have this subtle apprehension of a self of person. What is that?
It is an apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person.
How this mind apprehends the person? Such a mind conceives the person as
self-sufficient, i.e. is able to stand on its own, and is independent of
the body and mind.
In essence, it apprehends the person or self to be self-sufficient in the
sense that the self is not dependent on the body and mind, i.e. it doesn’t
rely on the body and mind.
This subtle apprehension of a self of person apprehends the person to exist
in a self-sufficient way, which means not depending/relying on the body and
mind, but rather it apprehends this person to be a controller/ owner of the
body and mind.
This belief in an I that does not rely on the body and mind yet is a
controller of body and mind is innate; that is not taught but naturally
occurring. In the view of this conception, the aggregates/the body and mind
are dependent on the I, the self. The body and mind are like that which is
controlled by the self or the person.
This subtle apprehension of a self, which we call it as an apprehension of
a self-sufficient substantially existent person, how does this mind work?
What is this mind grasping at? What is it apprehending?
Basically, it is apprehending an I, self, person, to exist as a controller
of body and mind, and this person is not dependent on the body and mind;
rather it is a controller/ owner of body and mind.
So this particular mind apprehends the I, self: “I am the controller of my
body and mind”, “I don’t depend/rely on my body and mind, rather I am the
owner/controller of my body and mind,” “My body and mind is that which is
controlled by me, and that body and mind is dependent on me”.
Unlike the previous apprehension, the apprehensions of a permanent, unitary
and independent self apprehends body and mind to be of completely different
entity, i.e. unrelated to the self of person. But in the case of the
apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person, it is not
like that. It doesn’t apprehend the I, person to be of completely different
entity with the body and mind.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting somewhere? Near Aljunied MRT? I don’t know
how to make easier than that. The reference text has anything on this that
is clearer? Do you find anything there? Or same?
Question: Can I confirm that this innate apprehension of a subtle self of
person, it is not separate but it is independent. It is not separate
because it has some relation with the aggregates. But it is independent of
the aggregates because it is the owner of the aggregates. So it has these
two qualities:   not separate from the aggregates but it is independent of
them.
Khen Rinpoche: This mind, the apprehension of a self-sufficient
substantially existent person, apprehends the I to be not relying on the
body and mind, which means it is independent.
Student: Yes, being the owner, not relying, therefore is independent. At
the same time, it is not separate from the aggregates, which is different
from the coarse apprehension of self of person (as permanent, unitary and
independent self) that is totally separate from the aggregates.
Khen Rinpoche: In the case of the previous apprehension (the apprehension
of a permanent, unitary and independent self), the I is not completely
unrelated to the body and mind.
In the case of the apprehension of the self-sufficient substantially
existent person, the aggregates/ body and mind are dependent on the I. The
body and mind are objects owned by the I.
Student: In Tuesday’s class, the teaching was that the I is not of a
separate entity from the aggregates and also it is independent of the
aggregates because it is a controller of the aggregates. So it is not a
separate entity because it is not totally unrelated, yes, some relation.
Therefore it is not totally separate from the aggregates but it is
independent of the aggregates because it is a controller of the aggregates,
therefore it is independent of them. Whereas the aggregates are dependent
on the I, that mean this subtle self of person is both, not separate from
the aggregates as well as independent of the aggregates at the same time,
from this discussion.
Khen Rinpoche:  The previous apprehension, that mind apprehends the
aggregates and the person to be of different entity. In the case of this
particular apprehension there isn’t such a manner of apprehension.
What does the apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially person
apprehends? Obviously it apprehends a person.
How does it apprehend the person? It apprehends a self-sufficient person
that is not reliance on the body and mind.
Such a mind is called apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially
existent person. There are innate forms of such a mind. But such an
apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person is not
necessarily innate, because there can be intellectually acquired forms. An
apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially person can arise due to
thinking; this is what we called intellectually acquired apprehension of a
self-sufficient substantially existent person. Of course, there are also
innate forms, and such a conception can arise naturally and without being
taught.
One of the sub-school of the GES called the Vasiputrayan, or Followers of
Vasiputra, believe that there is a self-sufficient, substantially person.
That kind of apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent
person is an intellectually acquired because it is something that arises
through following tenets.

These are the two apprehension of a self of person:
    ➢ the coarse apprehension of a self of person
    ➢ the subtle apprehension of a self of person
You could use the word “grasping” giving you the idea of clinging on or
holding on to something; so there are the two grasping at the self of
person.
The non-existence of these two apprehensions is the selflessness of person:
    ➢ the coarse selflessness of person
    ➢ the subtle selflessness of person
The apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person is a
subtle apprehension of self of person, is root of samsara, is a wrong
conception, is a wrong consciousness and is plain wrong.  When we say it is
plain wrong, what we are saying is that although this mind is apprehending
a person to be self-sufficient, such a person appears but such a person
does not exist. Although there is such an appearance and such a grasping,
but the object that it grasped at does not exist whatsoever. We have to
prove that a self-sufficient person doesn’t exist. In the previous lesson,
we talked about how a permanent, unitary and independent self does not
exist. Likewise here, with regards to the apprehension of a self-sufficient
substantially existent person, we have to prove that such a person does not
exist whatsoever, although there is an apprehension of it.
According to the great logician Dharmakirti in his Pramanavartika, he
stated this line of reasoning:
  The subject, the self-sufficient person, is not relying on the
  aggregates. Such a person does not exist naturally because it is by
  nature not one with or different from the aggregates.
The subject here is the self-sufficient person.
The self-sufficient person that is not relying on the body and mind, so
that is the subject of enquiry.
Such a self-sufficient person does not exist naturally. Why? Because such
an I is not established to be either naturally one with the aggregates or
by nature different from the aggregates.
We have such an apprehension of a person that is self-sufficient and it
appears to us. Although it appears, it doesn’t exist in the way it appears.

This is what we have to establish for ourselves.
According to these tenets, anything that exists necessarily exists from its
own side.
If this self-sufficient person exists, then it has to exist either
inherently one with the aggregates or it has to be inherently different
from the aggregates.
First you have to get what we have just stated, otherwise we cannot carry
on. We will try.
Is there such a mind, an apprehension of a self-sufficient person?
We have to recognize that. Such a mind is the root of all our problems and
it is said to be a wrong consciousness. What does this mind apprehends?
It apprehends a self. It is grasping and clinging on to a person, but it is
not just clinging on to any person, it is clinging on to a person that is
self-sufficient.
Self-sufficient means not relying on the body and mind. It is completely
independent of the body and mind. It is a controller of the body and mind.
There is such a mind and there is such a belief.
Why is it called a wrong consciousness?
It is a wrong consciousness because this self-sufficient I that is
apprehended by this mind does not exist whatsoever.
This is what we are trying to establish here.
The great Archaya and the great logician Dharmakirti said that:
  If such an I, the self-sufficient person, exists then it is necessarily
  either inherently one with the body and mind or it has to be inherently
  different from the body and mind.
What is the subject of enquiry here? It is the self-sufficient person.
We are trying to establish whether it exists or not.
If it exists, it can only exist in two ways and the possibilities are
exhaustive. If it exists:
    ➢ it is inherently one with the body and mind or
    ➢ it is inherently different from the body and mind
Can anyone posit that a self-sufficient is of the same entity with the body
and mind? I think the answer is no.
If the self-sufficient person exists, it is either inherently one with the
body and mind or inherently different from the body and mind. That is
exhaustive and there is no other way out.
Is the self-sufficient person the same entity with the body and mind? No.
Why? If the self-sufficient person is of the same entity with the body and
mind, just as the person is self-sufficient, then it would entail the
fallacy that the body and mind would be self-sufficient substantially
existent as well. That means that the body and mind would exist as
something not dependent on something else.
So if the self-sufficient person is of the same entity with the body and
mind that would entail the fallacy that the body and mind would be self-
sufficient as well.
Because it is of the same entity, it cannot exist in having a different
nature.
Therefore, just as the person is self-sufficient, then if this self-
sufficient person is of the same entity with the body and mind, then that
would entail the fallacy that the body and mind would also be self-
sufficient substantially existent. Then it would mean that the body and
mind would exist without having to rely on something else.
What is the problem if the aggregates themselves are also self-sufficient?
If we assert that there is nothing wrong in saying that the aggregates
themselves are also self-sufficient just like the self-sufficient person,
then it follows that:
    ➢ the aggregates would become permanent
    ➢ the aggregates are not dependent on causes and conditions
That will be absurd.
It is clear that the aggregates/body and mind themselves are impermanent
and they are dependent on causes and conditions. Based on such reasons, it
follows that the self-sufficient person cannot be of the same entity with
the body and mind.
Although the self-sufficient person is not of a different entity from the
body and mind, what is the problem if they are of different entity?
We have seen that the self-sufficient person cannot be of the same entity
with the body and mind. So is the self-sufficient person of a different
entity from the body and mind? No.
What is the problem if we say the self-sufficient person is of a different
entity from the body and mind?
The self-sufficient person is not of a different entity from the body and
mind. Why?
If the self-sufficient person is of a different entity from the body and
mind, then if you eliminate the aggregates one after the other, at the end
of eliminating all the aggregates, you should be able to find a self-
sufficient person standing there on its own.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, just to leave imprint. Those who have completed the
basic program, I think they should understand this one. I think we talked
about this one long time. We have talked about the reasoning of one and
different numerous times.
This reasoning of being either one or different is an important reasoning
that is used in the topic of selflessness and emptiness. This line of
reasoning comes up all the time in trying to establish the view of
selflessness. It is an important one. Those of you who have heard this
before and now by hearing this again should be clearer. For those who are
hearing it for the first time, then it is just leaving imprint. That is
about it. Imprints definitely work. Through hearing, listening, through
thinking and so forth, imprints definitely are left in our mental
continuum. So plant the imprint first and hope for the imprints to ripen.

(Root text page 4)
7 Presentation of the grounds and paths
This is explained in two parts:
   1. objects of abandonment and
   2. actual presentation of the grounds and paths.
7A Objects of abandonment
Two types of obscurations are asserted:
   1. afflictive obscurations and
   2. non-afflictive obscurations.
There is no such thing as the convention ‘obscuration to knowledge.
We usually say “afflictive obscuration” as obstruction to liberation, but
technically it is not very correct.
According to this school, there are two types of obscurations:
    ➢ Afflictive obscurations are that which obstructs the attainment of
      liberation.
    ➢ Non-afflictive obscurations refer to obstruction to all-knowingness.
But in this school, it says “There is no such thing as the convention
‘obscuration to knowledge,” that means for them the convention/term
“obscuration to knowledge” does not exist.
We talked about Buddha omniscience or all-knowing mind; which is the mind
that perceives directly and simultaneously the modes and varieties of
phenomena i.e. the two truths.
The GES does not believe that there is such a knower –omniscience mind-
that can perceive every phenomenon simultaneously and directly in one
moment of cognition. Perhaps due to this belief, in this school (GES), the
convention of obscuration to knowledge or obscuration to omniscience does
not exist.
I am not exactly sure whether this is the reason for the convention of
obscuration to knowledge does not exist in this school. However, other
schools agree that the omniscience mind directly perceiving all phenomena
in one moment as clearly as how we will perceive a bunch of fruits or seeds
on our palm.
GES say that there isn’t such a knower or mind that cans directly
perceiving every single phenomenon in one moment of connection.  Basically,
the GES find it difficult to conceive that Buddha is like that.
GES assert that the form aggregates of Buddha is true suffering, just like
the body that we have; whereas everybody else assert that the Buddha’s form
aggregates is Buddha.
Afflictive obscurations mainly prevent the attainment of liberation and non-
afflictive obscurations mainly prevent the attainment of all-knowingness.
Illustrations of afflictive obscurations are, for example, the conception
apprehending the person to be self-sufficient substantially existent and
the three poisons that arise due to the force of that [conception] together
with their seeds.
The conception apprehending the person to be self-sufficient substantially
existent is an apprehension of a self. It is an afflictive obscuration.
Such a conception of a person to be self-sufficient substantially existent
is the basis/root. Arising from that are the three mental poisons:
ignorance, anger and attachment.
“Together with their seeds” - seeds here refer to:
 - the seeds that are placed by the conception apprehending a person to be
 self-sufficient substantially existent and
 - also referring to the seeds that are placed by the three mental poisons:
 ignorance, anger and attachment.
All these are considered to be afflictive obscurations.
Illustrations of] non-afflictive obscurations are, for example, the
latencies (bag chags) of the conception apprehending the person to be self-
sufficient substantially existent and the negative tendencies of the mind
that arise due to the force of those [latencies].
Comment from Ven Gyurme:
1The latencies are also translated as imprints, predispositions,
procreativity
2 Negative tendencies – in Lamrim Chen Mo, it is translated it as
dysfunctional tendencies
For the word for seeds is “sa bon” and the word for latencies is “bag
chags”, sometimes they are translated using the same word and depending on
its context, it is alright to do so. But most of time, they are different.
Here, the seeds of the three mental poisons and the seeds of the conception
of the self-sufficient substantially existent person are posited to be
afflictive obscurations, whereas the latencies of the conception of the
self-sufficient substantially existent person to be non-afflictive
obscurations.
So seeds and imprints/predispositions/latencies are different.
The latencies of the conception apprehending the person to be self-
sufficient substantially existent is planted by the conception itself; the
conception of the self-sufficient substantially existent person.
But when we talk about the seed of this conception, the seed is also
planted by the same conception (the conception of the self-sufficient
substantially existent person).
Then what is the difference between the seed and the latencies as both are
planted by the same conception?
Whatever that is planted, if that has the potential to arise in the future
that same conception (the conception apprehending a person to be self-
sufficient substantially existent), it is called the seed.
If the seed that is placed by the conception apprehending the self-
sufficient substantially existent person has the power to be produced in
the future this conception then that would be called a seed (of the seed
that is placed by the conception apprehending the self-sufficient
substantially existent person).
The latencies of the conception apprehending the person to be self-
sufficient substantially existent are also placed by the same conception.
Obviously the latencies are different from the seeds. The latencies that
are placed by this conception do not have the power to produce in the
future a conception of a self-sufficient substantially existent person.
What it produces is just an appearance; that is still the appearance of a
self-sufficient substantially existent person but it is not able to produce
a conception of self-sufficient substantially existent person.
So what it produces is only mere appearance of a self-sufficient
substantially existent person. So, that is the difference.
Perhaps the analogy of an onion and the smell of the onion would help.
There is something that is able to produce just the smell of an onion, but
not the onion itself. That is analogous to the
imprints/latencies/predispositions of the conception of self-sufficient
substantially existent person.
There is something that is able to produce not just the smell of the onion
and also the onion itself. That is the analogous of the seed.
Regarding the convention negative tendencies/dysfunctional tendencies of
the mind, what does it do?
It is kinds of obstructing the mind from knowing the object.
When we talk about the qualities of the Buddha, they are called free from
the four-unknowingness.
The example given in the text is that of Arhat Shariputra. He was not able
to tell the total numbers of the practices of morality that the Buddha
accumulated. He was not able to tell exactly each and every single
qualities in the Buddha’s mind. So, this factor of unknowingness is posited
to be non-afflicted obscurations. So that is the factor of unknowingness
with regards to obscured phenomena.
Another example is to do with distance. Despite being an arhat,
Maudgalyāyana could not see where his mother was born. His mother was born
in some very far distance place. Because of being too far, he cannot
perceive that. So that is the factor of unknowingness with regards to
distance.
These two factors of unknowingness are all posited to be non-afflictive
obscurations.
There is also a factor of unknowingness with regards to time. For example,
as in the Lamrim teaching, there is a story about how Shariputra didn’t
want to ordain a particular lay person because he thought that this lay
person didn’t have any root of virtue to be ordained and to achieve
liberation. Because Buddha is all-omniscient, he says “Hundreds of eons ago
while he was a fly and for whatever reason, he went around the stupa.  For
that he has the root of virtue to be ordained and to achieve liberation.”
Shariputra couldn’t see that. This is the factor of unknowingness with
respect to time. This factor of unknowingness is also an illustration of
non-afflictive obscurations.
Another example is the unknowingness that happens due to not able to figure
out the complexity of the situation or the varieties of objects being
involved such as not able to sort out the details of the past lives of an
individual, all the different past lives, great numbers of past lives and
so forth.  This factor of unknowingness is due to the varieties of objects
in question and the complexity of the situation. Another example given in
the text is that the peacock tail contains different designs, colors,
shapes and so forth. All these are the results of their individual causes.
As it is very complicated, one is not be able to see the exact causes of
those individual colors, designs and so forth.
A person is called a foe destroyer because of having abandoned or destroyed
the afflictions, but don’t have to destroy something other than that. So
there are many such factors of unknowingness in the mental continuum of foe
destroyers or arhats as they may not know many things. But not knowing is
not an affliction, but it is an obscuration, it is a non-afflictive
obscuration.
We have to know, according to this school, what is being posited to be the
afflictive obscurations and what is being posited to be the non-afflictive
obscurations.
The afflictive obscuration prevents/ interferes/ hinders the attainment of
liberation.
The non-afflictive obscuration prevents/ interferes/ hinders the attainment
of all-knowingness.
Because of this, there are differences in what exactly is being obstructed.
Therefore there are these two obstructions.
Refer to Root Text (page 5~6) 7B Actual  presentation  of  the  grounds  and
paths
There is the convention of the three vehicles (yanas). The three vehicles
are:
   1. The Hearers vehicles
   2. The Solitary Realizers vehicles
   3. The Bodhisattvas vehicles
There are five paths:
   1. The path of accumulation
   2. The path of preparation
   3. The path of seeing
   4. The path of meditation
   5. The path of no more learning
There are:
   1. The five paths of the Hearers
        a. The path of accumulation of the Hearers
        b. The path of preparation of the Hearers
        c. The path of seeing of the Hearers
        d. The path of meditation of the Hearers
        e. The path of no more learning of the Hearers
   2. The five paths of the Solitary Realizers
        a. The path of accumulation of the Solitary Realizers
        b. The path of preparation of the Solitary Realizers
        c. The path of seeing of the Solitary Realizers
        d. The path of meditation of the Solitary Realizers
        e. The path of no more learning of the Solitary Realizers
   3. The five paths of the Bodhisattvas
        a. The path of accumulation of the Bodhisattvas
        b. The path of preparation of the Bodhisattvas
        c. The path of seeing of the Bodhisattvas
        d. The path of meditation of the Bodhisattvas
        e. The path of no more learning of the Bodhisattvas
Please read the root text and see what is the fruits of attainment these
respective paths.

Questions for Sunday (24.03.2013) discussion:
   1. a)   Is there a different between a Buddhist and a proponent of
      Buddhist tenets?
     b) Does a proponent of Buddhist tenets necessarily have to
        assert/accept the four seals?
   2. a)   What is the difference between the two truths here in this
      school?
     b) If it is an ultimate truth, is it necessarily partless?
   3. Is there a difference in the mode of apprehension of the coarse and
      subtle apprehension of a self of person?
The purpose of these questions is to help you to gain an understanding of:
    - What are the four seals
    - What are the two truths, according to the GES
    - The difference between the two apprehensions of the self of person.
If you really understand the two truths and the differences between the two
truths in the GES, then you would definitely, by the way, come to
understand what the meaning of imputed existent and substantial existent
is.
If you can see the difference between imputed existent and substantial
existent it makes difference to the mind. For example, if you come to
understand how the self of this life, not the self in general, but the
specific self or person of this life, then according to this school, the I
of this life is a conventional truth; which therefore makes it an imputed
existent. Of course, when we talk about how the person that is imputedly
existent in the highest school, then the meaning is not the same.
Nevertheless, you come to have some understanding of what is an imputed
existent.
There is something for you to think about. If you think about it, I guess
that you probably have to say the specific I or self of this life, not the
self in general, is a conventional truth; which is an imputed existent as
opposed to the I or the self in general, that would be a substantial
existent. I am not saying hundred percent it is like that; perhaps it is
like this. So, this is something to analyze and think about.
By understanding the presentation of the two truths, you will come to
understand the imputed and substantial existent. This crucial understanding
would serve as a platform for you to appreciate and understand the next
higher schools presentations. Therefore the understanding of the lower
schools is important as a platform.
As there is nothing much left for the GES, I guess we should be able to
finish it in the next lesson.
Student: Yogic direct perceiver realizes the selflessness of a person, it
does realize the person. So, how does this person actually exist?
Khen Rinpoche: It is very complicated. In order to talk about this, first
you have to know that there is positive and negative phenomenon. Within
negative phenomenon, usually there are two divisions:
    • Non-affirming negation
    • Affirming negation
The GES is unable to posit non-affirming negative. In the first place, you
have to figure out what is the affirming negative and non-affirming
negative.
The GES are unable to posit space in the way that the higher schools can.
When we talk about space, it is the mere negation of obstructiveness or
obstructive contact. The GES cannot and do not know how to posit such a
space. For them, if something exist it necessarily substantially
established; must be something appearing, something right there. There must
be substance, some substantiality that is able to perform a function.
Actually in reality, the emptiness of a self-sufficient substantially
existent person is a non-affirming negative. That means it is just a mere
negation of a self-sufficient substantially existent person.
The GES do not know how to posit the non-affirming negative. While there
has to be a non-affirming negation but for them the emptiness of a self-
sufficient substantially existent person cannot be a non-affirming
negation. They don’t know how to posit the non-existence of a self-
sufficient substantially existent person; which is a mere negation, non-
affirming negative that does not perform any function. For them, everything
that exists must necessarily perform a function. That is why we talk about
substantial established.
Like what we have discussed in the previous module about the yogic direct
perceiver, the yogic direct perceiver perceives the emptiness of the self
of a person through realizing the aggregates/body and mind that are devoid
of such a self. Through that he realizes the lack of such the self of a
person.
I think it is somewhere in the Lorig text. A yogic direct perceiver through
directly realizing the aggregates/body and mind are devoid of such a self
of a person, they implicitly realizes the selflessness of a person.
Student: That assertion works for the Sutra School right? But for the GES,
how do you explain that the person is substantially existent? It seems to
not able to explain that, because the GES is saying that there is a
substantially existent for a person?
Ven Gyurme: No, there isn’t a person that is self-sufficient substantially
existent.
Student: But the person itself is the ultimate truth which is a
substantially existent. We have to say that.
Khen Rinpoche: It is substantially existent.
Student: If it is substantially existent then it can be found. My question
is then what is it?
Ven Gyurme: It is substantially existent but it is not established as self-
sufficient substantially existent. There is a difference.
Student: In that case, can I say it is other-powered substantially
existent?
Khen Rinpoche: In this school, substantial existent is mutually inclusive
with ultimate truth. If the mind apprehending the phenomena cannot be
cancelled despite trying to or mentally separating it into its parts then
that makes the object in questions an ultimate truth.
That is the meaning of substantial existent. That means the mind apprehends
the object cannot be cancelled. But for the case of the person that is self-
sufficient substantially existent then that is a different story.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------
Extract: Cutting Through Appearances (Page 205~206)
Objects Abandoned by the Paths
There are two types of ignorance to be abandoned through the path:
afflictive ignorance and non-afflictive ignorance.
The first, afflictive ignorance mainly, prevents the attainment of
liberation. Illustrations of afflictive ignorance are a consciousness
conceiving a self of persons and the three poisons [desire, hatred, and
ignorance] which arise on account of this conception, as well as their
seeds.
Non-afflictive ignorance mainly prevents the attainment of all-knowingness.
Illustrations of non-afflictive ignorance are the four causes of non-
knowingness, such as the non- afflictive obstruction that is the ignorance
of the profound and subtle qualities of a Buddha.
  The other three causes of non-knowingness are ignorance due to the
  distant place of the object, ignorance due to the distant time of the
  object, and ignorance due to the nature of the object, such as the subtle
  details of the relationship of karmic causes with their effects.
  The all-knowingness mentioned here is not a Buddha's quality of
  omniscience as it is understood by the Great Vehicle tenet systems. All-
  knowingness here simply means that if a Buddha thinks about objects, seen
  or unseen, a Buddha will know those things one by one The Great Vehicle
  tenet systems, however; assert that a Buddha can know all things
  simultaneously and instantaneously, without exerting any effort of
  thought. The Proponents of the Great Exposition do not accept such
  omniscience, and, therefore, they do not assert obstructions to
  omniscience; they merely distinguish between afflictive and non-
  afflictive ignorance. The Great Vehicle tenet systems distinguish between
  an ignorance that is an afflictive obstruction and a non-afflictive
  ignorance that is an obstruction to omniscience.
With respect to the obstructions, aside from obstructions to liberation and
non-afflictive ignorance, the Proponents of the Great Exposition do not
accept the designation 'obstructions to omniscience'.

|Afflictive obscurations                |Non-afflictive obscurations            |
|Prevent the attainment of  liberation  |Prevent the attainment of              |
|Illustrations:  the conception         |all-knowingness                        |
|apprehending the person to be          |Illustrations: the latencies of the    |
|self-sufficient substantially existent |conception apprehending the person to  |
|and the three poisons that arise due to|be self-sufficient substantially       |
|the force of that [conception] together|existent and the negative tendencies of|
|with their seeds.                      |the mind that arise due to the force of|
|                                       |those [latencies].                     |

