Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson05.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.322912
================================================================================


Once I was playing a game and after I didn’t do well, there was a message
from the game; “If you don’t succeed try again and again”. Here, if you
want to study the Buddhist philosophy, of course it is not easy, and if you
really have the wish to study then you have to try again and again. It is
not easy. You need to try again and again. Not everyone can understand the
same way. Everybody is different; different intelligence, different karma,
different mind, different body, and different dress. So nobody can be the
same.  If you put in effort, in some way, you will learn little bit of the
Buddhist philosophy. Regarding to learning the  Buddhist philosophy, again
I want to mention, even doing 100,000 prostrations and making extensive
offerings to all the holy objects, I think the merits of putting effort and
giving some time to study the Buddhist philosophy will be equal, if not
more. Logically speaking, I think, you gain more merits by studying or
reading the Buddhist teachings especially the philosophy. I think you
create much more merits than doing 100,000 prostrations and making
extensive offerings. By studying, you leave positive imprints on your mind.
In this way you will able to meet the Buddhadharma from life to life, able
to practice and able to meditate. In this way, you will also be able to
achieve liberation. So I think studying is extremely important and also
putting effort in reading and discussion.
As I have mentioned before, you also have to memorize some of the words of
the philosophy texts; without which it is not possible. Here again, when
you think about what everyone is doing in this life, whether doing practice
or doing business, if you really look deeply, who they are doing for? All
are doing for the self, the person. So there is a self, a person. Because
of that, we all are doing different types of things to make this self,
person happy. So definitely the self, person is there and it exists. Of
course, if there is no self, then we don’t do all these things. All boils
down there is a self. Because of that there is a person. We do all sorts of
things to please this self. So think about the person, the self or the ‘I’.
You are not a philosopher but just an ordinary person so you don’t think so
much about the self. You just do for the self and you don’t think what kind
of self is there. You don’t really check about the person there. Normally
you don’t check that. If your mind is not affected by tenets then of course
you don’t think so much about the self. What kind of self is there?   You
don’t think much about it but you are doing for that self. What kind of
“I’, what kind of person, what kind of self? If you are not a philosopher
or not affected by the tenets then you don’t think much about it. Here, now
you are talking about the tenets, so you need to think deeper than that.
A self, person and I do exist. So there is the self, person and I who
achieves liberation. There is a self, person and I who is in samsara. Here,
what kind of person, what is person, how the person look like, how the
person exist? In tenets, different philosophers think in different ways on
how the person exists. The philosophers can be Buddhist and can also be non-
Buddhist. Even Buddhist philosophers also forward different tenets. So
there are different views explaining about the self.
When we talked about non-Buddhist, there can be many different types of non-
Buddhist. Some philosophers of non-Buddhist don’t believe in past life and
future lives. They just believe there is just one life; there are no past
lives and no future lives. Why they believe as such? There are some reasons
for that. The non-Buddhists believe the consciousness is produced by the
body; i.e. the physical body produces the mind and the consciousness. Let’s
take the example of butter lamp and the light of the lamp.
The mind is like the light of the lamp and the body is the lamp.
Another example, drawing carved on the rock or painting on the rock.
The mind is like the drawing that is carved on the rock and the body is the
rock.
The non-Buddhist believes like that. Therefore, when one dies, the mind
also dies. The mind does not continue because it depends on the body. So
when the body dies the mind also dies; all disappear and nothing continues.
Just like the drawing on the rock, when the rock disappears, there is no
way to see the drawing that is carved on the rock. Therefore, they believe
there is no future life. Even if you think about it scientifically, it is
the same and is not easy.
All the minds, whatever kinds of feeling, are produced by the brain. When
the brain is dead, all the minds are also dead. So it all depends on the
brain. That is what they said. In the ancient times, some of the non-
Buddhists also believed that when one dies everything are dead; there are
no past and future lives, just one life. So be happy and just enjoy when
you are alive. Some of the non-Buddhists believe in that.
Some non-Buddhist philosophers also believed that everything just arrives
suddenly and there is no cause for it. There is no cause and conditions for
it, it just happens suddenly. Non-Buddhist philosophers gave different
types of examples on this. For example, sun rise suddenly and there is no
cause for it. Another example, water always flows downward and there is no
cause for it. Also thorn does not have the cause for it to be sharp; it
just comes out like that. They give examples that don’t need any cause for
it to happen.  They also mentioned that people who do a lot of violence and
killing can have long life; there is no cause for it. Also people who are
stingy and miser can be rich. The examples that they gave show that there
is no cause. They do think a lot to give these examples. Some non-Buddhists
do believe in future lives but do not believe in cause.
Also some non-Buddhists do believe in future lives but do not believe in
liberation. The reason for this is that when they do meditation on calm
abiding they are able to reduce the delusions to become non-manifest. As
they meditate longer, they are able to achieve form and formless realms
until the Peak of Samsara. At the Peak of Samsara, it looks like there are
no more delusions in their mind, and they believe they have achieved
liberation at that time. But in reality they have not achieve liberation.
At the time of death, they are able to see what they are going to be reborn
as in the next life such as in animal realm, hell realm or different
realms. Then immediately they develop the strong view that there is no
liberation. To them, liberation does not exist. Some of them who were rich
at the time of death can see that they are going to be reborn as a poor,
and they criticize that there is no cause.
There are so many philosophers on how they see and on how they believe.
Here I guess how to prove that there is future life is the most important
for the Buddhist and this kind of confidence in the mind. This topic is not
easy. Here, the Buddhist logic is that the mind is not produced by the
body. The body is not the substantial cause for the mind. For the non-
Buddhist they said the body is the cause to produce the mind, but the
Buddhist says the body is not the substantial cause, but is a condition for
the mind to be produced. The physical body cannot be the substantial cause
for the mind.
For the case of the body being the substantial cause for the mind, the
buddhist Dharmakirti, an Indian pundit and a philosopher, debated with the
non-Buddhist. He said that if the body is the substantial cause for the
mind then it follows that the dead body should have the mind. But that is
not the case. Dharmakirti also said that one’s wisdom and compassion do not
totally depend on the body. If the wisdom and compassion are totally
dependent on the body, for the person who is stronger, then his wisdom will
be much better.  If the person is weak then the wisdom must be weak because
the wisdom and the compassion are the dependent on the body.  Dharmakirti
said this is not true. Dharmakirti said that how compassionate you are or
how intelligent you are does not depend on whether your body is stronger or
your body is weaker. If your body is getting stronger it does not mean that
your wisdom is getting better and you become more intelligent. If you are
getting weaker it does not mean that you have less compassion or getting
less intelligent. In this way, Dharmakirti says that your wisdom and
compassion do not totally depend on the body. Then Dharmakirti mentioned
that the substantial cause of the mind must be of the similar cause, i.e.
another mind to produce another mind. The body cannot produce the mind i.e.
the body cannot be the substantial cause for the mind. For the mind, it
must be another consciousness to produce another consciousness.
In this way, by using this logic, Dharmakirti proved that there are past
lives.   The first moment of consciousness of this life must come from the
past life. It must be produced by a substantial cause and a similar cause.
It cannot come from the body as the physical form cannot produce the mind.
It must be the similar cause. In this way, he said it must be something
else i.e. some kind of mind.  In this way, he proved that some kind of mind
of the past should be there. Otherwise, it is impossible to exist. So there
must be another cause and it must come from the past life. In this way that
is why there is no beginning of the mind. It has to come from some kind of
the mind. Therefore for Buddhist there is no beginning of the mind, and
there is no beginning of the lives.
So it is the same to every impermanent phenomenon, if you think about it. I
think there is no beginning but some kind of continuation because it has to
be produced by a cause. So there is no beginning for everything. Do you
agree? There is no beginning because it has to come from some kind of
substantial cause. In this way, there is no beginning for all impermanent
phenomena such as the mind. I don’t know and you have to think about this.
So for the mind, there is no beginning and no end. The same goes for the
person, self and I which has neither beginning nor end.
Some non-Buddhists do not believe in past and future lives. There are some
non-Buddhist believe in past and future lives. They really need to think
about the points that are shared between Buddhists and non-Buddhists who
believe in past and future lives. What really goes from life to life? What
move from life to life? The person, the self and the I is the one who
experiences all the happiness or the suffering. Something has to continue
to the next life. Those non-Buddhist philosophers and almost everyone who
believe in past and future lives believe that there is some kind of self,
person and I which is the continuation of that. Normally it is called the
soul. The Christian, the Muslim and the Hindu believe some kind of soul and
they have to accept that something has to move from life to life. I do not
know exactly what they mean, maybe like a person, a self or maybe mind. So
again they do think a lot about what is a soul or self and what kind of
self is that. They say the five aggregates cannot be one entity with the
body but must be something totally separate from the five aggregates. So
the person, self, I or soul cannot be one entity with the body but must be
totally separated from the five aggregates. The five aggregates, for
example the form, the body, the soul has to of separate entity from the
body.  They believe in that. The reason is the aggregates, the form, will
disappear when one die. The self does not disappear but the form will
totally disappear during cremation and it became ashes. The self cannot
disappear but have to continue. For this reason they say the soul cannot be
one entity with the body but must be totally separated from the body. They
also say that it must be permanent because it never changes; it is the same
thing that keeps on going on. The self never change at all. It is the same
kind of soul that keeps on moving and nothing change. From life to life, it
is the same kind of soul. It is permanent which doesn’t change. They also
mentioned the self, the person is single which does not have part. They
mentioned that the self pervades every phenomenon. The self must be single
and independent. Here independent does not depend on causes and conditions.
So the soul, the self, the person or whatever you call should be like that.
For the past and future lives, the non-Buddhist has to put something that
goes from lives to lives. What kind of person? The self is like that which
is permanent, single and independent.
When you say permanent, it means does not change momentarily. The self does
not have any part. That is why it is called single. When you talk about
independent, it does not depend on causes and conditions. I think most of
the non-Buddhist who believe past and future lives accept that the self
which is permanent, single and independent person exist. They do think a
lot about what goes from lives to lives and they concluded that it must be
like that. Whether it is true or not in reality, it is another thing. They
think that is the only way and their conclusion is like that.
Now we are talking about Buddhist philosophy. All Buddhist accept past and
future lives. When we say self, person and I we have to accept that self
does exist. When we talk about the Buddhist term that there is no self, we
have to understand what does that mean. There is no self, no person,
selflessness. We have to understand that. Here when we talk about GES, we
are talking about the coarse level of selflessness of person. It is in the
chart.
























A permanent, single and independent person does not exist. The non-Buddhist
believes in that kind of self. All the different kinds of Buddhist
philosophers say that kind of self does not exist. When we talked about the
coarse self of persons, it is the same for GES, SS, MOS and AMWS. They all
say that kind of person does not exist.  First you have to understand how
the non-Buddhist believes in the self that goes from life to life and the
reason for that. All the Buddhist tenets say that kind of self does not
exist.
At the very beginning I have mentioned the four Buddhist seals.
|The four seals are:                        |
|All compounded phenomena are impermanent.  |
|All contaminated phenomena are suffering   |
|[or miserable].                            |
|All phenomena are empty and selfless.      |
|Nirvana is peace.                          |

Why does the Buddhist believe that kind of self cannot be permanent? Why
permanent self does not exist? Why single self does not exist? Why
independent self does not exist? We have to prove that kind of self does
not exist.  When you understand the first seal - all compounded phenomena
are impermanent, when you talk about impermanent, there is coarse level of
understanding of impermanent and subtle level of understanding of
impermanent. When we say impermanent, it means momentarily changing i.e. it
change every second by causes and conditions. That is impermanent.
When we talk about the second seal: All contaminated things are suffering,
impermanent is momentarily changing, all contaminated aggregates changes by
causes and conditions. What kind of causes and conditions change that? All
comes due to karma and delusions. Contaminated phenomena come from karma
and conditions. The word “gang zag” in Tibetan is person in English.  The
etymology of the “gang zag” - “gang” is full and “zag” is flow. When they
say “gang”, it is full of delusions and “zag” is overflow.  So it mean full
of delusion and overflow. The word is interesting so it is good to learn
about “gang zag”. When it say ‘contaminated phenomena’, it mean it is
produced or caused by karma and delusion that they are in the nature of
suffering.
The third seal is: All phenomena are empty and selfless.  Buddha says all
contaminated phenomena are in the nature of suffering. If it is in the
nature of suffering, is there anything we can do about it? Buddha says it
is possible because all phenomena are empty and selfless. How is that
possible? If we think deeper, all the suffering and pain comes from
attachment and anger which is wrong consciousness and is not a valid mind.
The wrong consciousness apprehends the object in the wrong way, see it in
wrong way and believe in wrong way. Because of that it cause pain and
suffering. Again if you look deeper of how anger and attachment arise, it
all boils down to believing in the independent self; self-grasping.
Believing on such independent ‘I’, anger and attachment arise, and then
suffering arises from there. All boils down to self-grasping and believing
the independent ‘I’ is there. Based on that, all sufferings arise. Buddha
says: All phenomena are empty and selfless, so nothing exists
independently. The self does not exist independently. The self-grasping
sees and grasps at the independent ‘I’ and believes seeing that. Not only
that, it 100% believe the independent self is there. We need to analyze
whether that mind is a valid mind or wrong mind. The mind that believes the
independent self, is it a valid mind or wrong mind? When we analyze that,
the mind that believe the independent ‘I’ is the wrong consciousness; which
is totally opposite of how the self does exist. In reality there is no
independent ‘I’ but the mind totally believe the independent ‘I’ is there.
So it is a wrong consciousness. There is antidote for the wrong mind; which
understands that there is no such independent ‘I’. That mind becomes
antidote to the mind that believes the independent ‘I’ does exist. When we
understand there is no such independent ‘I’ or person, then we are able to
reduce the self-grasping mind. When we are able to reduce that, we will be
able to weaken the mind and, logically, it is possible to totally reduce
this mind. Therefore liberation is possible when you understand that. That
is why the fourth seal comes: Nirvana is peace. So nirvana is possible.
Here we get out all our delusions and the root of all the delusions - the
self-grasping. If you are able to understand that and able to take out all
the delusions then you are able to understand nirvana is peace. When you
don’t have delusions, you don’t have attachment and anger. Then the peace
in the mind starts. When you talk about nirvana, it is not some kind of
cities. Nirvana is just in your heart and you don’t have to go to other
countries. You have to understand that nirvana is peace and samsara is not
far away. Samsara is in your mind; until your delusions and karma are
released. Your body is likes a pillar, your mind is like someone there and
the rope is karma and delusions. The mind is tied with the body and karma
and delusions and is always there. When you die, another body will come and
again your mind goes there and ties to the karma and delusions. Your body
and mind is always bound with karma and delusions. The mind never legs go
of the body. That is why suffering starts. If karma and delusions do not
tie you, your mind is free. You may have your body and if your mind is free
and is not tied with karma and delusions you will free of that and there is
no pain and suffering, and you are liberated from karma and delusions.
Here you have to understand what kind of wrong mind we have and how many
wrong minds we have. Everything you see is right, what you believe is
right, whatever you say is right, and whatever you see is right. One is
like the Buddha, everything is correct.
Let’s talk about permanent and how we see thing. Something which is
impermanent but we see it as permanent and also believe in it. We say it is
impermanent but in reality in our mind we believe the impermanent as
permanent. So we have this wrong mind. For example, the Swee Kim we saw
yesterday and the Swee Kim we see today when we come to class, we see him
exactly as the same person; there is no change. Not only we see in that
way, we totally believe that is the same person i.e. today and yesterday
Swee Kim is exactly the same. We do believe in that. We believe Swee Kim is
permanent. We believe the person we saw ten years before and now is the
same; we believe it is the same person even he is getting older. But in
reality yesterday Swee Kim has already passed and does not exist today.
When you divide the time, when the yesterday 24 hours has finished,
yesterday Swee Kim has gone and today Swee Kin starts. It is totally
different and it is not the same Swee Kim at all. Here I am talking about
how we believe he is exactly the same person. In reality it is not the
same. About the rock mountain, we never thought it is impermanent. We
always think it is permanent and it will last forever and grasp at that.
When we think of this world, we also believe that. After billions of years
this world has to disappear but we don’t see in that way and we think it
will always be there and is permanent.  If we go deeper, this morning Swee
Kim and the afternoon Swee Kim are different but we believe he is totally
the same. When we talk about the one hour of Swee Kim, then we go deeper to
the seconds, they are not the same but we believe they are the same. For
each second, it changes momentarily so it is not the same at all but we do
not understand that. In reality it is impermanent but we believe it to be
permanent, the same and always there.
When a person passed away, you say it is the end. This is coarse
understanding of impermanent; not the subtle. Yesterday Swee Kim does not
exist today and that is the coarse level of understanding (of impermanent).
We do not understand even at the coarse level. If we can see that he is not
the same person, he keep on changing and is a different person, if we
really understand that, then it will reduce out attachment and anger. We
will be able to reduce everything once we understand that. There is no self-
grasping. With anger, you believe the person who harms you two days ago to
be the same person when you see him again the next day. You see him as
exactly the same person who harmed you. The yesterday and today person who
harm you is the same person and you never thought it has changed and is a
different person. If you understand that the person who harmed you is gone
today and is no more there, he is totally a different person and not the
same at all, if you understand the coarse level of impermanent then you
will be able to remove your anger and attachment.  In reality, Swee Kim of
yesterday does not exist today and today Swee Kim will not exist tomorrow.
Yesterday Swee Kim was labeled at yesterday time. When the time goes, that
Swee Kim does not exist anymore. Does it make sense? Without understanding
that, we believe it to be exactly the same. We are not talking about
emptiness here. We are talking about impermanent; not even about subtle
impermanent. We are talking about coarse impermanent. If we understand that
kind of coarse level of impermanent we are able to change and reduce our
anger and attachment. Here I am saying we have this kind of believe in
permanence which in reality is impermanence. We have this kind of believe
in permanence. We all have that. That is why whatever we believe is not
true.
When we talked about something natural is unclean, we believe it to be 100%
clean, for example, our own body.  If we think about causes and conditions
and how does our body come about and how does it exist, in reality what we
have is unclean. How does our mind see especially on our own body? What we
see about our body is totally clean. When we see other bodies, which in
reality are the same kind of body, they are not as clean as your body. You
always believe “I am cleaner.”
Long time ago I have also mentioned about comparing your own pooh with
others pooh. In reality they are of no different because if you eat exactly
the same thing, the same thing should come out; but the mind looks at it
differently. Mine is not so disgusting whereas others’ pooh is disgusting.
 This is how our mind works when related to oneself. If you really look at
the body, we always think that our body is always clean. Our mind believes
what we see but in reality it is not true at all. When we were at Lorong 15
(old premises of ABC), I remembered asking someone “When you see your own
pooh why your pooh is not so smelly?” Someone replied, “It is self-
cherishing.” This is how our mind works. So many wrong thinking and wrong
believing. In reality, it is not true.
When you think about ‘person’, you immediately believing the body is one’s
self. In reality the body is not the self and is not the ‘I’ but we believe
the body is the ‘I’. For example, the body is the ‘I’, when you walk and
your body hit against the pillar. Immediately you believe your body is the
‘person’ hitting the pillar; “I hit the pillar” and believing the body is
one’s self.
So happy feeling, suffering feeling, unpleasant feeling, you feel that the
feeling itself is the ‘person’. If you understand something then it is “‘I’
understand something.”  The same thing with discrimination, when you
discriminate some object, then you think, “I discriminate the person”.  We
have this kind of wrong believing but in reality each five aggregates;
form, feeling, discrimination, consciousness is not the person but we
believe it so.

When we die, the consciousness move to the next life, then we think the
consciousness is the person, I, or self but in reality it is not the
person, I and self. We do believe that is the self. We have many kind of
wrong consciousnesses within our mind based on the independent I. Here when
we say about coarse level of selflessness, subtle level of selflessness,
selflessness of person, selflessness of phenomena, there are many different
levels of wrong consciousness within ourselves. What we see and what we
believe is not necessary 100% true. When we understand the four Buddhist
seals we are able to understand that we have so many wrong minds and wrong
believing. When we understand that our mind is not 100% pure, not correct,
not valid, then we are able to understand this topic, then there will be a
difference when we practice. Rinpoche mentioned many times that we should
practice guru devotion for three months. We have to understand that our
mind is not pure and we have so many wrong minds in our mind. From there,
by practicing guru devotion will able to help this thing and that can be
applied in meditation.

The conclusion is that we have to understand why some of the non-Buddhists
do not believe in future lives but only this life and what are the reasons.
For those non-Buddhists who believe in past and future lives, what kind of
thing or self that moves from life to life? We have to understand that.
They said it is permanent, single and independent person. For the non-
Buddhist who believes in past and future lives believe that kind of self
that goes from life to life. Now come to the Buddhist philosophy, all
Buddhist tenets says that kind of self, which is permanent, single and
independent person, does not exist. Why not permanent? Why not single? Why
not independent? We have to find out that one by one. What is the problem
if it is permanent? What is the problem if it is independent? What is the
problem if it is single? We have to find out and prove that kind of self
does not exist.  We have to get some idea. First is how they believe and
how does Buddhist does not accept that. That is the whole idea to get from
the tenets. So the coarse selflessness of the person is the non-existence
of permanent, single and independent person.

We stop here. Did you get some idea? This is the review of the previous
classes.

(Note: In this lesson Khen Rinpoche taught directly in English)
