Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson19.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.403055
================================================================================


Question: Root text page 16: “The five sense objects – forms and so forth –
are produced on the basis of a substance that is an inner consciousness in
dependence upon the latencies of common and uncommon actions deposited upon
the mind-basis-of-all”. What are the consciousnesses that deposit common
and uncommon actions and what will these latencies produce?
Answer: The mind-basis-of-all is the basis of infusion of the latencies of
all the actions. What deposit those latencies on the mind-basis-of-all?
This can be any consciousnesses.
 • If you assert the collection of the six consciousnesses, then any of the
   six consciousnesses can be the depositor of the latencies of all the
   actions.
 • If you assert the collection of the eight consciousnesses, then on top
   of the usual six consciousnesses, you add the afflicted mentality. So
   the afflicted mentality can also be a consciousness that deposit the
   latencies of all the actions.
All these latencies are deposited on the mind-basis-of-all, which is the
basis of infusion of the latencies of all the actions. The mind-basis-of-
all is neutral.
For the latencies of common and uncommon actions, let us look at the
latencies of common actions. All of us are able to see the water in a cup,
so we all have the common or shared appearance that able to see the water
in a cup. That is due to the ripening of the latencies of common actions.
While we all are able to see the water but it is possible for an individual
to see certain thing about the water that other people cannot see, i.e. the
appearance may have something that is not shared with somebody else. We can
call that uncommon latency.
I guess we could look at it in this way. We could also say that it is an
uncommon latency that account for human beings able to see that liquid as
water because what we see as water is not seen as water, for example, by
the hell beings. That latency that causes us human beings to be able to see
the cup of liquid as water can be the uncommon latency; i.e. something that
is unshared with others and it is only peculiar to human beings. I think we
could talk about common and uncommon actions in such a way. This is
something to think about.
We have finished with the Mind Only School. Now we will look at the fourth
tenets, the Middle Way School.
If you remember that in the Hinayana tenets you have GES and SS. Those
Hinayana tenets only propound a selflessness of persons. They do not
propound selflessness of phenomena. Hinayana tenets propound that just by
realizing the selflessness of persons one would be able to eradicate all
the destructive emotions or afflictions. Why? This is because all the
destructive emotions or afflictions arise from within the sense of ‘I’.
The stronger the sense of ‘I’ or self, the stronger would be the anger or
attachment that is induced by that sense of ‘I’. According to the Hinayana
tenets, if we can eradicate this false sense of ‘I’ and realizing the
selflessness of persons then we will be able to eradicate our afflictions.
In the Hinayana tenets, in the presentation of the selflessness of persons,
they talked about the emptiness of a self-sufficient person. They propound
that the self-sufficient person does not exist whatsoever. By realizing
that the self-sufficient person does not exist then it is said that our
three mental poisons will decrease. So realizing the selflessness of
persons is the method to pacify our destructive emotions. When our
destruction emotions are pacified, correspondingly the suffering that we
experience will decrease. So it is very important to gain a good
understanding of what I have just said, although there is a very extensive
presentation of all kinds of conventionality in the four Buddhist tenets.
As I have mentioned before, we should focus on their presentation of what
constitute reality; their view.
When we look at the Mahayana tenets, first there is an explanation of the
MOS. The presentation of the Mahayana starts with the presentation of the
view of the MOS. You may have noticed that the presentation of the MOS is
more profound than what you find in the Hinayana tenets. For example, in
the MOS, they said the object of the senses such as form, sound, smell,
taste, and touch do not exist in the way they appear to us. In the Mahayana
tenets starting from the MOS, they explain that how the phenomena such as
form and so forth exist are very different from how they actually appear to
us. These phenomena such as form and so forth do not exist in the way they
appear to us. According to the MOS, phenomena such as form and so forth,
although they appear to exist as external object but in reality that
appearance is a hallucination and is false because phenomena such form and
so forth only establish through the ripening of latencies. This ripening of
latencies produces the appearance of phenomena such as form and the mind
perceiving it. So this is how the MOS explain the existence of phenomena
such as form and so forth.
Although they appear to us to have an external objective existence (appears
to exist as external object), but in reality they do not exist as external
object. Form comes into being through the ripening of latencies or imprints
that are stored in the mind-basis-of -all. This world view is founded on
the fundamental premise that the mind is truly established. So, in the MOS,
mind is given the primacy. To the MOS, the mind is a very important thing.
According to them, the mind is truly established. This truly established
mind holds the imprints or latencies of actions. When these latencies are
ripened they produce the appearance of form and so forth and the
consciousness that perceives those form and so forth.
According to the MOS, due to the ripening of the latency of ignorance then
an appearance of external object such as external form is produced, which
is a false appearance. According to the MOS, we mistakenly believe that
there are external forms, and we mistakenly believe that they are beautiful
forms. Based on that belief, we get emotionally involves, we get attached
and so forth. According to the MOS, if an individual will to realize that
those appearances are false, although there is an appearance of an external
object but in reality external object does not exist, and how object exist
is only through the ripening of an imprint that is deposited on the mind,
it will help very much. It is coming from the mind. It is not coming from
outside. That will help us to work against our attachment, anger and the
other afflictions. So this is a helpful method.
This particular world view of the MOS is based on the fundamental premise
that the mind is truly established. According to the MOS, the mind is
everything and is the primacy, but they assert the mind is truly
established. It is possible to experience pain or pleasure by focusing on
the mind itself rather than focusing on object other than the mind. If we
focus on the mind itself, it is possible to feel pain, hurt, happiness,
pleasure and so forth. Based on those feeling of pain or pleasure that is
derived from focusing on the mind itself then there can be anger or
attachment that arises due to these emotions or feelings. So we also need a
method to deal with such anger and attachment that is induced by the
feeling of pain or pleasure that has the mind as its focus.
You understand the point that there is everything other than mind such as
form and so forth. According to MOS, these are appearances of the mind that
arises through the ripening of the latencies. But when we talk about the
mind itself, the mind is truly established. Then there can be a grasping at
the mind i.e. grasping at the mind when the mind is happy, grasping at
happy feeling, grasping at painful feeling which then gives rise to
attachment, anger, and so forth. In this case, the view of no external
object does not help in dealing with the attachment or anger directed at
that base of consciousness and mental events. That is the reason why we
need to know the teachings that are found in the MWS. We need a method to
deal with this kind of attachment.
According to the MWS, all phenomena -outer and inner- are not truly
established. The MOS assert that the mind is truly established. In the MWS,
all phenomena -outer or inner- are not truly established at all. While
phenomena are not truly established or not truly existent, phenomena appear
as if they are truly established or truly existent, and the mind assent to
that appearance. That is what we call an apprehension of true existence,
which is a perverse consciousness or wrong consciousness. Why? This is
because although things and events/ phenomena appear as truly existent, in
reality they do not exist truly. Therefore, the mind that apprehends true
existent is a wrong consciousness.  It is not sufficient just to have the
MOS world view that external objects do not exist, we need a method to deal
with the apprehension of true existence. Therefore, there is a need to
understand the presentation of the final tenets- the MWS. The MWS
explanation of how phenomena do not exist truly is a method to eradicate
the destructive emotions and to destroy them.
The Buddha gave many teachings and said many different things over a long
period of time. It is said that the purpose of all the teachings that the
Buddha gave is to lead sentient beings to be able to establish for
themselves what reality really is especially what constitute the person,
self and what is the ultimate nature of the person and what is the ultimate
nature of phenomena. That is the ultimate purpose behind all the teachings
that the Buddha gave. Therefore, the heart essence of the entire
Buddhadharma that we study, learn and reflect is the presentation of what
constitute reality, the ultimate nature of the person and the ultimate
nature of phenomena. So it become extremely important to delineate for
ourselves what exactly is the ultimate nature of the self and the ultimate
nature of phenomena. With regards to delineating the ultimate nature of the
self and the ultimate nature of phenomena, the Buddha also said many things
in the many teachings. The most profound and the ultimate of all those
teachings on selflessness are the teachings or the views that are
propounded by the MWS. While it is true that the MWS represent the most
profound view on the nature of reality, but by just saying that it is the
most profound from the beginning has no much meaning. This is because you
can only come to realize that it is profound when you see that in
comparison to some other existing views, indeed it is more profound. So
that is one of the reasons why the study of the four tenets is important
because it is only by understanding well the view of reality that is
propounded by the tenets below the MWS is more coarse. It is only after
seeing something that are coarser or grosser, then when you come to the MWS
you realize that is indeed very subtle and very profound.  Then you realize
that that is really good. Without the understanding of the lower tenets and
just study the MWS tenets, then it is just like that. You can only say it
is profound and that is about it.  But this is not an understanding at all
and it is not a realization. So that is the reason why you need to study
tenets. There are people asking why we need to go through the whole tenets.
Since that is the highest then we should go to the highest, why do we need
to start from the bottom? Many people feel like that.
You should see the progress from the coarser view to subtle view. We
started with the selflessness of persons, which is according to all the
school from the AMWS to the GES. All of them assert that the self-
sufficient substantially existent person does not exist whatsoever.
Relatively speaking, that is coarse because the MOS refute external object
and they do explain how there is no external object. Their worldview is
little bit more refine than the selflessness of persons. When we come to
the MWS, we see how the MWS refute true existence, then we see how it is
indeed is much more profound and much subtle because we already have some
understanding of the views which are more coarse.
There are always people who say this over and over again “My time is
limited, my time is short and I don’t have much time. So, what is the point
of me studying all these things? Would it be much better if I meditate?”
Why do we want to meditate? What is the reason? There is only one reason:
we want to have peace of heart, peace of mind and to get happiness. For
that reason, people meditate on the breath, some meditate themselves as
deity or some try to develop single-pointedness. The whole purpose is to
look for peace. Of course, if we meditate on the breath and trying to focus
our mind then of course we get some peace. This comes from settling the
mind. We basically stop all the busy thoughts. When all the busy thoughts
subside, of course we do get some peace. Of course when we meditate and
focus on our breath just to feel peace for 15 minutes then we will get 15
minutes of peace. If we do sit for 1 hour then we will get 1 hour of peace.
But we are not going to spend our life sitting there for 24 hours and stop
all kinds of thought. We will not be able to get the 24 hours of peace that
come from just spacing out. The whole purpose of doing meditation is to
find happiness and to avoid suffering, and there is no other reason. That
is also the reason why we educate ourselves to learn all these things.
There is no other reason. At the end of the day, we study all these things
is to investigate on what are the things that causes us problem and who is
this person or ‘I’ that is feeling the pain. So the point of studying all
these is to find what causes the problem and who is this ‘I’ or the person
feeling the pain.
Through our education, we think through things such as why we suffer, what
is the ‘I’ that suffer and in particular on the teaching on selflessness.
Even though we gain a coarse understanding but if it is a correct
understanding that comes from analysis and thinking then it definitely does
help a lot. There and then you will get peace, and your mind become more
peaceful and will able to stop the grosser manifestation of our destructive
emotion. This is meditation that involves thinking and analysis. When this
analysis and thinking start to leads to correct understanding of what is
the nature of this ‘I’, or self that suffers or experience pain, even
though it is coarse, it can start to pacify the afflictions. When the
afflictions are pacified it is difficult for them to come back again if the
understanding is correct. Nothing is comparable to such kind of meditation
because once it hit the point it is very powerful and you can really
experience or feel it.  So this kind of meditation on the ultimate nature
of the ‘I’ is more effective and more powerful than other kinds of
meditation.
There are many kinds of meditation such as meditation on the breath, single-
pointedness and so forth. When you do this kind of meditation it does help
for the 15 minutes or the one hour. You will get some peace and your
discursive thoughts get settled for a while. But when you arise from the
meditation, you again have to confront the world and all kinds of thought
will come back. Then what are you going to do? The meditation on the nature
of the self is powerful because it is something that involves thinking and
analysis on various perspectives. That is very effective and more powerful
than other meditations that deal with these things.
Therefore, whatever education of the Buddhist teaching that you receive and
thinking of what you have learned in particular the education and learning
of what exactly the person or ‘I’ is, such an understanding is very
helpful. When the understanding is stable and correct, it is helpful to
deal with all kinds of situation, whereby even when experiencing those
difficult situations the mind is not that disturb and shaken. But learning
is not enough. Just by hearing, reading and studying is not enough because
just by that alone will not bring about any noticeable change. It is
necessary that on the basis of learning, reading, listening or studying,
the more important thing is to think about things and analyze. The real
understanding can only come from reflection and analysis; “It is like
that!” With that kind of understanding then definitely you can use it to
deal with problems in your daily life, and you will see immediate and
noticeable different. Until we get such an understanding, which comes from
thinking and reflection, we will not notice or feel any positive change or
benefit. So don’t ever think that learning and thinking about the Buddha
teaching such as philosophy is a waste of time. Never think is such a way
because, as I have mentioned earlier, the essence behind studying all these
is to ultimately is to arrive an understanding of what  exactly is the ‘I’
and how do phenomena exist.
(Root text page 19)
Middle Way School
The explanation of the system of the Proponents of Non-Nature (Skt.
Nihsvabhavavadin) has three outlines:
1. definition,
2. divisions, and
3. meaning of each division.
1 Definition
The definition of a Proponent of Non-Nature (Skt. Nihsvabhavavadin) is: a
person propounding Great Vehicle tenets who does not assert true existence
even conventionally.
2 Divisions
There are two divisions:
1. Autonomists (Skt. Svatantrika) and
2. Consequentialists (Skt. Prasangika).
3 Meaning of each division
The explanation of the Autonomy School and the Consequence School.
Those proponents of Buddhist tenets who assert that phenomena do not exist
truly, that means, those assert there is not even a single atom of true
existent out there, those are the Proponents of the Middle Way.
Proponent of the Middle Way has two divisions.
Both are similar in asserting that phenomena do not truly exist.
However, one asserts that while phenomena are not fully existence,
phenomena do exist by way of its own character. Another asserts that just
as phenomena do not exist truly, phenomena do not exist by way of its own
character as well.
The Proponent of the Middle Way who asserts that thing do exist by way of
its own character is called Middle Way Autonomists (Svatantrika-
Madhyamika).
The Proponent of Middle Way who asserts that just as phenomena do not truly
exist, phenomena do not exist by way of its own character is called Middle
Way Consequentialists (Prasangika-Madhyamika).
|Proponent of the Middle Way                                          |
|Middle Way Autonomists            |Middle Way Consequentialists     |
|(Svatantrika-Madhyamika)          |(Prasangika-Madhyamika)          |
|Assert phenomena do not truly exist.                                 |
|Assert that phenomena do exist by |Assert phenomena do not exist by |
|way of their own characters       |way of their own characters      |


The teaching on how all phenomena lack even an atom of true existence comes
from the middling turning of the wheel of dharma where Buddha said this
many times in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras.
It was Nagarjuna and his spiritual sons Aryadeva and so forth who clearly
elucidated the meaning of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras. Nagarjuna was
the trailblazer of the Middle Way School. Even though, Nagarjuna Father and
Son, “father” referring to Nagarjuna and “son” referring to Aryadeva,  were
the one who clearly elucidated the meaning of the Perfection of Wisdom
Sutras, however, their explanations were done according to the general
procedure of the Middle Way School. They did not divide the structure of
the Middle Way into the Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS) or the Consequent
Middle Way School (CMWS). They merely explained the general procedure and
the general structure of the Middle Way. While in reality Nagarjuna and
Aryadeva were Middle Way Consequentialists (Prasangika) themselves, they
did not explicitly identified themselves as such but merely presented the
general system of the Middle Way as it is.
Subsequently, there came to be different interpretations of what Nagarjuna
and Aryadeva taught. Later, it was Buddhapalita and Chandrakirti who
clearly showed and explained what Nagarjuna and Aryadeva had taught were
indeed the tenets of the CMWS (Prasangika-Madhyamika). They assert that
Nagarjuna and Aryadeva's views were essentially the views that formed the
Prasangika-Madhyamika views. They assert that the AMWS (Svatantrika
Madhyamika) presentation is incorrect.
Later on, the Indian master Bhavaviveka rejected the presentation of
Buddhapalita and Chandrakirti and formulated his own explanation of what
exactly were the thoughts of Nagarjuna. Thus, he became the trailblazer
(the person who started the tradition) of the AMWS (Svatantrika-
Madhyamika).
Who is the one who started the CMWS?  There are different views. Some say
it is Chandrakirti, some say it is Buddhapalita. So those are the two
schools of the Middle Way: AMWS and CMWS.
Both are similar in asserting that phenomena do not exist truly, not even a
single atom of true existence.
But the AMWS asserts that phenomena exist by way of their own character.
Although things do not have an atom of true existence but phenomena do
exist by way of its own character. Proponent of this view is called the
Middles Way Autonomist.
The AMWS (Svatantrika) asserts that, if a phenomenon exists, it necessarily
exists by way of its own character, exists inherently, and exists from its
own side.
That’s what the AMWS think. If thing exist, it necessarily exists by way of
its own character, exists inherently, and exists from its own side.
According to AMWS, if someone were to say that a phenomenon does not exists
by way of its own character, does not exist from its own side, does not
exist inherently, then such a phenomenon does not exist.
If things do not exist from their own side, then what exist? How do you
explain the existence of the object?
The AMWS cannot accept that phenomena exist merely by being imputed by
mind, as there must be something that exists from the side of the object.
For them, if a phenomenon exists as merely imputed by mind, then one can
just make up anything with one’s mind.
The AMWS say: “If you assert phenomena exist as merely imputed by mind then
it is tantamount to say that things do not exist”. Because for them, they
do not know how to explain existence and non-existence if they have to
accept that things are imputed by mind. They do not know how to define what
really exist and what does not exist if everything is merely imputed by
mind. Therefore, for them, there must be something that exists that comes
from the side of the object.
With the exception of the CMWS, all other Buddhist tenets (AMWS, MOS, SS,
GES) are the same in asserting that phenomena must exist from their own
side, exist inherently by way of their own character. Why? This is because,
when you look for the object, you must be able to find it.
Thing existing from its own side, so when you search for the imputed
object, you can point to something that is the object.
For example, when you look for the 'I', there must be something that you
can point to that is the self. According to all these tenets, there is the
“this or that’.
It is only the CMWS that asserts that the imputed object, when sought, is
not findable.
That means you cannot point to the thing that is the object when you look
for it.
Only the CMWS say that. Starting from AMWS and the tenets below it, they
say that when you look for the imputed object, you will be able to find it.
You can definitely point to something that is the object.
Proponents of the Middle Way, whether it is the AMWS or CMWS, both are
similar in asserting that things and events do not exist truly. There is
not even a single atom of true existence; no true existence, no true
establishment.
The AMWS assert that phenomena do not have a single atom of true existence.
Phenomena are not true existent, phenomena are not truly established.
How do the AMWS explain the non-existent of true existence?
For example, conventional phenomena are not truly existent. If conventional
phenomena are truly existent, then they have to exist in the perspective of
a valid cognizer/ ultimate awareness.
Here, ultimate awareness refers to the meditative equipoise of a Superior,
which is the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness.
If conventional phenomena are indeed truly existent, then this would mean
that:
    ➢ They would appear as truly existent,
    ➢ They would have to exist in the perspective of the wisdom directly
      perceiving emptiness.
However, conventional phenomena do not exist in the perspective of the
wisdom directly perceiving emptiness.
Since that is the case, then this would mean that there are no truly
existent conventional phenomena.
This is one of the explanations of how conventional phenomena do not exist
truly because:
- conventional phenomena do not exist in the perspective of the wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness.
Not ultimately established is not established by way of its own uncommon
mode of existence without being posited through the force of appearing to a
non-defective awareness.
According to the AMWS, the meaning of true existence, true establishment,
ultimate establishment is established by way of its own uncommon mode of
existence without being posited through the force of appearing to a non-
defective awareness. This is the self of phenomena. This is the object of
negation.
|Established by way of its |True existence      |Is a self of phenomena, which is|
|own uncommon mode of      |True establishment  |the object of negation          |
|existence without being   |Ultimate            |                                |
|posited through the force |establishment       |                                |
|of appearing to a         |                    |                                |
|non-defective awareness   |                    |                                |


Not established by way of its own uncommon mode of existence without being
posited through the force of appearing to a non-defective awareness is the
meaning of not truly existence, not truly established, not ultimately
established.
We have not yet start with the meaning of “established by way of its own
uncommon mode of existence without being posited through the force of
appearing to a non-defective awareness”. First we have to know the word. It
is the explanation of true existence, true establishment, ultimate
establishment, according to AMWS. So, according to the AMWS, the meaning of
true existence is established by way of its own uncommon mode of existence
without being posited through the force of appearing to a non-defective
awareness. The opposite of that is the meaning of non-existent of true
existence, non-true establishment. We must first able to say all these out.

Please read the page 20 and 21 on your own because if I were have True Path
read everything, then there is no time. For point 1 to 4, they are quite
straight forward.
1. definition,
2. divisions,
3. etymology,
4. way of asserting objects,
If there is anything that you don’t understand, you can bring up in class,
otherwise I will not read this through as this will take time. I will
explain the meaning of true existence according to the AMWS. Otherwise, we
should be able to finish the AMWS in one or two lessons. It is important
that you read the root text. If there is anything that you don’t understand
you should bring it up in class.
Question:  In the MOS, the mind is truly established. In Lesson 17, it
mentioned that all things are accepted to be the common locus of being
truly established and being a falsity. Is this” truly established
“different from the “truly established” as mentioned the mind is true
established?
Answer: In the MOS, the other-powered nature and thoroughly established
nature are truly established, whereas imputational nature is not truly
established.
What is the meaning of true existence and true establishment according to
MOS?
If it exists not merely imputed by thought then it is truly existent, it is
truly established.
If it exists merely imputed by thought then it is not truly existent, it is
not truly established
If it is not merely imputed by thought but exist by way of its own
character and existing from its own side, then that is the meaning of truly
establishment. Then that is the meaning of true existent and true
establishment, according to the MOS.
It is not only the mind. Primacy is given to the mind. Why they have such a
world view? This world view is based on the premise that the mind is truly
established. The mind is truly established.
Question: In the definition of a conventional truth is: that which is
realized by the direct valid cognizer directly realizing it by way of being
together with dualistic appearance, what is the meaning of “together” here?
Answer: For the example; for eye consciousness apprehending blue, the eye
consciousness apprehends blue by way of being accompanied with dualistic
appearance. What accompanied the realization of blue is the dualistic
appearance.





