Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson01.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.333426
================================================================================


As said by the savior Nagarjuna: “Through the accumulation of both
collection of method and wisdom, one will achieves the two enlightened
bodies - the Truth Body and the Form Body”. The final objects of attainment
of the Mahayana path are the two enlightened bodies of the Buddha - the
Truth Body and the Form Body. The final object of attainment of the
Mahayana path is enlightenment in which the state of existence is the
unification of the Truth Body and the Form Body. In order to achieve this
state of existence -the unification of the Truth Body and the Form Body
-one has to create the causes. As said earlier by Nagarjuna, one has to
accumulate the two collections - the collection of merit and the collection
of wisdom.
In order to engage in the practice of a path whereby there is an
accumulation of both the collection of merit and the wisdom, one’s practice
must be founded on an understanding of what constitute realities is; in
technical philosopher language, one must have an understanding of what the
basis is. Here we are specifically talking about the understanding of the
two truths:
 • In order to be able to accumulate the collection of wisdom one must have
   a thorough understanding of the presentation of the ultimate truth.
 • In order to be able to accumulate the collection of merit one must have
   an understanding of the presentation of the conventional truth.
In essence, in order to achieve the two enlightened bodies, the Truth Body
and the Form Body, one must cultivates the path which unifies the method
and wisdom. In order to practice correctly the method and wisdom aspects of
the path, one must have correct understanding of the basis i.e. what
constitutes the reality, specifically the two truths: the conventional
truth and ultimate truth. This is very important. It is for this reason
that the subject of Tenets is studied. When we study Tenets, we are trying
to understand what constitutes realities -both conventional truth and
ultimate truth. The final view of the two truths is in accordance with the
presentation of the highest tenets, the Consequence Middle Way School.
Why do we study the lower tenets? An understanding of the lower tenets will
make us appreciate and able to understand better on the ultimate
presentation of these two truths.
Why must we have a better understanding of the conventional truth? We need
to understand the conventional truth in order to be able to accumulate the
collection of merit i.e. be able to engage the method aspect of the path.
As long as the phenomenon in question is a composed phenomenon, its
existence is dependent on causes and conditions. Composed phenomena arise
from causes and conditions; in fact from the gathering and coming together
and interplay of many causes and conditions. For example, in order for
sprout to arise, many causes and conditions must come together i.e. we need
to have seed, water, fertilizer, correct temperature and so forth. It is
not as if that one or two conditions are more important than the others.
All the necessary causes and conditions must come together. As soon as the
necessary causes and conditions come together, then we get the result - the
sprout. In the case of the production of the sprout, we can see that the
sprout is dependently arisen and its existence is due to the coming
together of the necessary causes and conditions that were mentioned
earlier.
Here we are talking about dependent arising on the level of causality i.e.
on the level of causes and conditions. If you can remember what we had
studied in the previous module (Lorig) on how a consciousness, for example,
an eye consciousness apprehending blue, is generated, three conditions must
be present:
1. The observed object condition
2. The uncommon empowering condition
3. The immediately preceding condition
Only when these three conditions come together, an eye consciousness
apprehending blue is generated.
When the causes for the production of a particular phenomenon come
together, then phenomenon will arise. This is the result of the coming
together of the causes and conditions.  This is irreversible and we cannot
do anything about it because when the causes and conditions come together,
it will have the corresponding effect. In order for any composed phenomena
to arise, all causes and conditions must come together. If any of the
required causes for production is missing, even just one or two conditions
are missing the particular phenomenon will not arise. Nobody can do
anything about it. Not even the numberless buddhas and bodhisattvas who
have the limitless qualities and powers.
We all want realization to arise in our mind; be it big or small
realization. However, in order for any realization to arise in our mind,
the necessary causes and conditions must come together; otherwise
realization will not arise. So if we want realization then we have to
ensure that all the necessary causes and conditions for the realization to
arise specifically we have to understand the instruction of our teachers
correctly.  The instructions that we received from our teachers have to hit
the mark i.e. exactly as it is intended. It also depends on how we go about
accumulating merits and the purification practice i.e. whether our
practices of accumulating merit and purifying our mind of obscuration do
hit the marks.  If all these conditions are fulfilled such as understand
the instruction then the instruction will make an impact on the mind and
hit the mark. The same goes for accumulating merits and the purification
practice. Only then desire realization will occur.
If you think about how the instruction of the guru can actually be
effective for the mind, move your heart and hit the mark, I guess it boils
down to whether you have devotion towards that particular guru or not.  If
one has single-pointed devotion and faith in the spiritual guru, even just
by receiving a single piece of advice, it will touch the heart. Some people
just change like that for life. It boils down to having faith and devotion.
If you does not have that kind of devotion and place the trust in the guru
that you have received the instructions and teaching from, even he teaches
the entire Tengyur to you and give you initiations, perhaps these
instructions or initiations may not have any impact on your mind and does
not move your heart. If you look at the major outlines of the Stages of the
Path to Enlightenment (Lamrim Chenmo), one of the outlines is “the root of
the path, correct devotion to the virtuous friend.”  After that is the
proper graduated training that you undertake after you have relied upon
him. The proper graduated training that you should undertake after you have
relied on him is, basically the entire Lamrim, starting from the
contemplation of the human life of leisure and opportunity up to the
achievement of enlightenment. All these fall under the section ‘the proper
graduated training you undertake after having relied on the guru” and this
comes after the first outline “the root of the path, correct devotion to
the virtuous friend.”  What does this indicates? This show very clearly
that if you want all the realizations that I have mentioned starting from
understanding of the human life of leisure and opportunity up to the
achievement of enlightenment is dependent on faith in the virtuous
friend/guru.  Without that kind of devotion and faith then all those
realizations and experiences will not arise. This is the implication.  This
is my personal experience and I guess all of you can look at your own
experiences. It is quite an evidence that when we received the instruction
or teaching from the virtuous friend/ guru with faith, particularly with
single-pointed devotion, even having just heard a couple of sentences will
have a profound impact on the mind and move the heart. That is very clear.
Going back to the final object of attainment of the Mahayana path, our
final goal is the achievement of the two bodies - the Truth Body and the
Form Body. The achievement of these two bodies is completely dependent on
the generating all the realizations of the path. In order to generate all
the realization of the path we need to ensure all the necessary causes and
conditions for generating the realization to come together. For that
reason, therefore we need an understanding of the conventional facet of
reality; the presentation of the conventional truth. Therefore we need an
understanding of dependent arising at the level of causality.
There are different levels of subtleties with regards to the meaning of
dependent arising. The obvious coarse level that we talk about is dependent
arising on the level of causality such as effect depends on the causes. It
is through an understanding of the coarse meaning of dependent arising we
come to understand what is beneficial and what is non-beneficial, what is
virtuous and what is non-virtuous and what should be adopted and what
should be discarded. If we just talk about emptiness right from the
beginning such as “everything is empty, things are empty of inherent
existent” then it would be difficult for us to engage in any meaningful
practice of abandoning of what is to be abandoned and cultivating of what
is to be cultivated. If one has the proper understanding of dependent
arising on the level of causality then our faith in karma and effect will
increase.  With the understanding of dependent arising on the level of
causality, it will assist and help us in our practice of love and
compassion and the cultivation of the altruistic intention; likewise the
practice of perfections.
Many of you may have heard of this before. Je Rinpoche, Lama Tsongkhapa,
once asked Manjushri: “What is the quickest possible way to realize the
subtle meaning of dependent arising i.e. to actualize the correct view of
realities - emptiness.  Manjushri said: “There are three things you need to
do:-
   1. Made heartfelt request to the guru inseparable from the meditational
      deity.
   2. Strive in the accumulation of merit and purify the mind of
      obscurations.
   3. Study and analyze the great treatises.
If you think about of what Manjushri had said, essentially:
   1. You need faith
   2. You need a lot of merit. You need to purify the mind of obscurations
      because of the immeasurable mass of negativities obscuring the mind.
   3. You have to put in effort to study, learning and thinking about the
      meaning of the teaching.
In order for us to realize the ultimate nature of realities -emptiness-
then all these causes and conditions must come together. We cannot do one
and then leave out the others.
We are here to learn about the two facets of realities: conventional truth
and ultimate truth. What we unraveling?  We are unraveling in our mind the
meaning dependent arising on all its levels; from the coarse level to the
most subtle level starting with the dependent arising at the level of
causality, dependent arising in term of dependent* and the dependent
arising in the most subtle form of how things are dependently designated.
Through the understanding of these facets of realities, one comes to have a
very clear understanding of what we are supposed to abandon and what we
should be cultivating. Therefore, we should keep this in our mind right
from the beginning of why we are studying this text.  Of course it is for
the goal as mentioned earlier; ultimately to achieve the two enlightened
bodies- enlightenment. In order for us to do that, we need to have a
correct understanding of the different facets of realities. For that
purpose, we will spend times looking into this text. So we should generate
this type of motivation right from the beginning based on our understanding
of the reason for studying all these.  Then we should practice with
enthusiasm, with joy and with happiness.
We must be aware that in the course of doing something like this, sometime
we will experience problems and obstacles such having difficulties in our
work, we suddenly get sick and so forth. These things do happen. When these
things happen then it is very important to make heartfelt request to the
guru inseparable from one’s deity. We also need to strive as much as
possible in the practices of accumulating merits and purifying the
negativities and obscurations because we have so much negativities and
obscurations. Even though we strive to study but we may find it difficult
to understand. Then we have to work at taming the different layers of
obscurations and negativities. At the same time we have to continuously
reading the text and thinking about it. From our side, we need to put
effort for this. The subject matter that we are going to deal with is quite
difficult and is challenging, but if we get discourage right from the
beginning just because we find it difficult then nothing will work.
Basically we just stop out ourselves. For those who really want to learn
about Tenets, we should have this attitude “I will try my best. No matter
how hard it is, I will put in time and effort”.
In order to engage in the practice of the person of great capacities, one
has a transition from the practices that are shared with the person of
small and medium capacities. We do not just make a jump but we have to move
step by step. This is just talking about sutra. After that one is in the
transition from the sutra to tantra. Many of you have heard that tantra is
a swift path to enlightenment. But what make it possible to achieve
enlightenment so quickly through the practice of tantra? One of the main
deciding factors of whether tantra is a quick path to enlightenment or not
is one’s practice of guru devotion. That is very important in tantra
practice and that is where you have the practice of guru yoga. If you think
about it and analyze why tantra is such a quick path to enlightenment, all
these boil down to the practice of guru yoga.
You may also have heard the Noble Eightfold Path. The first one is right
view. Why does right view is the first of the Noble Eightfold Path? This
implies that whatever we do, including cultivating paths and so forth, is
done on the basis of an understanding of what realities is. That is the
implication. In the technical philosophical language, it is the
understanding of the basis. In layman English, it is the understanding of
what constitute the realties.
In the context of the philosophical study here, we are talking about the
two truths - the two facets of realities. When we have the correct
understanding of the two facets of realities - both the conventional truth
and ultimate truth- then whatever understanding we have of things and
events, our judgment and our understanding will always be correct because
our judgment and understanding is founded on realities and not based on day
dreaming. We just understand realities as it is. Based on the right view,
which is the correct understanding of what constitutes realities then
whatever thought or opinion we may have would be correct because it is
founded on realities. We are just accepting an understanding of the
situation as it is. So with that kind of right view, one would also tend to
have right speech. Based on the understanding of what constitute realities
then the speech, in term of the presentation and the meaning, would be
correct - right speech. Similarly, there will be right action. So with
right view, whatever action one undertake would be correct. Therefore based
on right view, when one has right speech and right action, then there will
be right livelihood i.e. to be able to live the life correctly especially
living a virtuous life. Similarly, one would also have a right effort.
Whether it is the effort of one’s practice or whatever one does in life,
one will have right effort. One also has right mindfulness. So when we have
some control over our body, speech and mind, then it is much easier to have
mindfulness and introspection. With proper mindfulness and introspection,
then it is much easier to develop concentration. There is where right
concentration comes in.
To summarize, having a correct understanding of the different facets of
realities become very important. So in order to have the right view of
realities we need to have an understanding of the different facets of
realities.  In this case, we are talking about the conventional facet -the
conventional truth. In understanding of what conventional truths are, then
one has to understand dependent arising on the level of causality; how
causes and conditions must come together for the desire effect to arise.
Based on the correct understanding of the conventional facet of realities
then one will be able to gradually cultivates and acquires the right speech
and so forth culminating in the achievement of concentration.  From this
short discussion you can see that why it is so important to study, to learn
and to think about the teaching. So learning, studying, hearing and
reflection are very important because there are many people who do not see
the value of learning and studying. Many Buddhists in this world think that
there is no need to study so much. This is a big mistake. As I have said
before and if we think about it, the more we know the greater the depth of
our reflection. The more we have heard the teaching, the more we have
studied, then the depth of our reflection increases because the depth of
our reflection commensurate with the depth of our learning and the depth of
our meditation commensurate with the depth of our reflection. So from this
you can see that how important are learning, studying, thinking and so
forth are. So you can see the importance of learning and reflection. Having
said this, it is not that learning and reflection is easy. They are
challenging and not easy. There will be always difficulties but you will
see the point of how important it is. Even with difficulties, you will be
willing to put up with it and trying your best to get on with it because
you have seen its importance. This advice is for those who really want to
learn. Another thing to note is that this is a long term thing. We need to
accumulate our understanding overtime because we need to have an extensive
knowledge. As it takes time therefore we need to put in time. It is not
going to be accomplished just by coming to class one or twice and thinking
“I will come and then not come.” Then nothing will happen. If you really
want to learn, one important thing is that you must try your best not to
miss the class. You must come to class continuously. That is very
important. Continuity is very important. Many causes and conditions need to
be put together. On top of coming to class uninterruptedly, reading the
text and discussion are also important. If we able to gather all the
mentioned conditions together, even if you do not understand everything,
definitely you will get something. If there is nothing happen after you
have tried with all these conditions coming together then we will see what
need to be done. Before even attempting to put together all the causes and
conditions, if you don’t come to class, you don’t read the text, not
thinking and analyze the teaching and not coming for the discussion and you
come to tell me that you don’t understand then what I am going to do. You
look at the external world. In order for things and events to come about,
back to the example of the sprout, even just for the sprout to arise, the
necessary causes and conditions must come together. It is exactly the same
thing for the internal world of the mind. In order for the positive mental
state of realization and experience to arise, we require all the necessary
conditions to come together. If you have understand what I have said today,
then as much as possible put in your time and effort and try your best.
Please bring your text on the coming lesson as we will start.

*
   1. Dependent arising at the level of causality.
   2. Dependent arising at the level of dependently on parts (Because things
      made up from parts. Whole verses parts)
   3. Dependent arising at the level of dependently designated


