Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson15.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.345808
================================================================================


Question: The Half-Eggists asserts that for the mottled colors on the wing
of the butterfly, the individual colors cast an aspect. For the MOS, when
the karma ripens for a consciousness apprehending the individual color,
both object (the color) and the subject (consciousness) are ripened
simultaneously. If that is the case, since the individual color cast an
aspect, how did it end up still being a consciousness that apprehends the
mottled colors instead of the individual color?
How can it be possible for multiple objects being cast over to the
consciousness and yet there is only one consciousness apprehending the
object? For MOS, they state that every time the object is cast,
`simultaneously there is a subjective aspect. So I was thinking there
should be multiple subjective aspects rather than only one subjective
aspect.
Answer: The SS asserts that consciousnesses are aspected. There is also
discussion about the objective aspect and the subjective aspect in
accordance with the Proponents of an Equal Number of Apprehendeds and
Apprehenders, Half-Eggists, and Non-Pluralists in the SS. It is just that
the SS assert external object, such that the object, from its own side,
cast an aspect of itself to the consciousness perceiving it.
The SS assert external object. They assert that the object, from their own
side, cast an aspect of themselves to the consciousness apprehending it. So
the casting of the aspect comes from the side of the object.
However for the MOS, although such language is used, depending on whether
it is translated as the aspect is cast or is delivered, the question is
whether this casting of the aspect is coming from the side of the object or
not.
To the MOS, the aspect of the object that is cast is not from the side of
the object, but it is due to the ripening of a particular karmic
seed/propensity.
Although the language used is the same “the aspect is cast or delivered”
but the meaning is different.
|Sutra School                             |Mind Only School                     |
|Assert external object                   |Do not assert external object        |
|Assert the object, from its own side,    |Assert that the aspect of the object |
|cast an aspect of itself to the          |that is cast is not from the side of |
|consciousness apprehending it, i.e. the  |the object, but it is due to the     |
|casting of the aspect comes from the side|ripening of a particular karmic seed |
|of the object.                           |                                     |


Question: My question will be equally applicable to the SS, how could it be
possible that multiple objects are actually cast, so when the consciousness
apprehending it supposed to be generated every time an object is cast. Then
how did it end up that multiple objects appear and only one consciousness
apprehending the overall mottle rather than individual color.
Khen Rinpoche: Of the three positions, which position is this?
Student: In the root text, it is the Half-Eggists but Khen Rinpoche
explained it from the other commentary, it is from the Non-Pluralists.
Answer: This is one particular way of explaining the Non-Pluralists
position - one consciousness is generated in many aspects. Using eye-
consciousness apprehending blue as an example, the eye-consciousness
apprehending blue is just one consciousness, but it is not just the blue
that is appearing to the eye-consciousness.
Everything that is part of the collection of blue including the
impermanence of blue, the blue being a product, blue being impermanent,
blue being a functional thing, and whatever appear as there is so many
isolates, all appear to the eye-consciousness apprehending blue. Although
everything within the collection of blue appears appear to the eye-
consciousness apprehending blue, but the eye-consciousness apprehending
blue is only generated in the aspect of blue. It is not generated into the
aspect of blue’s impermanence, blue being a product and so forth.
Student: Back to the example of eye-consciousness apprehending blue, based
on the position of the Proponents of an Equal Number of Apprehendeds and
Apprehenders, then there will be multiple apprehenders having the different
aspects of the blue?
Ven Gyurme: There are two positions, either generated simultaneously or
serially.
Question: The MOS asserts that there are no external objects.
The Mind Only True Aspectarian asserts gross object as not polluted by the
latent ignorance of the mind.
The Mind Only False Aspectarian do not assert gross object. What is the
difference between external object and gross object?
For the MOS external object does not exist, but does the gross object for
the MOS exists? Does it exist for both True Aspectarian and False
Aspectarian? Is it better to be a True Aspectarian or a False Aspectarian?
Does the word True and False have anything to do with right view?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Good to be both.
Answer: In order to understand the MOS assertion that there is no external
object, in the first place we have to understand what an external object
is. For that, we first have to look at the tenet below the MOS.
The SS assert external object. What is their explanation of an external
object?
The SS assert directionally partless particle. It is the coming together of
many of these directionally partless particles then you have a gross
form/object. Then this gross object can then act as the objective condition
for the production of a consciousness apprehending it.
According to the SS there is a cause and effect relationship. In the case
of an eye-consciousness apprehending vase, the vase must exist prior to the
eye-consciousness apprehending it.
Vase acts as the objective condition for the production of an eye-
consciousness apprehending vase.
So there is a sequence: the former the vase, and the latter the eye-
consciousness apprehending it. They are not simultaneous.
This is the explanation of what an external object is according to the SS,
but this explanation of an external object is not accepted by the MOS.
When we say the MOS do not assert external object, essentially what we are
saying is that MOS do not accept the explanation of the SS. Does this mean
that the MOS does not assert a vase?
MOS do assert vase exist. They also assert that the eye-consciousness
apprehending vase exists. Both the object and subject do exist, but both
are produced simultaneously i.e. their arising is not sequential.
Both the object and subject are produced simultaneously. They both arise
from the ripening of one imprint/ predisposition. This one
imprint/predisposition produces both the objective aspect and the
subjective aspect.
Therefore the MOS asserts that both the vase and an eye-consciousness
apprehending vase are produce simultaneously from the ripening of one
karmic predisposition/imprint. This one imprint/predisposition produces
both the objective aspect and subjective aspect. Unlike the SS, it is
simultaneously.
In the first place, the MOS do not assert directionally partless particle.
If they do not assert directionally partless particle, then you cannot have
a gross form that is the result of the coming together of many
directionally partless particles. So, if there isn’t such a gross form,
then there cannot be a valid cognizer apprehending such an object.
This is the MOS reason for refuting external object. According to MOS, they
say that directionally partless particle does not exist.
If the directionally partless particle does not exists as you (the SS)
claimed to exist, then how can you have gross form that is the result of
the coming together of the many of such directionally partless particles?
If there isn’t any such a gross form, then there cannot be any valid
cognizer apprehending it. Therefore it does not exist in the first place.
This is the MOS refutation of external object.
In short, when the MOS says that there aren’t any external objects,
basically what they are saying is that the external object that is asserted
by the SS does not exist.
|Sutra School                           |Mind Only School                       |
|Assert external object.                |Do not assert external object          |
|Because they assert directionally      |Because they do not assert             |
|partless particle.                     |directionally partless particle        |
|                                       |There isn’t any gross form then there  |
|The gross form is the result of the    |cannot be any valid cognizer           |
|coming together of many directionally  |apprehending it. So external object    |
|partless particles.                    |does not exist.                        |
|This gross object act as the objective |                                       |
|condition for the production of a      |                                       |
|consciousness apprehending it.         |                                       |
|For an eye-consciousness apprehending  |For an eye-consciousness apprehending  |
|vase, the vase must exist prior to the |vase, both vase and eye-consciousness  |
|eye-consciousness apprehending it. It  |apprehending vase are produce          |
|is a cause and effect relationship.    |simultaneously from the ripening of one|
|Vase acts as the objective condition   |karmic predisposition. So this one     |
|for the production of an               |predisposition produces both the       |
|eye-consciousness apprehending vase.   |objective aspect and subjective aspect.|


The Mind Only True Aspectarian does assert gross object.
The Mind Only False Aspectarian does not assert gross object. To the Mind
Only False Aspectarian, to assert gross object is the same as asserting
external object.
So what is gross object? What is a gross blue or gross vase?
When we think of blue, gross blue, what does it means? Gross blue means a
very vivid blue is appearing.
What about gross vase? Gross vase is a vase that we see occupying a space
there.
The Mind Only True Aspectarian asserts gross object. Whether is gross blue
or gross vase, they assert the appearance of blue as gross blue and the
appearance of vase as gross vase is valid. That appearance is correct
because, to the True Aspectarian, it exists in the way it appears.
As in our earlier discussion, for the Mind Only True Aspectarian, the mind
that is apprehending blue as gross blue is not mistaken with respect to
those factors of appearance.
For the Mind Only False Aspectarian, they do not assert gross blue because
to do that, that would mean it is the same as saying there are external
objects.
To the Mind Only True Aspectarian, they have no problem of saying that the
mind is not mistaken with respect to the factor of blue appearing as gross
blue, or the factor of vase appearing as gross vase. That does not mean
that there is an external blue or there is external vase. What gross blue
or gross vase is, as what I have said earlier:-
- the gross blue is just that the very vivid blue appearing
- the gross vase, there is a vase that is occupying a space.
The Mind Only False Aspectarian does not assert gross form, gross sound and
so forth. Because, for them, to assert that there is gross form and so
forth, would be the same as saying that there are external form and so
forth.
If you remember, the Mind Only False Aspectarian asserts that the mind is
mistaken with respect to form appearing as form, and form appearing as
gross form.
So for the Mind Only False Aspectarian, with respect to the direct
perceiver apprehending form, that direct perceiver:-
 - is mistaken with respect to the factor of appearance of form appearing
 as form
 - is also mistaken with respect to form appearing as gross form.
The Mind Only False Aspectarian asserts that the direct perceiver
apprehending form is mistaken with respect to form appearing as form
because there is an appearance of an external form.
The False Aspectarian’s understanding of the True Aspectarian’s assertion
is that what the True Aspectarian says about form appearing as form is form
appearing as external form.
Both the Mind Only True Aspectarian and Mind Only False Aspectarian assert
that the eye-consciousness apprehending blue, for example, is a mistaken
consciousness, but they differ as to how that consciousness is mistaken and
what it is mistaken with respect to.
For the Mind Only True Aspectarian, the eye-consciousness apprehending blue
is not mistaken with respect to the factor of blue appearing as blue.
But the Mind Only False Aspectarian assert that the eye consciousness
apprehending blue is mistaken with the factor of blue appearing as blue.
Because of this difference, then there comes the difference in asserting
about whether the blue appearing as gross blue is mistaken or not.
|Mind Only True Aspectarian             |Mind Only False Aspectarian            |
|Do assert gross object                 |Do not assert gross object because to  |
|                                       |do that, that would the same as saying |
|Assert that the mind that is           |there are external objects.            |
|apprehending blue as gross blue is not |Assert that the mind is mistaken with  |
|mistaken with respect to those factors |respect to form appearing as form, and |
|of appearance, it exists in the way it |form appearing as gross form.          |
|appears.                               |With respect to the direct perceiver   |
|The gross blue is the vivid blue       |apprehending form, that direct         |
|appearing.                             |perceiver is mistaken with respect to: |
|That does not mean that there is an    |- the factor of appearance of form     |
|external blue.                         |appearing as form (because there is an |
|                                       |appearance of an external form)        |
|                                       |- form appearing as gross form.        |
|                                       |Eye consciousness apprehending blue is |
|                                       |mistaken with the factor of blue       |
|Eye-consciousness apprehending blue is |appearing as blue.                     |
|not mistaken with respect to the factor|                                       |
|of blue appearing as blue.             |                                       |


There are two kind of emptiness that is described in the MOS as in the
illustrations of the two selflessnesses (in the root text).
For example, an eye-consciousness apprehending blue, although there is just
one consciousness, there are many ways in which objects can appear to this
consciousness.
To the eye-consciousness apprehending blue, there are many different
appearances:-
  - there is the appearance of blue as blue
  - there is an appearance of blue as an external blue,
  - there is an appearance of blue as the natural base of engagement of
  blue (as the referent for applying the term “blue”)
  - there is the appearance of blue existing by way of its own character as
  the basis for applying the term “blue”
There are all these different appearances to one consciousness apprehending
it. All these appearances are not due to just one karmic
predisposition/latency, but it is the ripening of different karmic
latencies.
To this eye-consciousness apprehending blue, there are many different
things appearing to it, and of all the things that are just mentioned, the
appearance of external blue is an object of negation, that is what needs to
be abandoned and what need to be refuted.
The appearance of blue as an external object and the appearance of blue
existing by way of its own character as the basis for applying the term
“blue” do not exist in the way they appear. Therefore they are the objects
of negation or refutation
|Object of negation:                                                            |
|Blue as an external blue                                                       |
|Blue existing by way of its own character as the basis for applying the term   |
|“blue”                                                                         |


According to the SS:-
 -blue exist by way of its own character, and
 -blue exists by way of its own character  as the basis for applying the
 term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.
According to the MOS,
 -blue exist by way of its own character,
 -but blue does not exists by way of its own character  as the basis for
 applying the term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending
 blue.
Both the SS and the MOS assert that:
- there is a blue that is the natural base of engagement of blue, or there
is a blue that exist as the basis for applying the term “blue” to the
conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.
But the MOS says that the blue that is the basis for applying the term
“blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue:
  - exists as an imputation by conceptual consciousness, and
  - does not exist by way of its own character.
The SS asserts that there is a blue that is the natural base of engagement
of blue, or there is a blue exists by way of its own character as the basis
for applying the term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending
blue. This blue exists as its own uncommon mode of subsistence; that means
from its own side.
The SS asserts that:
 -blue exist by way of its own character, and
 -blue exists by way of its own character  as the basis for applying the
 term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.
This is different from the MOS.
The SS says that blue that exists by way of its own character as the basis
for applying the term “blue’ to the conceptual consciousness apprehending
blue cannot exist as an imputation by conceptual consciousness.
This blue that is the basis for applying the term “blue” has to exist by
way of its own character and therefore is not something that is imputed by
a conceptual consciousness.
 So according to the SS, if you say that blue does not exist by way of its
 own character as the basis for applying the term “blue” to the conceptual
 consciousness apprehending blue, then it would make blue similar to a
 rabbit horn because there is a conception of a rabbit horn, although
 rabbit horn does not exist.
What is the basis for applying the term “horn of a rabbit” by that
conceptual consciousness?  It is rabbit horn.
So, because of this, the SS asserts that:
 -blue exist by way of its own character as the basis for applying the term
 “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.
 -this blue that exists by way of its own character as the basis for
 applying the term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue
 cannot exist as something that is imputed by a conceptual consciousness.
|Sutra School                           |Mind Only School                       |
|Both schools assert that blue exists by way of its own character.              |
|Both schools assert that there is a blue that is the basis for applying the    |
|term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue                  |
|Blue that is the basis for applying the|The blue that is the basis for applying|
|term “blue” to the conceptual          |the term “blue” to the conceptual      |
|consciousness apprehending blue exists |consciousness apprehending blue does   |
|by way of its own character. It exists |not exist by way of its own character. |
|as its own uncommon mode of subsistence|It exists as merely imputed by a       |
|and cannot exist as something that is  |conceptual consciousness.              |
|imputed by conceptual consciousness.   |.                                      |


So blue is blue from its own entity. Blue being blue is not something that
is merely imputed either by conception or by term. So blue being blue, it
is from its own side, it is the entity/nature of blue.
Whether it is blue or is form -the form being form, the form being
established as form, the form in the nature of form- it is from the side of
the form itself and from the entity of form. Form being form is not
something that is merely an imputation by a conceptual thought or by term.
If form being form is something that is merely imputed either by term or by
thought, then that would make form no different from a rabbit horn.
 So for this reason, for the SS, whether you understand is blue or form,
 blue being blue or form being form that is from the side of blue, and the
 entity of blue is like that. It is not something that is just merely
 imputed by thought or by term. For that reason, therefore if you think
 about blue being a basis for applying the term blue to the conceptual
 consciousness apprehending blue, that has to exist by way of its own
 character. It cannot be merely imputed by thought or by terms. Otherwise
 that would make the blue that is the basis for applying the term blue
 similar to a rabbit horn.
 According to the MOS, form exists from its own side. Although form exists
 from its own side, form exists as the basis for applying the term form to
 the conceptual consciousness apprehending form. Although such a form
 exist, it does not exist by way of its own character.
To the MOS, the form that is existing by way of its own character as the
basis for applying the term “form” to the conceptual consciousness
apprehending form does not exist.
As discussed in the last lesson, if form exists by way of its own character
as the basis for applying the term form, to the conceptual consciousness
apprehending form then what is the problem? In the case of a mind thinking
about vase, what is the basis of engagement of the mind apprehending vase?
It is a flat-base bulbous thing. Then just by seeing the flat-base bulbous
thing, the idea of vase would come about, but that is not the case.
The conceptual thought plays an important role here.
First you see a basis. Then there is a concept applying a term or name to
that basis arises; there is a conceptual thought trying to label or impute
it.
In the case of a vase, we see a flat-base bulbous thing. Then conceptuality
gets involved that labeled it as vase. What is the basis for applying the
term vase? It is the flat-base bulbous thing.
This flat-base bulbous thing being the basis for applying the term vase is
coming from the side of the conceptuality.
In relationship to this conceptuality imputing vase, this flat-base bulbous
thing becomes the basis for applying the term vase.
So that flat-base bulbous thing being the basis for applying the term vase
is dependent on the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase.
If the flat-base bulbous thing does exists by way of its own character as
the basis for applying the term vase, then anybody who sees that flat-base
bulbous thing without even thinking about the concept or label vase, he
should be able to see vase there and then.
The flat-base bulbous thing is the basis for applying the term “vase” of
the conception apprehending vase.
The flat-base bulbous thing is the basis for applying the term “vase” but
this flat-base bulbous thing being the basis for applying the term “vase”
does not exist from its own side/by way of its own character.
If this flat-base bulbous thing does exists by way of its own character as
the basis for applying the term “vase” then just by seeing that flat-base
bulbous thing, you should be able to see vase because it is coming from its
own side. The term or expression “vase” in relation to this flat-base
bulbous thing has a factor of being imputed by conceptuality.
Let’s take one specific individual as an example. This one specific
individual is regarded as wise and knowledgeable. So the term “wise” is
applied. The term or expression “wise” is referring to something engaging
in that person. So that person is the basis for this expression “wise.” It
is also the basis for the conception of a wise person. But that very same
person can be regarded as an idiot or a fool or stupid by other people.
Then for those people, that person is the basis for the expression “stupid”
and is also the basis for the conception of that person as stupid.
So that person is wise to some, and is foolish to others. So these are two
different characteristics exist on that one person:
 -there is a factor of that person being wise, and
 -there is a factor of that person being stupid
But that factor of being wise or stupid does not exist from the side of
that person.
➢ The person does not exist by way of its own character as the basis for
  applying the term “stupid”.
➢ The person does not exist by way of its own character as the natural
  base of engagement for the conception thinking that the person is stupid.


➢ Similarly, that person does not exist by way of its own character as the
  basis for applying the term “wise”.
➢ Neither does the person exist by way of its own character as the base of
  engagement of the conception apprehending a wise person.
If that person exists by way of its own character as the basis for applying
the term “stupid” and at the same time the person also exists by way of its
own character as the basis for applying the term “wise” then it would end
up with an absurd position, that the person is both wise and stupid at the
same time.
So from this example, it is clear that that one person does not exist by
way of its own character as the basis for applying the term “wise”, neither
does the person exist by way of its own character as the basis for applying
the term “stupid”.
What you have to understand is: If things and events exist by way of its
own character as the basis for applying a specific term, then what is the
problem? For example:
- Why form does not exist by way of its own character as the basis for
applying the term “form”.
- Why form does not exist by way of its own character as the natural base
of engagement of the term “form” or for the conception apprehending form?
This understanding can have practical application. For example, try to
equalize this to the eight worldly dharmas. You are either been praised or
been criticized. The part of you that is being praised, you can just think
that you are not a basis existing by way of its own character as the basis
for the praise. Similarly, when you are criticized, the part of being
criticized, you can think that you do not exist by way of own character as
the basis for those criticisms.
It is helpful if we think about this in relation to how we react to praise
and criticism, because we understand that we as one person do not exist by
way of its own character as the basis for the praise, so that means the
praise is merely imputed. So, when we are praised there is no need to get
super excited or being carried away. Similarly, when we are criticized,
this criticism is merely imputed by conceptual thought precisely because we
as a person do not exist by way of its own character as the natural base of
the engagement of those criticisms or hurtful words.
According to the MOS, the person who is receiving the praise is truly
established, and the person who is giving praise is also truly established.
However, the praise itself is merely imputed.
In the case of Khen Rinpoche, he exists. He is known as Geshe Chonyi. He is
the basis of designation of the term “Geshe Chonyi.”
Then there is a person who designates the term “Geshe Chonyi.” The
designator, the person who designates the term, is truly established. He
exists, and he is truly established, but the name that is imputed as “Geshe
Chonyi” is merely imputed.
The fact of him being Geshe Chonyi does not exist from its own side. There
is a basis of designation - him, the being. What is being imputed is the
title “Geshe Chonyi”. So, him, is the basis of designation and the thing
that is imputed is “Geshe Chonyi”.
This term “Geshe Chonyi” does not exist from the side of the basis of
designation.
If this term “Geshe Chonyi” exists from the side of the basis of
designation, then whoever comes in should be able to see Geshe Chonyi.
So the factor of him being Geshe Chonyi is merely imputed.
The factor of him being Geshe Chonyi does not exist from the side of the
basis of designation.
Similarly, he is also a monk, but he does not exist by way of its own
character as the basis for applying the term “monk”.
So him, the self, the person is the basis of designation for “Geshe
Chonyi”,or “monk” or “man”, but the factor of him being Geshe Chonyi, or
the factor of monk is merely imputed. It does not exist from the side of
the basis of designation. What is the basis of designation? “Him”, the “I”,
the person is the basis of designation.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): There is one story. I was walking in the
Botanic garden, and after that I came out. While I was waiting at the gate
for somebody to pick me up. There was one tourist couple, foreigner, came
up to me and asked: “Are you working here?” Maybe this is the uniform
(referring to his robe) for workers at the Botanical Garden, as they don’t
know this is the costume of a monk. I said “No”. They were waiting for the
tourist bus, and they asked me whether the bus will come here or not. I
said “I think so, as this is the only place that the bus will come.” I was
shocked myself. So this shows that it doesn’t exist from one’s side.
In dependence on the basis of designation “him”, then he is known as monk,
he is known as “Geshe Chonyi”.
The factor of “Geshe Chonyi” or the factor of monk does not exist from the
side of the basis of designation.
The factor of “Geshe Chonyi” or the factor of monk, are merely labeled
thought.
At the end of the day what you have to understand is, using form as
example, why form does not exist by way of its own character as the basis
for applying the term “form” for the conceptual consciousness apprehending
form?
Every phenomenon has a name. Everything is known as something, and it is
called “something”. Now we are looking at the name. How does the name of
any particular object exist? Is it established from the side of the object
itself? Is there something being uncommon or peculiar to the object? Or is
there some other ways of existing?
According to MOS, an object is called “such and such a name”, and “such and
such a name” does not come from the side of the object, but comes from the
side of thought; it comes from the side of terminology. The MOS is trying
to show us that the thoughts and terms are more powerful. They are
responsible for the name. The name is not coming from the side of the
object, but rather it is the thought and the term that we impute that
accounts for the name.
Whatever objects there are, say objects one, two, three or four, and these
objects are respectively the basis of designation for the label “Object
One”, “Object Two”, “Object Three” and “Object Four.” These four things are
the basis of designation. What is imputed? It is object one, object two,
object three and object four.
When we say Object One, it is referring to something. When we say Object
Two, it is also referring to something, i.e. the term is engaging in
something and it is referring to something. What we are trying to do now is
to discover how this term engages its object.
Is the basis of the term “Object One” coming exist from the side of
designation or not?  According to the MOS, the object that has the name
“Object One” does not exist by way of its own character as the basis for
applying the term “Object One”. That object one that is the basis for
applying the term “Object One” does not exist by way of its own character
from the side of the object, the basis of designation. If it does, there
will be a lot of logical inconsistencies, faults and fallacies.
In short, according to MOS, whatever phenomena in question, they do not
exist by way of its own character as the basis for applying the name that
is given to it.
Although things do not exist in such a way, but things appear to exist in
such a way.
Imagine you see a flat-base bulbous thing, and your eye-consciousness
perceives a flat-base bulbous thing.
To you, that flat-base bulbous thing appears as a vase, it also appears to
you as the basis of engagement of the term vase.
That flat-base bulbous thing appears from its own side as the thing that
the term “vase” is referring to.
Is the flat-base bulbous thing, something that is referred to by the term
“vase”? Yes
When you think of vase, ‘vase’ is referring to something. So what you see
is that the flat-base bulbous thing appearing to you as the thing that the
term “vase” is getting at.
The flat-base bulbous thing is the basis of engagement of the term “vase.”
It is the basis for applying the term vase. But how does the flat-base
bulbous thing appears to you? The flat-base bulbous thing appears from its
own side, by way of its own character, as the thing the term “vase” is
referring to.
When you look at the flat-base bulbous thing, what appears to you is that
there is a flat-base bulbous thing existing by way of its own character as
the thing that is referred to by the term vase. That is what appears to
you.
That flat-base bulbous thing is by way of its own character, from its own
side, is the thing that term “vase” to the conceptual consciousness
apprehending form. We have that appearance and that is what the MOS
refutes. The MOS says that appearance is mistaken.
So there is an appearance of a flat-base bulbous thing, appearing from its
own side, without being merely imputed by thought or term, as the thing
that is referred to by the term “vase.” That does not exist.
The MOS refutes such appearance as it does not exist in the way it appears.
On the other hand, the SS accepts that appearance is valid, because just as
the flat-base bulbous thing appears to exist by way of its own character as
the thing that is referred to by the term “vase”, just as it appears this
is how it exists. According to the Sutra School, that is valid. They also
assert external object. Therefore for them, the Sutra School do not assert
the non-existence of object and subject as different substances.
I think we will not talk anymore about what ever being the natural base of
engagement of whatever. You get headache, I get headache.
Question: Can I confirm that to the sense consciousness apprehending blue:-
    - the appearance of blue existing as the referent name of blue,
    - appearance of blue existing as the natural base of applying the name
      blue,
    - appearance of blue existing as the natural basis of engagement of
      blue,
all exist by way of its own character?
Answer: Like what was mentioned earlier, to the eye-consciousness
apprehending blue, many things appear such as appearance of blue as blue,
appearance of external blue, appearance of blue as the basis for applying
the term blue, and there is also appearance of blue existing by way of its
own character as the basis for applying blue. All these appear to the eye-
consciousness apprehending blue.
Question: But not everything exists in the way it appears right? Like
external blue doesn’t exist in the way it appears right?
Answer: Since sense consciousnesses are necessarily mistaken, therefore it
is clear that it does not mean that whatever appears to them necessarily
exist. For “the appearance of blue existing by way of its own character”,
you all must get what exactly we are talking about. We are not talking
about blue but we are talking about there is an appearance of blue existing
by way of its own character as the basis of applying the term blue. In the
first place, this blue existing by way of its own character as the basis of
applying the term blue is an imputational nature. It is not just an
imputational nature, it is an imputational nature which is non-existent.
Question: But such an imputational nature also applies to a sense
consciousness?
Answer: Such a non-existent Imputational nature appears also to a sense
consciousness, but it does not exist in the way it appears.
Question: Can I confirm that referent name, base of applying the name, and
base of engagement, all these three phrases refer to the same thing?
Answer: Yes, can be the same. The basis for applying the term or the basis
of engagement of a conception are two different phases but they mean the
same thing.
Question: To the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue, the actual
object blue appears to it but the conceptual consciousness is only able to
realize the meaning generality of blue.
Ven Gyurme: What it realizes? It realizes blue.
Question: Then the appearing object is the mental image of blue?
Answer: Yes.
Question: To the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue, the appearing
object is mental image of blue. It is not able to distinguish between the
mental image of blue and what it realizes, blue. Therefore, this is the
same as SS as being mistaken. However, do the MOS assert a more subtle mode
in that the conceptual consciousness does not realize that the [mental
image] is merely imputed by thought? Can one say that the blue is the
actual object whereas blue as the basis for applying the term blue is the
mental image/ meaning generality of the object?
Ven Gyurme: These two, blue and blue as a basis for applying the term blue
are not the same.
Question: One is an actual object and one is the mental image of the
object, can we say that?
Khen Rinpoche: Eye-consciousness or conceptual consciousness?
Student:  Conceptual consciousness.
Answer: For a conceptual consciousness apprehending blue, what does it not
realize?
Student: It does not realize that it is merely imputing the term blue onto
the base.
There are three things here for objects of negation that appears to a
conceptual consciousness.
   1. The object blue
   2. The mental image of blue
   3. The mental image of blue being established by way of its own
      character.
I am saying the mental image of blue not being established by way of its
own character. The actual object blue is established by way of its own
character, but the mental image of blue is not established by way of its
own character, but it does not realized that. The thing to refute is that
to realize that the mental image of blue is not established by way of its
own character.
Answer: The whole discussion about an object being the basis for applying a
particular term is not just for proving or establishing that the mental
image is imputed by thought. What we are trying to establish is that, in
the case of blue:-
 - blue does not exist by way of its own character as the basis for
 applying the term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue
That is what we are trying to establish.
Question: So, it has nothing to do with the mental image being involved?
Khen Rinpoche: Is the mental image of vase, the basis of engagement of the
term vase?
Student: For the conceptual consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche: No. The question is: Is the mental image of vase the basis
of engagement of the term vase? The flat-base bulbous thing is the basis of
engagement; not the mental image of the flat-base bulbous thing. That is
something to think about.
The mental image of the vase cannot be the basis for engagement of the term
“vase”, because whatever is the basis of engagement of the term “vase” is
vase. Necessarily vase, something there from its own side.



