Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson26.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.380904
================================================================================


Student: In the last class, you asked: “Is the inferential cognizer that
realizes the impermanence of sound a wrong consciousness?” It is should be
a mistaken but not a wrong consciousness because:
• the impermanent sound appeared to be inherently existent to that
  inferential cognizer, therefore it is mistaken.
• the inferential cognizer does realize the impermanent sound, therefore it
  is not a wrong consciousness.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Correct. Not wrong consciousness.
Student: In the MOS, there are three natures. The other-powered natures
come about by causes and conditions. The imputational natures don’t come
about by causes and conditions. Do thoroughly established natures come
about by causes and conditions?
Khen Rinpoche: Thoroughly established nature is permanent. A permanent
phenomenon does not arise in dependence on causes and conditions. Those
phenomena that arise in dependence on causes and conditions are other-
powered phenomena.

We talked about the object of negation according to the CMWS. The analogy
of mistakenly a coil of rope to be a snake is perhaps the best illustration
that shows how all phenomena are merely imputed by thought.
Of course, there are also other examples such as using the analogy of
illusion, mirage and so forth. If we look at the example of an illusory
elephant that is conjured by a magician, we may see the illusory elephant
due to the spell or whatever that is being used. If we search for the fully
qualified actual elephant on the basis of that appearance as an elephant,
we will not be able to point to a real elephant there.
When the analogy such as the dream elephant or seeing a coil of rope as a
snake is applied to the self or the person or the ‘I’, when you look for
the ‘I’ or the person on the aggregates or among the basis of designation -
the aggregates- you will not be able to point to or find the ‘I’, although
the ‘I’ appears to be one with the aggregates or among the aggregates. So,
if you look for such an ‘I’, you will not able to find it.
Perhaps the most important assertion of the CMWS is that all phenomena,
anything and everything that exist, includes the ‘I’, the self or the
person, exist as merely imputed by thought. The way to understand how all
phenomena exist as merely imputed by thought is to employ those analogies
that were mentioned earlier. It is important to understand what it means by
merely imputed by thought. So gaining an understanding of this is very
important.
We need to understand what it actually means when we say that all phenomena
are merely imputed by thought; such as the ‘I’ or the person that is merely
imputed in dependence upon the basis of designation – the aggregates. For
us, who do not has any understanding of the ultimate nature of reality –
the emptiness of phenomena- so whatever we look at or thinks about,
everything or all phenomena appear to the mind as truly existence,
appearing as inherently existence, existing from its own side.
The most difficult thing for us is not able to distinguish the difference
between existence and inherent existence. For us, whatever appears to us,
the phenomena appear as inherently existence. We think this is how things
exist; if they exist, they are necessary inherently existence. That is the
most important thing for us to differentiate between existence and
inherently existence.
In his ‘Precious Garland’, Nagarjuna say that we should look for the ‘I’ on
the basis of designation. In this case, the basis of designation is the
aggregates: the body and mind. We should investigate to see if the ‘I’ is
among the aggregates. As we are made up of the four elements, is the ‘I’ or
person the earth, water, fire or wind?  Or is the ‘I’ or person the
consciousness? We should also investigate to see is the ‘I’ or person the
collection of all these together.
When we think of ourselves or the ‘I’ or the person, what naturally comes
to mind is that the ‘I’ appears to exist from the side of the aggregates.
We don’t think about that there is the ‘I’ somewhere. Probably we think the
‘I’ is somewhere either on the body and mind, one of those things or it is
the collection of those things.  This is how the ‘I’ appears to us. Not
only that, we believe the ‘I’ is probably like that. But the question is;
“Does the ‘I’ exist in the way it appears?” Although it appears in such a
way, will we be able to find the ‘I’ among the basis of designation?
Nagarjuna encourages us to look and search for this ‘I’, “Is it the body?
Is it the mind? And so forth”.  He concludes by saying that if you look for
it, at the end of the day, you would not be able to point to the ‘I’.  You
are not be able to point to the body or the mind or anything that you can
say; “That is the ‘I’ or the person”.
Although the ‘I’ or the person appears to exist inherently, appears to
exist from its own side, and appears to be findable among the basis of
designation - the aggregates – which is the body and mind, but if you look
for it, you will not be able to find such an ‘I.’ The unfindability of such
an inherently existence ‘I’ upon searching for it shows that the ‘I’ does
not exist inherently.
At the end of the day, what you find is the emptiness of the inherently
existence ‘I’. If we look for the ‘I’ or the person among the basis of
designation, and you eliminates one by one but still you are not able to
point to or find the ‘I’. That will naturally lead us thinking: “If that is
the case, does that means the ‘I’ does not exist?”  On analysis upon
looking for the ‘I’ among the basis of designation, although at the end of
the day you will not be able to find such an ‘I’ or the person that does
not mean that the ‘I’ is non-existence. That would be incorrect. Obviously
the ‘I’ do exist and we know that from our own experience. Definitely there
is a self or a person wishes to be happy and does not want to suffer. That
is very clear. Obviously there is an ‘I’. Although, at the end of the day,
you will not be able to find the ‘I’ but that does not mean you have found
the non-existence of the ‘I’. This is the difference.  So at the end of the
search, what you have not found is the ‘I,’ this does not mean that you
have found that the ‘I’ does not exist in the first place. That is
different from finding the non-existence of the ‘I.’ It makes a difference.

It is clearly evident that we exist as an ‘I’ or a person that does not
want to suffer. There is an ‘I’ or a person that wishes to be happy. We all
can establish this through common sense and our common experience. It is
foolish to say the ‘I’ does not exist. Obviously the ‘I’ exist.
The question is; “How does the ‘I’ exist?”
Of course ‘I’ exist, but the ‘I’ is not the basis of designation.
The ‘I’ is not the body or mind.
The ‘I’ is neither the collection of the body and mind.
The ‘I’ cannot be found on the basis of designation but yet the ‘I’ exists.

At the end of the day, how does the ‘I’ exist?
‘I’ exist but is not among the basis of designation.
It does not exist on the basis of designation.
It is not the basis of designation.
What ‘I’ is none other than that which is merely imputed or posited by the
mind.
There is nothing more to the ‘I’ other than being merely imputed by
thought.
‘I’ exists as that and nothing more. That is how the ‘I’ exists.
How does the ‘I’ exist?
The ‘I’ exists as that which is merely imputed in dependence upon the
aggregates -the basis of designation.
The ‘I’ does not exist inherently.
The ‘I’ exists as that which is merely imputed and dependence upon
aggregates.
For that reason, the ‘I’ is merely imputed by thought.
According to the CMWS, when we think about the emptiness of inherent
existence, we should reflect on the emptiness of inherent existence on the
basis of the ‘I’ or the person first, rather than thinking about the
emptiness of inherent existence of phenomena, other than the ‘I.’ It is
said that it is easier to gain an initial comprehension of the emptiness of
inherent existence if we think about it on the basis of the ‘I’ or the
person.
However this doesn’t mean that it will be easy. It is extremely difficult
to understand the emptiness of inherent existence. In order to understand
or to realize emptiness we first have to identify correctly and experience
what exactly is the target and what exactly are you negating. In technical
language, you call that the object of negation. In this case, in relation
to the ‘I’, it would be the inherently existence ‘I’.
To be able to identify and experience it, it is really difficult. It is
very difficult because for us, we cannot differentiate between the inherent
existence ‘I’ which does not exist at all and the conventionally existence
‘I’ which does exist. To us, these two are mixed up. Therefore we find it
very difficult to identify correctly and experience the target. What
exactly are you targeting at? What exactly are you negating?
The greatest difficulty is to differentiate between existence and inherent
existence. For us, we think that anything that exists means they must be
inherently existence. We cannot differentiate between these two. This is
the greatest difficulty. Because it is so difficult, therefore everybody
else starting from the AMWS and the tenets below it   asserts that if
things exist they must exist inherently. Otherwise they cannot exist.
Because of the great difficulty in distinguishing between actual existence
and inherent existence, everybody else, with the exception of the CMWS,
believes that things exist inherently, they are findable, and you
definitely will be able to point to something that you can say is the
object.
To even entertain the idea that things and events are merely imputed by the
mind, for most people that mean you can just make up anything. If things
are merely imputed by the mind, basically, it means that you can just make
up anything with your mind. For vast majority of people, it is an untenable
idea. How can that be? Definitely there must be something about things and
events that must have something from their own side, something there
inherently existence. Therefore, with the exception of the CMWS, everybody
asserts that if it exists, it is necessarily inherently existence.
The GES and the SS assert external objects. They assert that the external
objects basically are findable, i.e. if you look for it, you will be able
to point to something that is the external object. But for the MOS, they do
not assert external object. According to them, if you look for the external
object, you will not be able to find it. Therefore they refute the external
object.
Whether it is the GES and the SS assertion of external object or whether it
is the MOS refutation of external object, basically their assertion or
refutation of external object hinges on whether, from their view, the
external object can be found or not.
The CMWS assert external object as well. But their reasons for asserting
external object is unlike the GES and the SS. The CMWS do not assert
external object for the reason that they are findable. According to the
CMWS, everything and anything that exist can only exist as merely imputed
by mind; they are not findable upon analysis.
Because external objects and internal objects, apprehender and apprehended,
object and subject exist conventionally or they are conventionally
existence, therefore external object can exist. How do they exist? External
object exists conventionally. They are conventionally existence. For the
Prasangika or the CMWS, they assert external object and external objects
are conventionally existence.
The most difficult thing about the CMWS view is to understand how things
can exist as merely imputed by thought only. It is extremely complicated.
While on one hand, anything that exist can exist as merely imputed by the
thought, but on the other hand, it does not mean that everything that is
imputed by thought exist. For things to exist, they have to exist as merely
imputed by thought. But this does not mean that anything that is merely
imputed by thought exists.
Khen Rinpoche in English: Maybe I will give one example about myself. I
have some stories about my key chain. This key chain is given by someone to
me six or seven years ago. The first time when I got this key chain I
thought that the ‘G’ is for Geshe. This symbolized Geshe Chonyi. That is
why they put the ‘G’ there I thought. Almost for five to six years, I
believe that this symbolized that. In my mind it is valid. But whether it
is that, the reality is not that. How I find out after five or six year?
That is one nine to ten year olds kid, he saw my key chain. Then he said
“Oh!”  He seems shocked when he sees my key chain. Then he told his mother,
“Oh Geshela has this.” I still didn’t know what he meant and why he was
shocked. You know why? Because this key chain is the brand of GUCCI.
Because I didn’t know, the kid was quite surprised that I have this key
chain telling to the mother. Then I asked the mother, “What about this?”
She said, “No, not like that”. She didn’t say much. Only after I find out
from someone who said that this is real GUCCI key chain. After that then I
have valid cognizer of GUCCI key chain. The person is not valid, just my
mind made up. It is labeled by my mind, “This is Geshe Chonyi”. But whether
it is true or it is not true, it is true in my mind. You are somebody who
knows this brand. They don’t see that. At the end of the day, it is GUCCI
key chain for somebody who labeled it as a GUCCI key chain. Here what I am
saying is that your thought really label and you believe it. In reality it
is not that.  Just for oneself. So, only after I found this one and also
labeled by mind, somebody labeled now I have is valid. So, it is quite
complicated. Also last time, I mentioned the story at the botanical garden.
Same thing. When you say “monk” also it is also labeled because it doesn’t
exist from my dress. Everybody see me wearing this dress “Oh, this is monk”
like it exist from its own side. But reality it doesn’t exist from its own
side. I have this name then after you say Geshe Chonyi. Geshe also doesn’t
exist from its own side. You put the name Khen Rinpoche. This also doesn’t
exist from its own side. I mean it is very clear. As mentioned, even the
person doesn’t see me as a monk, how to see Geshe, this label, it is not
possible.
Whatever object or phenomenon in question, that phenomenon does not exist
from the side of the basis of designation, that phenomenon exist as merely
imputed in dependence upon the basis of designation.
At the end of the day, if you are asked, “How does that particular
phenomenon exist?” You can only say, “It exists as merely imputed in
dependence on that particular basis of designation.” This is the most
difficult thing to understand.  That is why Nagarjuna in his ‘Precious
Garland’ says: “The person and the ‘I’ is not the earth, not the water, not
the fire and not the wind. The person is not those elements that made up
the body. The person is also not the consciousness”.
Does that mean that the person does not exist? No. The person exists.
How does the person exist? The person is basically a collection of all the
elements and consciousness.
What that means is that the person is none other than that which is merely
imputed in dependence upon the body and mind - the basis of designation.
Because the person is none other than that which is merely imputed in
dependence upon the basis of designation that means the person does not
exist inherently, the person does not exist from its own side.
The conclusion is that the person is that which is merely imputed in
dependence upon the aggregates: the body and mind.
Having said that, some people may wonder or think, “Yeah, the person is
merely imputed in dependence upon the body and mind but maybe the body and
mind themselves exist inherently”. One may have that kind of thought. Even
the aggregates themselves, whether it is the body or the mind, also do not
exist from their own side, do not exist inherently.
Imagine there are two people walking towards one and another. As they walk
towards one and another, somebody come along and crosses the path of these
two people.  From the perspective of this person, when he looks at the
person on his right, what he sees is that there is a person going towards
the other person. Then when he looks at his left, he feels like there is a
person coming towards. The fact that there is a person going and there is a
person coming is only posited in dependence of the view of this person in
the middle. To the person in the middle, what he sees is the person going
and the person coming. But this coming and going is only posited in
dependence upon the existence of these two people who are in motion or
moving. You cannot posit that coming and going without depending on these
two people moving.
There is an example given in the text on “the mountain on this side” and
“the mountain on the other side”.
Whether it is “the mountain on this side” or “the mountain on the other
side”, it is dependent on perspective. If you are standing on this mountain
here looking at the other mountain, you call that mountain “the mountain on
the other side”. However, if you are standing there, then that mountain
would become “the mountain of this side”. So, the mountain of this side or
the mountain of the other side is relative.  What these examples show is
that there isn’t such a thing as “the mountain of the other side” which
exists independently on its own from its own side. If there is a real
mountain of the other side existing from its own side as “the mountain of
the other side” then the mountain of the other side will always be the
mountain of the other side. It can never be “the mountain of this side”.
Obviously this is not the case. When you stand on that mountain then it
will becomes “the mountain of this side”.  The fact that there is existence
as “the mountain of the other side” is relative and is imputed. Its
existence as “the mountain of the other side” is relative. Because it is
relative, its existence as “the mountain of the other side” is dependent on
something else. Therefore its existence as “the mountain of the other side”
is changeable.
According to the MWS, the main reason why we all can become Buddha is
because our minds are not truly existence. Because of our minds are not
truly existence therefore it can be change. In essence, that is the main
reason. This is different from the MOS view. According to the MOS,
everything is in the nature of the mind. So everything that exists arises
due to the awakening of a predisposition and that produces the appearance
of a particular object. But for the MWS, everything and anything that
exist, they exist as dependently originated. All phenomena are dependently
originated, including the mind. For that reason, all phenomena including
the mind do not exist truly or do not exist inherently. Because of not
existing inherently therefore, when causes and conditions come together,
change can be effected.
Arising from emptiness, then you have the whole variety of phenomena. That
is why there is some meaning when we say that everything is in the nature
of emptiness. Everything is the display of emptiness. All phenomena are
empty of existing inherently because all phenomena are dependently
originated or dependently arisen. Because phenomena are dependently arisen,
when certain factors come together, things do change. Then you have arising
of certain phenomena and events, and you have the disintegration or
disappearing of certain events or phenomena. There are whole varieties of
phenomena exist because things are dependently originated or dependently
arisen.
When the necessary factors come together then you have the appearances of
these whole varieties of phenomena. This shows that things are dependently
originated. If things are dependently originated, they cannot be inherently
existence. So, therefore there are some meanings to the phrases such as:
    • All phenomena are the display of emptiness.
    • Things and phenomena are the play of emptiness.
    • Things are in the nature of emptiness.
According to the CMWS, they say that because all phenomena are dependently
arisen, therefore they are not inherently existence.
At those time when we are emotionally upset, we get angry or upset because
someone points out our faults, criticizes us, and put us down or at those
times, for whatever reason we feel very proud, it is possible to get a
glimpse of this ‘I’ appearing as to exist from its own side, appearing as
inherently existence.
It is possible at times one can discover that the ‘I’ that is upset, the me
that you hurt, that me or the ‘I’ seems so real that you can briefly feel
that it is in there among the basis of designation, it is somewhere in
there and the feel is so real. At times that when we are criticized then
there is this feeling that the ‘I’ feel is so bad and so low- the depressed
kind of ‘I. At times when you are praised, you feel the very elevated sense
of ‘I’.  We all have these different experiences of how the ‘I’ appearing
to be inherently existence from its own side. It is that one, which is the
target and is the thing that we need to destroy.
We talk about the object of negation:
    • the thing that you are targeting,
    • the thing that you are trying to realize that which is empty; that
      does not exist
    • the false sense of ‘I’ whether it is a very depressed kind of ‘I’ or
      elevated sense of ‘I’.
The feel that it is somewhere in there you can almost touch and feel it.
You know it is there. That is the target. That is the object of negation.
That is the thing that we need to destroy.
When you have some experiences in identifying correctly this false sense of
‘I’, the ‘I’ that does not exist but nevertheless appears to be so real
either being very elevated or being very depressed, then at those times
especially when we are emotionally charged, and if we do think about what
Nagarjuna say; “Where is this ‘I’- the depressed ‘I’, the elevated ‘I’? Is
it the body? Is it the mind?” If you have a good understanding and if you
do it correctly then you start to have the sense of grasping that the
tightness is loosening and you feel relieve. You start to understand that
it doesn’t exist; “It is not this, it is not that”.
Whether we call it the object of negation or target or whatever, the point
is, at the end of the day, it is this false sense of ‘I’ that appear so
real and findable among the aggregates. The source of all the problem comes
from either feeling too stuck up, too full of ourselves or on the other
end, the ‘I’ feeling that “I am so bad, I am useless and this and that.”
So, all the problems and unhappiness come from this false sense of ‘I’.
[Root text: page 26~27]
7 Presentation of the grounds and paths
This is explained in two parts:
1. objects of abandonment and
2. actual presentation of the grounds and paths.
7A Objects of abandonment
The coarse and subtle conceptions of a self together with their seeds and
the attachment and so forth that arise due to the force of those
[conceptions] together with their seeds are afflictive obscurations. They
are posited as obscurations that mainly prevent the attainment of
liberation.
The conception of a coarse self of person is the conception of a self-
sufficient substantially existent person.
The conception of a subtle self of person would be the conception of a
truly existence person.
So, these two conceptions - the conception of a self-sufficient
substantially existent person and the conception of a truly existence
person together with their seeds that they plant on the mind together with
the afflictions that arise from those seeds and conceptions - are posited
to be afflictive obscuration.
What the afflictive obscurations does is it hinders/prevents the attainment
of liberation from samsara. So, according to the CMWS, in order to achieve
liberation, one must abandon all these.
The conception of a truly existence person is not the only afflictive
obscuration.
The conception of the aggregates as truly existence or the conception of
any other phenomenon other than the person as truly existence is also an
afflictive obscurations.
The conception of a self of person and the conception of a self of
phenomena are both afflictive obscurations.
These two conceptions -the conception of a self of person and the
conception of a self of phenomena- as we saw in the previous lesson are not
differentiated by the object of negation.
Both the conception of a self of person and the conception of a self of
phenomena are afflictive obscurations.
Therefore they have to be abandoned in order to achieve liberation.
In order to achieve liberation, one must directly realize the selflessness
of person and the selflessness of phenomena.
The CMWS assertion is different from the other tenets up to from the
Autonomists. Because the Autonomists and the tenets below them asserts that
in order to achieve liberation, you only have to realize the selflessness
of person, and you don’t need to realize the selflessness of phenomena.
According to the CMWS, in order to achieve liberation, you must realize
both the selflessness of person and selflessness of phenomena.
Why is there a difference in the position of the CMWS and the rest of the
other tenets?
Why is it that the CMWS assert that in order to achieve liberation, you
must abandon both the conception of the self of person and the conception
of the self of phenomena, whereas according to the other tenets, you only
need to abandon the conception of the self of person in order to achieve
liberation?
The differences in the position come merely due to what they posit as the
root of samsara.
For AMWS and the tenets below it, they posit the root of samsara to be the
conception of self of person; which according to them is ignorance - the
root of samsara.
For AMWS and the tenets below it, because they posit the conception of self
of person to be ignorance which is the root of samsara, if that is the
case, you only need to get rid of that conception in order to achieve
liberation. For that reason, therefore according to these tenets, all you
have to do is to directly realize the selflessness of person. With that
realization you would be able to achieve liberation.
According to CMWS, they also say ignorance is the root of samsara. But for
them, ignorance is not only the conception of the self of person. Yes, the
conception of the self of person is ignorance and is also the root of
samsara. But the conception of the self of person arises on the basis of
the conception of self of phenomena, in particular, conceiving the
aggregates - the body and mind- to be inherent existence.
So for the CMWS, ignorance is posited to be the conception of the selves -
both the self of person and self of phenomena. Therefore in order to
achieve liberation, one must realize directly the selflessness of person
and phenomena before you can get rid of ignorance. The assertion that one
must abandon the conception of self of phenomena in order to achieve
liberation is a unique feature of the CMWS.

[Root text: page 27]
The latencies of the conception of true existence and all factors of
mistaken dualistic appearance that arise due to the force of those
[latencies] are obscurations to knowledge. They are posited as obscurations
that mainly prevent the attainment of omniscience.
If both the conception of the self of person and the conception of the self
of phenomena are posited to be afflictive obscurations then what is left to
be called the knowledge obscurations.
What are the obscurations to knowledge? The latencies or the imprints or
the predispositions are placed on the mind by the conception of true
existence. Those are posited to be the obscurations to knowledge. Not only
that, all the mistaken dualistic appearances that arise due to the force of
those latencies are also posited to be the obscurations to knowledge.
So, the latencies of the true existence and the factors of mistaken
dualistic appearances that arise due to the force of those latencies are
posited to be obscuration to knowledge. They mainly hinder the attainment
of omniscience or full enlightenment. Therefore in order to achieve
omniscience one must abandon the obscurations to knowledge.
The hearers and solitary realizers do not abandon the obscurations to
knowledge. They do not abandon them and neither are they capable of
abandoning them.
Even in the Mahayana, the abandoning of the obscurations to knowledge does
not start until after the eighth bodhisattva ground is achieved. On the
Mahayana path, the afflictive obscurations are abandoned when one achieved
the eighth bodhisattva ground (or the eighth bhumi). Only then does the
abandoning of knowledge obscurations start.
I will talk a little bit more about the Mahayana path and ground maybe at
the beginning of the next module when we look at “The Heart of the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra”. In the first two lessons of the next module, I
will talk about the Mahayana path and ground according to the CMWS. Without
some basic understanding on the path and ground then it makes things a bit
complicated when we look at “The Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra.”

[Root text: page 27]
7B Actual presentation of the grounds and paths
There is no difference in terms of superiority among the views that are the
objects of meditation of the persons of all three vehicles because all
three are similar in taking the subtle selflessness of persons and the
subtle selflessness of phenomena as their main objects of meditation.
Although the person of all three vehicles do not have different objects of
meditation but they do differ with respect to their main objects of
abandonment.

[Root text: page 27]
There are differences with respect to their main objects of abandonment
because hearers and solitary realizers take the two conceptions of a self
together with their seeds as their main objects of abandonment, whereas
bodhisattvas take the latencies of those [conceptions] as their main
objects of abandonment.
There are differences between the Hinayana and Mahayana with respect to
their main objects of abandonment.

[Root text: page 27]
The suchness that is qualified by the abandonment of the two conceptions of
a self together with their seeds in the continuum of a hearer or solitary
realizer foe destroyer in meditative equipoise is a nirvana without
remainder, whereas such a suchness in the continuum of a hearer or solitary
realizer foe destroyer in post-equipoise is a nirvana with remainder.
The nirvana that is in the continuum of a hearer or solitary realizer arhat
is essentially the factor of abandonment of the afflictive obscuration;
which is the mind emptiness of true existence. That suchness of the mind in
the continuum of this arhat is posited to be nirvana or the sorrowless
state.
Now you know what is nirvana. Then there is nirvana with remainder and
nirvana without remainder.
According to the CMWS, one achieves the nirvana without remainder first
then subsequently nirvana with remainder is achieved.
What is nirvana without remainder? Nirvana without remainder is that factor
of abandonment of the afflictive obscurations in the continuum of the
Superior in meditative equipoise.
To keep it simple, when the hearer or solitary realizer arhat is in the
meditative equipoise directly perceiving emptiness, what he has achieved in
his mind is a thorough abandonment of afflictive obscurations. So that
state of abandonment while he is in meditative equipoise directly focusing
on emptiness is the nirvana without remainder.
Why is that called the nirvana without remainder?
When that arhat is in meditative equipoise directly perceiving emptiness,
in that state of realization, all dualistic appearances have completely
subsided.  All dualistic appearances have subsided in that state of
meditative equipoise, which means no dualistic appearances remain. For that
reason it is called a nirvana without remainder.
When that foe destroyer arises from the meditative equipoise and enters
into post-equipoise, he still has the dualistic appearances. The dualistic
appearances come back again. Also he has the appearances of truly existence
phenomena, i.e. phenomena appear as truly existence. But this arhat has
already abandoned all afflictive obscurations. He has achieved nirvana. In
post-equipoise, he has all these mistaken dualistic appearances. For that
reason therefore whiles he in post- equipoise that arhat in the state which
is called nirvana with remainder.

[Root text: page 27]
For those of the Great Vehicle lineage who are definite in that lineage
from the very beginning, the [complete] abandonment of the afflictive
obscurations occurs simultaneously with the attainment of the eighth
ground, and the [complete] abandonment of the obscurations to knowledge
occurs simultaneously with the actualizing of the four bodies.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Okay, that is the end of the tenets.

As mentioned already, the exam is set for 23rd of June. It is a Sunday.
Let’s schedule it to take place at 10:30am in the morning.
|Exam:                    |
|23 June 2013 (Sunday) at |
|10.30am                  |


Try to study for the exam as much as possible, and as much as you are able
to. As I mentioned before, the only reason for having exam is that it gives
us the reason to learn, and to study. That is the only reason. That is no
other reason. It is the preparation and reviewing the information that is
of the only importance. It is not about doing well or not doing well,
passing or not passing. I don’t see any meaning or any point in someone who
doesn’t really study but come for exam. Even he manages to pass I don’t see
any meaning in that. What is the point? I do see there are people who just
come for the exam, they just take and whatever happen happen. Even if they
pass, I don’t see any great purpose in doing that. Of course it is your
choice. I mean if you like to do that you can come, and nobody is stopping
you. But it doesn’t fulfill any purpose in the end. What is more important
is a constant engagement with the materials. Whether exam or no exam,
looking at the material, thinking about things that is the thing that
matters.
Try to learn as much as possible. I understand it is difficult. Of course,
it is difficult but learning the Buddhadharma is a meritorious thing. It is
a virtuous thing. It is a good thing especially while we all have the
opportunity. We are so fortunate even just to have the opportunity to even
do this. No matter however good or bad we are doing but the point is that
we have the opportunity to do it. It shows that we are very fortunate. As
much as possible, while we are still alive and when we are still not down
with some serious sickness, without many major obstacles, while there is
still opportunity, we should learn as much as possible. From my side, even
to teach is not an easy thing. I also find it difficult but I always think
that sharing and teaching this subject helps me to accumulate merits. It is
something virtuous and something meritorious. That is what has been kept me
going. Otherwise, it is challenging even just to share or to teach the
information.
Therefore as much as possible continue to learn and to study. We should, as
much as possible, to leave imprints in our minds. It is also very important
to constantly make aspirational prayers that from life to life without a
break, we always be able to meet the Buddha teachings, always to be able to
hear and to able to reflect on these great treatises and to be able to
practice those teachings. It is very important to meditate how fortunate
you are even if you are only able to get a little bit of information. So
every time you are able to learn new word or some new concept, you should
feel fortunate.


∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞ End of Presentation of Tenets module
∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞∞
