Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson24.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.533011
================================================================================


|Note: There is no transcript |
|for Lesson 23.               |


(Root text page 24)
Consequence School
The explanation of the Consequence School (Skt. Prasangika) has seven
outlines, as before.
1 Definition
The definition of a Consequentialist is: a Proponent of the Middle Way who,
by way of accepting just other-approved consequences, does not assert true
existence even conventionally.
2 Divisions
Examples [of Consequentialist] are Buddhapalita, Chandrakirti, and
Shantideva.
3 Etymology
There is a reason why Acharya Buddhapalita is called a ‘Consequentialist.’
He is called such due to asserting that an inferential cognizer realizing a
thesis is generated in the continuum of an opponent just by [stating]
consequences.
When we look at the etymology of the word “Consequentialist” (or
Prasangika), a Consequentialist is someone who able to cause an opponent to
generate an inferential cognizer realizing a particular thesis just by
merely stating a consequence of the opponent’s argument or statement.
The Consequentialist states that in order for an opponent to generate an
inferential cognizer realizing a thesis, it is not necessary to cause him
to realize that thesis by stating a reason “This is so and so.” All you
have to do, sometime, is to state a mere consequence of his/her position,
by just stating “It follows that...”
Let’s just state an example of a consequence that a Consequentialist would
throw at the proponent of the Autonomy School in order to refute truly
existent.
A Consequentialist will say: “It follows that the subject, a sprout, is not
produced in dependence upon its own cause, because it is inherently
existent.”
It is said that the opponent by hearing the consequence that is just thrown
at them can realize that there is an internal contradiction in their own
position. In the process, they may come to realize the emptiness of
inherent existent.
The Consequentialist states that in order for an opponent to generate an
inferential cognizer realizing a particular thesis:
    ➢ it is not necessary to state a subject that is commonly agreed upon
      by both parties and
    ➢ it is also not necessary always to state a reason.
The point is that the Consequentialist states that in order for an opponent
to generate an inferential cognizer realizing a thesis, it is not necessary
always to cause the opponent to do so by stating a proof or reason. You can
do that simply by stating an “absurd consequence” of their position.
The root of the Consequence School stems from Nagarjuna father and son,
namely Nagarjuna and his spiritual son Aryadeva. Nagarjuna composed
Fundamental Wisdom. Nagarjuna and Aryadeva in stating the Madhyamakas view
did not employ a lot of consequences. What they merely did was to establish
the general procedure of the Madhyamaka. Later on Achaya Buddhapalita came.
In his commentary on Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom, Buddhapalita employed
only consequences in explaining Nagarjuna’s view and intent. He did not use
autonomous reasons. Later Bhavaviveka came along. He disagreed with
Buddhapalita’s commentary on Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom. He disagreed
with the idea that one can just use consequences in order to establish the
view of selflessness. He explained that one must use autonomous proofs and
reasons in order to be able to cause an opponent to generate an inferential
cognizer realizing selflessness. He wrote a couple of commentaries
explaining Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom by using autonomous proofs and
reasons. This is how Bhavaviveka become the trailblazer of the AMWS
(Svatantrika-Madhyamaka).
Bhavaviveka disagreed with Buddhapalita’s commentary because he felt that
one cannot realize Nagarjuna’s thought just by employing consequences. He
is not saying that a consequence is not a line of reasoning but he felt
that one must employ autonomous reasons and proofs in order to cause an
opponent to generate an inferential cognizer realizing a particular thesis.

Later the great master Chandrakirti came along. In one of his famous
commentary called the “Clear Words,” he supported Buddhapalita’s position
by saying that one can cause an opponent to generate an inferential
cognizer realizing the thesis just by merely stating a consequence. In his
Clear Words, Chandrakirti agreed with Buddhapalita’s mode of explaining
Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom. He also stated clearly that Buddhapalita’s
explanation was exactly according to the intent of Nagarjuna. He also
stated that the use of autonomous reasons in order to generate an
inferential cognizer realizing a thesis in an opponent is wrong.
Great master Chandrakirti stated very clearly that the Prasangika’s
position is a correct one, whereas the assertion of the autonomous is
incorrect. For that reason, most people would attribute Chandrakirti to be
the trailblazer of the Prasangika-Madhyamika. Of course there are scholars
or masters who say that Buddhapalita is the trailblazer of Prasangika
instead of Chandrakirti.


(Root text page 24)
4 Way of asserting objects
There are two types of objects:
1. Hidden objects and
2. Manifest objects.
Objects that are necessarily realized in dependence on a reason are posited
as hidden objects, and objects that can be ascertained by an ordinary
person through the force of experience without depending on a reason are
posited as manifest objects.
“Ordinary” literary means the ordinary in English, not necessarily the
ordinary in the spiritual sense, i.e. the person who looks only at this
life.
Illustrations of hidden objects are, for example, the impermanence of sound
and the emptiness of sound being truly existent.
Illustrations of manifest objects are, for example, a pot and a woollen
cloth.
Perceptible object*1 and manifest object are equivalent.
*1  mngon sum (Skt. pratyaksa) This can also be translated as ‘direct’. For
schools other than the Consequence school, this is normally translated as
‘perception’ or ‘direct perceiver’ since it refers to the cognitive
subject. In the Consequence school however it primarily refers to the
object of cognition and hence it is translated here as ‘perceptible
object’.
Manifest object and perceptible object are mutually inclusive.
Whether a pot, table or cup, these things are obvious. We do see a cup. We
don’t have to sit and think using reason trying to figure out whether it is
a cup or not. Obviously it is a cup. You realize it through experience. You
don’t have think about it. Basically, all the objects of the five senses
are obvious:
    • visual form is the object of eye consciousness,
    • sound is the object of ear consciousness,
    • smell is the object of nose consciousness,
    • taste is the object of the tongue consciousness and
    • tactility is the object body consciousness.
You don’t have to depend on a reason to realize them. You experience them.
So in order to realize manifest or perceptible objects, you don’t necessary
have to depend on a reason. Of course there are exceptions in which you
need to think about what this is and what that is, but in general these
things need not be realize by using a reason. These are obvious or manifest
objects.
Hidden objects are objects that you have to, at least initially, realize by
using a reason. The examples of hidden object that are given in the text
are the impermanence of sound and the emptiness of sound being truly
existent. In order to realize the impermanence of sound or to realize the
emptiness of sound, one has no choice but to depend on a reason. Without
depending on a reason, there is no way to realize it.
According to the Consequence School, anything that exists is either a
hidden object or a manifest object. There isn’t a common locus between the
two, that is, you will not be able to find something that is both a hidden
object and a manifest object. Therefore this makes these two mutually
exclusive.
Within the category of hidden objects, there are hidden objects and there
are extremely hidden objects (or extremely obscured objects). Extremely
hidden objects are things like the very subtle detail of the working of a
particular cause and effect relationship, and also the existence of
Buddha’s Pure Land. Buddha’s Pure Lands are huge and extensive. They are in
every direction and also there are numberless of them. These are what we
call extremely hidden objects. Extremely hidden objects can only be
realized in dependence on scriptural authority. In dependence upon the
scriptural authority, one generates the inferential cognizer through
belief. This is how one comes to understand the extremely hidden objects.
According to the Prasangika, the manifest objects and hidden objects are
mutually exclusive. However, in the lower schools, the ways they define a
manifest object, for example, according to the Sutra School:
    ➢ that which is explicitly realized by a direct valid cognizer is a
      manifest object
    ➢ that which is explicitly realized by an inferential cognizer is a
      hidden object
Because of this understanding of what constitutes a hidden object,
according to a lower school, that which is explicitly realized by
inferential cognizer. For them, everything can be explicitly realized by a
inferential cognizer. If that is the case, then that makes everything a
hidden object as well. As in the previous module on Lorig, remember that
existent and non-existent are mutually exclusive.
According to the Prasangika, manifest object can be realized directly
through experience without necessarily having to depend on a reason,
whereas a hidden object has to be realized in dependence on a reason.
So that is one way of looking at existent: hidden object and manifest
object.
|Hidden objects                       |Manifest objects                     |
|Objects that are necessarily realized|Objects that can be ascertained by an|
|in dependence on a reason            |ordinary person through the force of |
|                                     |experience without depending on a    |
|                                     |reason                               |
|Illustration: the impermanence of    |Illustration: a pot, a table, a cup, |
|sound and the emptiness of sound     |a woollen cloth                      |
|being truly existent.                |                                     |
|Two divisions:                       |Manifest object and perceptible      |
|Hidden object                        |object are mutually inclusive        |
|Extremely hidden object              |                                     |
|Extremely hidden objects can only be |                                     |
|realized in dependence on scriptural |                                     |
|authority.                           |                                     |
|Example: The existence of Pureland,  |                                     |
|the subtle details of the working of |                                     |
|cause and effect relationship        |                                     |


(Root text page 24)
Another way of dividing objects is into:
1. conventional truths and
2. ultimate truths.
The definition of being a conventional truth is: an object that is found by
a valid cognizer analyzing a conventionality and with respect to which that
valid cognizer analyzing the conventionality becomes a valid cognizer
analyzing a conventionality.
It is inadmissible to divide conventional truths into two – real
conventional truths and unreal conventional truths – because there are no
real conventional truths. This is so because if it is a conventional truth,
it is necessarily not real. This is so because if it is a conventional
truth, it is necessarily unreal. [i.e., a falsity]
It is admissible to divide conventional truths into two – real and unreal –
relative to the perspective of a worldly consciousness because a form,
relative to the perspective of a  worldly consciousness, is real, while the
reflection of a face in a mirror [being a face], relative to the
perspective of a worldly consciousness, is unreal. If it is real relative
to the perspective of a worldly consciousness, it does not necessarily
exist because truly existent forms are [real with respect to a worldly
consciousness but do not exist].

There is many ways of translating kun rdzob bden pa: conventional truth,
obscurational truth, truth of concealer, concealer truth. In the context of
the Prasangika, sometime obscurational truth is more accurate. Let’s stick
with conventional truth for the time being.


|Definition of conventional truth is: an object that is found by a valid   |
|cognizer distinguishing a conventionality and with respect to which that  |
|valid cognizer distinguishing the conventionality becomes a valid cognizer|
|distinguishing a conventionality.                                         |


Ven Gyurme: I prefer the term ‘distinguishing’ than ‘analyzing’
In the definition “a valid cognizer distinguishing a conventionality”:
 ➢ there is one valid cognizer distinguishing a conventionality
 ➢ there is also a valid cognizer distinguishing an ultimate
For the ease of understanding:
 ➢ A conventional truth is the final object or main object of a valid
   cognizer distinguishing a conventionality.
 ➢ An ultimate truth is the final object or main object of the valid
   cognizer distinguishing an ultimate.
Here we are talking about the highest school, the Consequence School.
There is a definition of ultimate truth.
|The definition of being an ultimate truth is: an object found by a valid   |
|cognizer analyzing the ultimate and with respect to which that valid       |
|cognizer analyzing the ultimate becomes a valid cognizer analyzing the     |
|ultimate.                                                                  |


What exactly is an ultimate truth? It is the emptiness of truly existent.
There is nothing higher or more exalted than that. So, ultimate truth is
essentially the emptiness of truly existent. Any existent other than that
is a conventional truth. This is an easy way to understand the two truths
according to the Prasangika.
The definition of the conventional truth: is an object that is found by a
valid cognizer distinguishing a conventionality and with respect to which
that valid cognizer distinguishing the conventionality becomes a valid
cognizer distinguishing a conventionality.
If we are just looking at conventional truth from the perspective of a
sentient being, then the first part [An object that is found by a valid
cognizer distinguishing a conventionality] is enough.
Why do we have the rest of the definition?
Basically there is Buddha who is different from us. The Buddha perceives
the two truths simultaneously.
The Buddha’s omniscient mind directly perceives the two truths
simultaneously. That makes that one omniscient mind of a Buddha both a
valid cognizer distinguishing a conventionality and at the same time a
valid cognizer distinguishing an ultimate.
Is there a phenomenon that is both these two cognizers?
A vase is a conventional truth. It is not an ultimate truth.
Then somebody comes along and says: “The vase is an ultimate truth because
it is the final object that is distinguishes by a valid cognizer
distinguishing an ultimate”.
What are you going to say? You have to say “No”.  The vase is a
conventional truth and not an ultimate truth.
But somebody comes along and says: “It is an ultimate truth because it is
the final object. It is the object that is found by a valid cognizer
distinguishing an ultimate”.
Then you say: “No, it is a conventional truth”
That person continues to say: “It follows that the vase is the final object
of a valid cognizer distinguishing an ultimate because it is the object of
comprehension of a valid cognizer distinguishing an ultimate.”
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Are you getting somewhere or are you not
getting anywhere? Okay we try one more.
Do you know why we are going through this process? The point here is that
if somebody were to ask you:
“Why can’t we just define conventional truth as an object that is found by
a valid cognizer distinguishing a conventionality and ultimate truth as an
object that is found by a valid cognizer distinguishing the ultimate?”
It is enough to just state that because it is the final object that is
distinguished by both valid cognizer respectively. Why can’t we just leave
it as that? Why we need to have such a long sentence for that?
If the definition of an ultimate truth is an object that is found by a
valid cognizer analyzing the ultimate, then in this case ultimate truth
will not necessarily be limited to emptiness.
So the question is: “If it is the object found by a valid cognizer
distinguishing an ultimate truth, is it necessary emptiness?”
The point is this: What would be the problem if the definition of an
ultimate truth is just like that “Is an object that is found by a valid
cognizer distinguishing an ultimate”? (The actual definition of ultimate
truth: is an object found by a valid cognizer analyzing the ultimate and
with respect to which that valid cognizer analyzing the ultimate becomes a
valid cognizer analyzing the ultimate)
The problem is that you can posit anything, basically any existent, not
necessarily just emptiness, to be the object that is found by a valid
cognizer distinguishing an ultimate. It can be anything else other than
emptiness.
All phenomena are the objects that are found by a valid cognizer
distinguishing an ultimate. Likewise, all phenomena also become the objects
that are found by a valid cognizer distinguishing a conventionality.
The problem becomes clear when somebody tells you: The subject is the
Buddha’s omniscient mind which realizes emptiness.
The Buddha’s omniscient mind realizes emptiness. Is that a valid cognizer
distinguishes an ultimate or not? Yes.
A Buddha’s omniscient mind realizes emptiness realizes only emptiness?
Buddha’s omniscient mind realizes everything else, every single thing,
which means everything other than emptiness.
Because of this, therefore it follows that all phenomena are objects that
are found by a valid cognizer distinguishing an ultimate. All phenomena are
the objects that are found by the Buddha’s omniscient mind.
Likewise, all phenomena are also objects that are found by a valid cognizer
distinguishing a conventionality because the Buddha’s omniscient mind
directly perceiving all conventionalities. All phenomena become the objects
that are found by that mind.
How does the Buddha’s mind works? If you were to just define the two truths
as the objects that are found by the respective valid cognizer, whether
distinguishing an ultimate or distinguishing a conventionality, then it is
not going to work.
The definition of a conventional truth is posited to be an object that is
found by a valid cognizer distinguishing a conventionality and with respect
to which that valid cognizer distinguishing the conventionality becomes a
valid cognizer distinguishing a conventionality.
Unlike the Svatantrika, the Prasangika do not divide conventional truth
into:
   1. Real conventional truth
   2. Unreal conventional truth
According to Prasangika, there is no real conventional truth. Why? Because
if it is a conventional truth, it is necessarily not real. However,
relative to the perspective of a worldly consciousness, one does divide the
conventional truth into real and unreal.
The essence is this: There are no real conventional truths. If it is a
conventional truth, it is necessarily unreal. This means that it is a
falsity. However, the Prasangika do divide conventional truths into real
and unreal relative only to the perspective of a worldly consciousness.
As in the root text: “because a form, relative to the perspective of a
worldly consciousness, is real, while the reflection of a face in a mirror
[being a face], is not a real face”. So, it is said “relative to the
perspective of a worldly consciousness” -here “worldly” refers to someone
who has not realized emptiness. So in the perspective of such a person, a
form is real.
In a perspective of a worldly person, someone who has not realized
emptiness, everything that appears to that person appears as existing by
way of its own character, existing truly, existing inherently. Not only is
there that appearance, the person assents to the appearance and think:
“This is how things are.” Basically he agrees and assumes that this is how
things exist and things are like that. Therefore, in the perspective of
such a person, everything is real in that sense. Real as in what they are
and what one see.
Here “form” is considered to be a real conventional truth according to the
perspective of a worldly consciousness. The text continues: “If it is real
relative to the perspective of a worldly consciousness, it does not
necessarily exist because truly existent forms are [real with respect to a
worldly consciousness but do not exist].”
The reflection of a face in the mirror is an unreal conventional truth in
the perspective of a worldly consciousness. Even for someone who has not
realized emptiness can realize that the reflection of the face in the
mirror is not the actual face. So the person realizes that there is a
disparity between the appearance and reality.
For someone who has not realized emptiness, there are things that the
worldly person cannot realize that there is disparity between how it
appears and how it exists, except that it exists in the way it appears.
Those phenomena are what we call real conventional truths in the
perspective of worldly consciousness.
The reflection of the face in the mirror is an unreal conventional truth
relative to the perspective to a worldly consciousness. Why? Because even
for a worldly person who has not realized emptiness, that person can
realize that the reflection of the face in the mirror is not the actual
face. The person sees that there is a disparity between the appearance and
reality. Such an example, like the reflection of the face in the mirror, is
an example of an unreal conventional truth relative to the perspective of a
worldly consciousness.
Do real conventional truths exist? No
Do unreal conventional truths exist? One may be able to say “Yes”.
Like the reflection of the face in the mirror, it is a falsity. It is
unreal.

(Root text page 25)
The definition of being an ultimate truth is: an object found by a valid
cognizer analyzing the ultimate and with respect to which that valid
cognizer analyzing the ultimate becomes a valid cognizer analyzing the
ultimate.
The divisions [of ultimate truths] are similar to those in the context of
the Proponents of Mind Only, however in this context it is asserted that
true cessations are necessarily ultimate truths.
The Consequentialists are alike in asserting that true cessations are
ultimate truths.
Next is the way of asserting object processors. Here there are some
differences in the Consequentialists’ position.

(Root text page 25)
5 Way of asserting object-possessors
The mere I that is imputed in dependence on the five aggregates is asserted
to be the illustration of the person.
Person is necessarily a non-associated compositional factor.
With the exception of the Consequentialists, everybody else believes that
things exist inherently. This means that when you look for the object, you
definitely will able to find something that you can point to and say:
“There that is the thing”. That is the meaning of the phrase “the imputed
object when sought is findable”.
With the exception of the Consequentialists, some says that the “I” or
person is the body, and a lot of them say the “I” or person is the mind.
The Consequentialists obviously do not say that the person is either the
body or mind. In fact, they say that the person is not the mind. It is
ridiculous; the person cannot be the mind. The person cannot be the body as
well. When you look for the person, ultimately what you found is nothing.
You are not able to find the person when you look for it, yet the person
exists. Obviously the person exists, but when you look for it, it cannot be
found. So, what on earth is the person?
At the end of the day, the person is none other than that which is merely
imputed in dependence upon the five aggregates. This is how the “I” exists,
that which the “I” exist as merely imputed in dependence upon the five
aggregates. Nothing is beyond that. Therefore, in this school, the person
is a non-associated compositional factor. It is not matter. It is not
consciousness.

(Root text page 25)
There are two types of awarenesses:
   1. valid cognizers and
   2. non-valid cognizers.
There are two types of valid cognizer:
   3. direct valid cognizers and
   4. inferential valid cognizers.
The Prasangika defines a valid cognizer differently from the rest of the
tenets.
For the Prasangika, as long as the mind realizes its own object, it is
infallible with respect to the object, so it is a valid cognizer.
Unlike the schools below it, they all insist that a valid cognizer has to
be a newly incontrovertible knower. That means it has to be fresh, the very
first moment of cognition.
The Prasangika says there is no need for that. So there is a difference
between the Prasangika and the rest of the tenets in that.
For the Prasangika, a valid cognizer needs not be just that first moment of
realization of the object.
It doesn’t have to be a newly incontrovertible knower. For the Prasangika,
as long as it realizes the object, it is a valid cognizer.
For that reason, according to the Prasangika, subsequent cognizers are
considered to be valid cognizers as well. As in the previous module, a
subsequent cognizer is not a valid cognizer. A subsequent cognizer is a
knower that realizes what has already been realized.
The point that you have to get is the differences in the assertion between
the Prasangika and the rest of the tenets with regards to what constitute a
valid cognizer. The difference comes in the definition of a valid cognizer.
There are two types of valid cognizers:
    ➢ Direct valid cognizers and
    ➢ Inferential valid cognizers.
According to the Prasangika, a direct valid cognizer
    ➢ is a valid cognizer that arises without necessarily having to depend
      on explicitly realizing a sign and
    ➢ is incontrovertible with respect to its object of the mode of
      apprehension.
What is a direct valid cognizer according to the Prasangika?
    ➢ It is a valid cognizer which does not arise by directly or explicitly
      depending on a sign and
    ➢ It is an incontrovertible knower with respect to its object of the
      mode of apprehension.
They assert direct valid cognizers, inferential valid cognizers and yogic
direct perceivers.
They do not assert self-knowing direct perceivers.
Here is another difference for the Prasangika.

(Root text page 25)
There are two types of direct valid cognizers:
   1. conceptual direct valid cognizers and
   2. non-conceptual direct valid cognizers.
As we did in the Lorig, according to the lowers schools such as the SS, a
direct valid cognizer is necessarily free from conceptuality. But here,
according to the Prasangika, there are conceptual direct valid cognizers.

(Root text page 25)
Illustrations of conceptual direct valid cognizers are, for example, the
second moment of an inferential cognizer realizing sound to be impermanent
and a remembering consciousness that is a factually concordant memory of
blue generated through being induced by a sense direct perceiver
apprehending blue.
The illustration given of a conceptual direct valid cognizer is the second
moment of an inferential cognizer realizing sound to be impermanent.
What about the first moment?
The first moment of an inferential cognizer realizing sound to be
impermanent is an inferential valid cognizer. The second moment becomes a
subsequent cognizer, but it is a direct valid cognizer. It is a conceptual
direct valid cognizer.
Why is the first moment of an inferential cognizer realizing sound to be
impermanent an inferential valid cognizer and then in the second moment, it
becomes a conceptual direct valid cognizer?
As mentioned before, according to the Prasangika, the difference between a
direct valid cognizer and an inferential valid cognizer hinges on whether
that mind is generated by relying directly on a sign or reason or not. The
generation of a direct valid cognizer does not come about by relying
directly on a sign whereas an inferential cognizer is generated by relying
directly on a sign or reason.
Do you remember “in dependence upon a sign from the definition” as in the
last module Lorig?
The first moment of a mind realizing the impermanent of sound is by relying
on a reason. That makes that first moment an inferential valid cognizer
because that first moment comes about by relying directly on a sign.
It is a valid cognizer. Not only that, it is an inferential valid cognizer.

So, the first moment of the inferential cognizer realizing sound to be
impermanent is an inferential cognizer. This is because it is generated
directly depending on a sign.
How come in the second moment, that same mind is now considered to be a
directly valid cognizer?
Is that second moment generated in dependence on a reason or not?
In the second moment, it is not generated in dependence directly on a
reason.
Since in the second moment of an inferential cognizer realizing sound to be
impermanent is not generated directly in dependence on a reason, therefore
it is not an inferential valid cognizer. It is a direct valid cognizer.
Is it conceptual? Yes, it is conceptual. So, it is a conceptual direct
valid cognizer.
An illustration of a non-conceptual direct valid cognizer is, for example,
a sense direct perceiver apprehending a form.
If it is a direct valid cognizer it does not necessarily have a perceptible
object because if it is a yogic direct perceiver it necessarily does not
have a perceptible object. This is so because perceptible object and
manifest object are equivalent.
If it is a subsequent cognizer it is necessarily a direct valid cognizer
For the second moment of an eye consciousness apprehending blue, that
second moment of an eye consciousness apprehending blue is not generated
directly in dependence on a sign or reason. Because it is a second moment
of an eye consciousness apprehending blue, it is a subsequent cognizer. It
is non-conceptual. It is a valid cognizer. That makes a non-conceptual
direct valid cognizer.
What you have to get is that, according to the Prasangika, a valid cognizer
needs not be newly incontrovertible. As long as it is incontrovertible with
respect to its object, then it is a valid cognizer.
Because of this, according to the Consequentialists, the subsequent
cognizers are also valid cognizers.
What distinguishes a direct valid cognizer from an inferential valid
cognizer?
Both are valid cognizers, but direct valid cognizers are not generated by
directly depending on a sign or reason whereas an inferential valid
cognizer needs to be generated by relying directly on a sign.
For that reason, therefore the second moment of an inferential cognizer is
not posited to be an inferential valid cognizer, but it is a direct valid
cognizer. It is a conceptual direct valid cognizer.
According to the Consequentialists, a direct perceiver is not necessary a
knower that is free of conceptuality.
If we have some time, we will look at the rest of the way of asserting
object processors according to the Prasangika. Then what is left is the
explaining of what the object of negation is according to the Prasangika.
Then that is about it.
It is understandable that after being getting used to a certain way of
presenting the mind and then suddenly you have this Prasangika who have
their own understanding. It is important to know clearly the differences.
Now think about the differences between the Prasangika’s way of presenting
the object processors and what we had studied previously. If there any
differences that you don’t understand or you cannot reconcile then bring it
up in class.

.
