Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson14.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.357218
================================================================================


As mentioned in our discussion in the previous class, we have to be certain
and be sure from our side that we understand the reason why we are learning
tenets. That was the whole discussion. The whole point is to be able to
fight our afflictions/destructive emotion. The only way is to reflect and
to familiarize our mind with selflessness. So far in the tenets, we have
looked at the selflessness of person.  By reflecting, meditating and
familiarizing our mind with the meaning of the selflessness of the person,
we are supposed to be able to fight and work against our destructive
emotion/afflictions. On top of that we have just started with the
discussion on the selflessness of phenomena. By reflecting and
familiarizing our mind with the meaning of the selflessness of phenomena we
can also work against our destructive emotions/afflictions. It is said that
by meditating on the selflessness of phenomena we can even overcome the
obscuration that can prevent us from achieving enlightenment or
omniscience. Having said all these, what we have to figure out is to be
certain as to how do the meditation of selflessnesses can act as antidote
to our afflictions. Is it really possible to uproot all our afflictions and
all our obscurations from the mind? This is something we need to think
about over and over again all the time.
We have looked at the selflessness of person. As for now, we know that
selflessness of person is the emptiness of a permanent, unitary and
independent self. It is said in the teaching if we do understand that
indeed a permanent, unitary and independent person does not exists
whatsoever, through thinking and then comes to understand, it is said that
our afflictions will be weakened. So what we have to do is to generate from
our own experience to see for ourselves that indeed such a person - a
permanent, unitary and independent self-  does not exist whatsoever. We
have to discover that for ourselves. Then we check whether our afflictions
do become weaker or not. That is the discovery we have to make it by
ourselves.
Then there is the subtle selflessness of person which is the emptiness or
non-existence of self-sufficient person. This is more subtle. The non-
existence of self-sufficient person is more subtle than the non-existence
of the permanent, unitary and independent self. It is again said in the
teaching that when we realized the non-existence of the self-sufficient
person our afflictions will be weakened. This is what they said in the
teaching. That is another thing that we have to discover for ourselves. We
have to discover for ourselves through thinking and through reflecting that
indeed such a self-sufficient person, although we have the experience of it
and there is an appearance of it to us, in reality the self does not exist
in such a way. That is the discovery that we have to make for ourselves.
When we made that discovery then we have to check and see whether our
afflictions are weakened or not. In the teaching it is said that the
afflictions will weaken if we realized that. So that is the discovery that
we have to make for ourselves. Essentially, the whole of learning and then
familiarizing our mind with the selflessness of persons is basically to
work against our afflictions, i.e. to reduce and destroy our afflictions.
Going by the tenets that we have covered so far this is the reflection on
the selflessness of person. But still when we look at our own experience,
we look around and we look at ourselves, we look at thing other than
ourselves, things and phenomena around us appear to us as if they are right
there outside of us. We call it external object. According to the MOS,
although external object appear but in fact in reality there aren’t any
external object. They have their reasons for saying that. So our experiment
is to see that if we adopt this MOS’ view that there is no external object,
but in fact that phenomena are selflessness; i.e. subject and object do not
exist as different entities. It is said in the teaching that when we see
that subject and object do not have different entities, our afflictions
will also be reduced. It is said that this is a very powerful tool. This is
what we have to discover whether this is so or not.
If we can think along the line of what I have mentioned in the previous
lesson which was about how we can put some of these things into reflection,
how we can think about it in the order and so forth. The whole point is to
discover that for ourselves. We have to reflect on what we have learnt. In
so doing when we start to taste the teaching and see some truths and lights
behind what is mentioned in the teaching, then this will automatically
enhance whatever interest we already have in the teaching and the practice.

Let continue with the text.
(Root text page 15)
`There are two types of False Aspectarians:
1. Tainted False Aspectarians and
2. Untainted False Aspectarians.
How many divisions are there for the MOS?
There are two divisions:
   1. Mind Only True Aspectarian
   2. Mind Only False Aspectarian
For the Mind Only True Aspectarian there are three types:
  1. Proponents of an Equal Number of Apprehendeds and Apprehenders
  2. Half-Eggists
  3. Non-Pluralists
For the Mind Only False Aspectarian there are two types:
  1. Tainted False Aspectarians
  2. Untainted False Aspectarians
|Mind Only     |Mind Only True Aspectarian|Proponents of an Equal Number of   |
|School        |                          |Apprehendeds and Apprehenders      |
|              |                          |Half-Eggists                       |
|              |                          |Non-Pluralists                     |
|              |Mind Only False           |Tainted False Aspectarians         |
|              |Aspectarian               |                                   |
|              |                          |Untainted False Aspectarians       |


The Tainted False Aspectarians assert that the nature of the mind is
polluted by the stains of the dualistic appearance.
The Untainted False Aspectarians assert that the nature of the mind is NOT
polluted by the afflictions, rather the afflictions are adventitious.
Ven Gyurme: I did not say the mind is polluted. I said that the nature of
the mind is polluted.
The Tainted False Aspectarians assert that there is dualistic appearance on
the buddha ground. Buddhas have the dualistic appearance of, for example,
yellow, blue and so forth appear to them. There are mistaken appearances on
the buddha ground. Are the buddhas mistaken? No, buddhas are not mistaken
but nevertheless there are mistaken appearances and there are dualistic
appearances, according to the Tainted False Aspectarians.
The Untainted False Aspectarians, on the other hand, assert that there are
no dualistic appearance on the buddha ground. It seems that they are saying
that on the buddha ground, there are no appearances of blue, yellow and so
forth.
In short, the difference between the Tainted False Aspectarians and
Untainted False Aspectarians lies in whether they assert the nature of the
mind is polluted by the stains of dualistic appearance or not.
|Tainted False Aspectarians             |Untainted False Aspectarians           |
|Assert that the nature of the mind is  |Assert that the nature of the mind is  |
|polluted by the stain of the dualistic |NOT polluted by the afflictions. Rather|
|appearance.                            |the afflictions are adventitious.      |
|Assert that there is dualistic         |Assert that there is no dualistic      |
|appearance on the buddha ground.       |appearance on the buddha ground.       |
|On buddha ground, yellow, blue and so  |On the buddha ground, there are no     |
|forth appear to the buddhas.           |appearances of blue, yellow and so     |
|There are mistaken appearances and     |forth.                                 |
|dualistic appearances on the buddha    |                                       |
|ground but buddha is not mistaken.     |                                       |


(Root text page 15)
3 Etymology
Why are they called ‘Proponents of Mind Only’?
They are called Proponents of Mind Only because they assert  that  phenomena
are merely the nature of mind, and they are called Proponents  of  Cognition
because they assert that all phenomena are merely the nature of cognition
4 Way of asserting objects
There are two types of objects of knowledge:
  1. ultimate truths and
  2. conventional truths.
The definition of an ultimate truth  is:  that  which  is  realized  by  the
direct valid cognizer directly realizing it  by  way  of  the  vanishing  of
dualistic appearance.
Ultimate truth, final reality  (Skt.  dharmata),  sphere  of  reality  (Skt.
dharmadhatu), and final mode of abiding are equivalent.
There are two divisions of ultimate truths:
  1. subtle selflessness of phenomena and
  2. subtle selflessness of persons.
When the subtle selflessness of phenomena is divided by way of the bases  of
emptiness, there are twenty emptinesses. When they are condensed, there  are
eighteen; when  they  are  condensed,  there  are  sixteen;  when  they  are
condensed, there are four emptinesses, and so forth.
Illustrations of the subtle selflessness of phenomena are, for example,  the
emptiness that is a form and  the  valid  cognizer  apprehending  that  form
being empty of being different substances and the emptiness that is  a  form
being empty of existing by way of its own characteristics  as  a  basis  for
applying the term ‘form.’
An illustration of the subtle selflessness of persons is, for  example,  the
emptiness  that  is  a  person  being   empty   of   being   self-sufficient
substantially existent.
In the MOS, ultimate truth, thoroughly established nature, emptiness are
mutually inclusive.
Here we have one definition of ultimate truth. As in the root text:
The definition of an ultimate truth is: that which is realized by the
direct valid cognizer directly realizing it by way of the subsiding/
vanishing of dualistic appearance.
There are different definitions for ultimate truth as different people has
different definitions. As there are many definitions and one can look at it
from different perspectives. I am giving you another definition of ultimate
truth.
Another definition of ultimate truth is: The final object of observation of
a pure path.
In this context, pure path refers to the wisdom directly realizing
emptiness.
There are different ways of understanding what an ultimate truth is.
An ultimate truth is an object that, when it is made into an object of the
mode of apprehension of a particular mind, then by familiarizing with that
one can eliminate the obscurations.
This is how you can understand ultimate truth here.
What is an ultimate truth? It is an ultimate truth if the object that you
meditate on and take it to be the object of the mode of apprehension can
eliminate the obscurations from your mind. Then that object would be an
ultimate truth.
The definition of ultimate truth in accordance with the root text which is:
that which is realized by the direct valid cognizer directly realizing it
by way of the subsiding of dualistic appearance.
Here “that which is realized” is the object ultimate truth and in this case
is emptiness. It is realized by the direct valid cognizer directly
realizing it.
What is the direct valid cognizer directly realizing it? It is the wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness.
Emptiness is realized by the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness.
How does the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness realize emptiness? It
realizes emptiness directly.
How does the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness realize its object? What
does it mean when we say it realizes it directly?
When the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness realizes emptiness it does
not realize emptiness with dualistic appearance, but rather emptiness is
realized by this direct valid cognizer directly realizing it through the
subsiding of dualistic appearances.
When the wisdom directly realizing emptiness realizes emptiness, it does so
through the subsiding of dualistic appearances.
What does it means? When this wisdom directly realizing emptiness realizes
emptiness, in the perspective of this mind, there are no conventional
appearances, there is no concept/feeling of subject or object. There is the
feeling that these two are merged; there is no duality between an object
and subject.
Then there isn’t any appearance of external object.
It is through the subsiding of dualistic appearances in the way that I have
explained that the wisdom directly realizing emptiness realizes emptiness.
Therefore the definition of an ultimate truth is that which is realized by
the direct valid cognizer directly realizing it by way of the subsiding of
dualistic appearance.
Let us at the etymology of the ultimate truth; not the definition.
In English, the individual syllables are not fully conveyed.
In Tibetan, there is don and dam pa. When put together, it is don dam.
On its own, don, means object, in this context.
Dam pa, in Lamrim, it is translated as holy or pure.
However here dam pa, in the philosophical context, you can say it as
ultimate.
When you put them together, don dam is ultimate object.
But you cannot translate it like that all the times.
In this context, dam pa, ultimate, you can read it as the meditative
equipoise of a Superior being.
Don is the object.
In this context when you them together, an object of the meditative
equipoise of a Superior.
So the word for ultimate truth in Tibetan is don dam bden pa.
We have explained don and dam pa. Here bden pa is truth.
Try to understand the etymology of the word.
When we put them together, don is an object. The object here refers to
emptiness
The emptiness is the object of which mind?
In this case, emptiness is the object of the meditative equipoise of a
Superior.
|don          |Object, here refers to as emptiness, which is the object  |
|             |of the meditative equipoise of a Superior.                |
|dam pa       |Ultimate, in this context, the meditative equipoise of a  |
|             |Superior being                                            |
|don dam      |ultimate object                                           |
|bden pa      |truth                                                     |
|don dam bden |ultimate truth                                            |
|pa           |                                                          |


In the perspective of this meditative equipoise of a Superior, in the case
emptiness, there is no discord between realities and how it appears.
Therefore it is truth. It is true in a perspective of the meditative
equipoise of a Superior being; therefore, emptiness is an ultimate truth.
Another way of looking at it is shorter. Sometime you can take don dam
together to mean ultimate awareness. In this case is the meditative
equipoise of a Superior being.
In the perspective of this meditative equipoise of a Superior being, this
ultimate awareness, emptiness is true because it exist in the way it
appears; therefore it is an ultimate truth. It is true in the perspective
of the meditative equipoise of a Superior being.
That is why the English language does not convey fully.
In our root text, the definition of an ultimate truth is that which is
realized by the direct valid cognizer directly realizing it by way of the
subsiding of dualistic appearance.
Different people have different definitions. The definition which I have
gave you earlier is the final object of observation of a pure path. Another
way of looking at it is that is an object by which if you familiarize with
it over and over again you will be able to eliminate or purify your
obscurations.
|Different ways of    |That which is realized by the direct valid cognizer      |
|defining ultimate    |directly realizing it by way of the subsiding of         |
|truth                |dualistic appearance (root text)                         |
|                     |The final object of observation of a pure path           |
|                     |If the object that you are meditating on, taking that    |
|                     |object to be the object of the mode of apprehension of   |
|                     |your mind, can eliminate or purify the obscurations from |
|                     |your mind, that object is an ultimate truth.             |


If you think that you don’t need all these complication and would like to
keep your life easy then you can always take ultimate truth and emptiness
the same.
If you really want to understand then you have to look it in more detail of
what we have done for ultimate truth and its meaning. I guess you
understood them so I will move on.
There are many divisions of emptiness. As mentioned in the root text, there
are twenty emptinesses, there are eighteen emptiness, there are sixteen
emptiness and so forth. These divisions are not made on the basis of there
being a different object of negation, but rather these divisions are made
according to the bases of emptiness.
When emptinesses are condensed, there are four emptinesses:
   1. Emptiness of thing
   2. Emptiness of non-thing
   3. Emptiness of nature
   4. Emptiness of other nature
Such divisions are made not because of the different in object of negation
i.e.the thing that you are refuting.
But the divisions are made because of the different in the base of
emptiness.
Emptiness of thing - ‘thing’ here refers to functional thing, those many
different composed phenomenon such as form. The emptinesses of those are
called the emptiness of thing.
Emptiness of non-thing - ‘non-thing’ here refers to uncomposed phenomena
such as uncompounded space. The emptinesses which exist on these uncomposed
phenomena are the emptiness of non-thing.
If you divide emptiness into these two: emptiness of thing and emptiness of
non-thing, all emptinesses are subsumed in it.
When emptiness is divided into two, then emptiness of thing and emptiness
of non-thing would cover all emptinesses. The emptinesses are the same but
the bases of the emptinesses are different.
When emptinesses are divided into four, then there is emptiness of nature.
What does emptiness of nature mean?
Emptiness of nature refers to the emptiness of emptiness.
The fourth emptiness, the emptiness of other-nature, refers to the
emptiness of nirvana.
There are many divisions of emptiness such as emptiness of the internal,
emptiness of the external and so forth but all divisions of emptinesses are
referring to the bases of emptiness. In English you can say; the object
that is qualified by emptiness has the nature of emptiness.
The emptiness of the internal - we have the five sense powers such as the
eye sense power, and so forth and these are included in the continuum of a
person, therefore it is internal, like the emptinesses of these five sense
powers.
The emptiness of the external - ‘external’ refers to those phenomena that
are not conjoined with the continuum of a person such as form that we see.
The emptiness of those forms would be emptiness of the external.
I am not going into detail with the twenty emptinesses, eighteen emptiness,
sixteen emptiness and so forth.
There are two illustrations given the subtle selflessness of phenomena.
   1. The emptiness that is a form and the valid cognizer apprehending that
      form being empty of being different substances
   2. The emptiness that is a form being empty of existing by way of its own
      characteristics as a basis for applying the term ‘form.’
The first illustration deals with the sense consciousness.
The second illustration deals with the conceptual consciousness.
Let’s look at what exactly is being negated. Is it the object of negation/
object of refutation?
This is something you have to focus and it is not easy.
First, you must identify what exactly is being negated/ refuted?
Let’s look at the second illustration:
The emptiness that is a form being empty of existing by way of its own
characteristics as a basis for applying the term ‘form.
This is an illustration of a conceptual consciousness.
The object of negation is the object that exists by way of its own
character as the referent of the names, i.e. the basis for the applying the
term “object” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending the object.
For example, blue existing by way of its own character as the referent of
the name “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue. This is
the object of negation.
Blue appears to this mind, the conceptual consciousness, and it appears
naturally as the basis for applying the term “blue”.
Note: “Existing by way of its own character as the basis for applying the
term (or name)” is also translated as “natural referent of terms (or
names)” or “natural base of engagement for the term (or name).”
Blue appears to the conceptual consciousness to be the basis for applying
the term “blue.” This blue appears to exist naturally from its own side (or
by way of its own character) as the basis for applying the term “blue” to
the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue without depending on the
conceptual consciousness apprehending blue. This is the object of negation.
According to the MOS, in reality, blue does not exist from its own side
i.e. as its uncommon mode of subsistence and do not exist by way of its own
character as the basis for applying the term “blue” to the conceptual
consciousness apprehending blue.
Let’s talk about blue in general without talking about blue being the basis
for applying the term “blue”.
According to the MOS, in general, blue is an other-powered nature. In this
school, blue is necessarily truly established; which means that it exist by
way of its own character. That is how blue exists.
Both SS and the MOS assert that blue exist by way of its own character and
that blue is truly established.
Both SS and MOS assert that there is a blue that exist as the basis for
applying the term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.

Although both SS and MOS assert that there is a blue that exist as blue
which is the basis for applying the term “blue” to the conceptual
consciousness apprehending blue:-
-but according to the SS, this blue that exist as a basis for applying the
term “blue” exist at its own uncommon mode of subsistence. That means it
exist by way of its own character.
-whereas according to the MOS, this blue which is a basis for applying the
term blue to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue does not exist
by way of its own character.
That is the difference.
|Sutra School                           |Mind Only School                       |
|Both SS and MOS assert that there is a blue that exist as blue which is the    |
|basis for applying the term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending|
|blue                                                                           |
|According to the SS, this blue that    |According to the MOS, this blue which  |
|exist as a basis for applying the term |is a basis for applying the term blue  |
|“blue” exist at its own uncommon mode  |to the conceptual consciousness        |
|of subsistence. That means it exist by |apprehending blue does not exist by way|
|way of its own character.              |of its own character. It exists as     |
|                                       |merely imputed by conceptuality.       |


So the MOS assert that:
 ➢ There is a blue
 ➢ This blue exists by way of its own character
 ➢ There is also a blue that is a basis for applying the term “blue”
 ➢ The blue which is a basis for applying the term “blue” to the
   conceptual consciousness apprehending blue does not exist by way of its
   own character
 ➢ This blue exists as merely imputed by conceptuality (the conceptual
   consciousness).
To recap:
 ➢ There is a blue.
 ➢ Blue exist by way of its own character.
 ➢ There is also a blue which is a basis for applying the term “blue”
 ➢ But such a blue which is the basis for applying the term “blue “does
   not exist by way of its own character to the conceptual consciousness
   apprehending blue.
 ➢ This blue is merely imputed by conceptuality.
You really have to focus and listen and your brain has to be very alert.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): If your brain is death then nothing goes
inside.
Blue that is the basis for applying the term blue to the conceptual
consciousness apprehending blue exist but it does not exist by way of its
own character. It does not exist as its own uncommon mode of subsistence.
So how does it exist?  It exists as merely imputed by conceptuality.
Blue existing as the basis for applying the term “blue” does not exist from
the side of blue.
The blue that is the basis for applying the term “blue” does exist.
But this blue that is the basis for applying the term “blue” to the
conceptual consciousness apprehending blue does not exist from the side of
blue. Rather blue as the basis for applying the term “blue” to the
conceptual consciousness apprehending blue exist as a mental construct,
merely imputed by conceptuality.
Presenting the fallacies
There is a blue that exists as the basis for applying the term “blue” to
the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.  However, blue does not
exist as the basis for applying the term “blue” to the conceptual
consciousness apprehending blue from its own side, by way of its own
character.
If there is a blue that exist by way of its own character as the basis for
applying the term “blue” to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue
then what is the problem?
The problem is this: For example, think of a flat base bulbous thing. A
flat base bulbous thing is essentially a vase. The consequence is that if
you see a flat base bulbous thing, naturally you will think of a vase.
If the flat base bulbous thing exist by way of its own character as the
basis for applying the term “vase” from its own side, then by seeing the
flat base bulbous thing you should generate the thought “vase”.  This is
because you should be able to see vase immediately if the flat base bulbous
thing exist by way of its own character as the basis for applying the term
“vase”.
But this is not so. Therefore, the basis of applying the term “vase” to the
conceptual consciousness apprehending vase is merely imputed by
conceptuality.
Arya Asanga gave an example of someone who is known by three different
names. If that person exists naturally, i.e., from his or her own side, as
the basis for applying those three names to the conceptual consciousness
apprehending that person, it will follow that there would be three
different persons. It would incur the fallacy of there being three separate
individuals. But here we are talking about a single person.
What if there are two different persons having the same name?
If these two different persons existed from their own side, by way of their
own character as the bases for applying, say, the name “John,” to the
conceptual consciousness apprehending these two persons that would mean
that these two separate individuals would become one person.
Going back to the example blue, blue does not exist by way of its own
character as the basis for applying the term “blue” to the conceptual
consciousness apprehending blue.
If the blue exist by way of its own character as the basis for applying the
term “blue” then everybody who look at it would necessarily see blue. It
should be like that because it is not dependent on term.
In short, there is a blue which is the basis for applying the term blue to
the conceptual consciousness apprehending it. However, the blue which is
the basis for applying the term blue to the conceptual consciousness
apprehending blue does not exist by way of its own character. Rather it is
a merely an imputation by conceptuality.
For that reason, the text says that a form being empty of existing by way
of its own characteristics as a basis for applying the term ‘form.’
So what we have to understand is that what does it means when we see the
sentence “form being empty of existing by way of its own characteristics as
a basis for applying the term ‘form.’” What is the problem if form exists
by way of its own characteristic as a basis for applying the term ‘form’?
This is something which will become clearer overtime if you think about it.
You have to work at it and try to get it. Only if you think about it, then
overtime it will become clearer. If you don’t even want to work at it or
think about it then it will never become clear.  We have to know the words
and have to say, such as, “the form being empty of existing by way of its
own characteristics as a basis for applying the term ‘form.’” There is no
choice. It is only on the basis of knowing the words then you can move on
to the next step of finding out what it means when we say “form being empty
of existing by way of its own characteristics as a basis for applying the
term ‘form.’” Only after that, you can think of the next point, “What if
form exists by way of its own characteristics as a basis for applying the
term ‘form.’” Then you can only figure out how form exist as a basis for
applying the term ‘form’ and it exist as something that is merely imputed
by conceptuality.
From your side, the first you must do is that you must know the words and
also must able to speak it out like you are doing with “Om Mani Padme Hum.”
 You have no choice. You have to be able to recite it just as you recite
“Om Mani Padme Hum,” otherwise there is no basis to work on. How are going
to ask question? What are you going to think about? Nothing, isn’t it? If
there is nothing, then how can it ever be any understanding?  So the first
thing is that you are able to speak it out.
Questions for discussion on Sunday, 21st April 2013
1. What are the differences in the presentation of the two truths by the
   Great Exposition School and the Sutra School?
2. What is a conventional awareness according to the Sutra School? Why is
   it called a conventional awareness?
3. What is an ultimate awareness according to the Sutra School? Why is it
   called an ultimate awareness?
4. What are the reasons for the Sutra School’s assertion of external
   objects? What are the reasons for the Mind-Only School’s refutation of
   external objects?
5. Why is it that the Great Exposition School and the Sutra School do not
   assert a selflessness of phenomena?
