Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson17.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.402037
================================================================================


We have spent two to three lessons talking about what is the selflessness
of phenomena in accordance with the MOS. We also talked about the emptiness
of the object and subject as different entities. We talked about the
emptiness of an object existing by way of its own character as the basis
for the conception of the conceptual consciousness. From your own side you
must be able to verbalize what these two emptinesses are i.e. at least be
able to say the words correctly.  Only on that basis then you can think
about the meaning. So what exactly is the emptiness of object and subject
as different entities and so forth?  It is important that you get the
understanding.
Then we do talk quite a fair bit about the three natures/ characteristics
according to the MOS:-
   1. Other-powered natures
   2. Imputational natures
   3. Thoroughly established natures
In the discussion of the other-powered nature, we use the physical and
mental aggregates as the example of the other-powered nature. The
aggregates are the basis of designation.  The basis of designation - the
aggregates- does not exist by way of its own character as a basis of
conception of a conceptual consciousness. So an aggregate existing by way
of its own character as a basis of conception of a conceptual consciousness
is the imputational nature. The emptiness of that is a thoroughly
established nature.
I have mentioned to you the purpose of looking at these three
characteristics/ natures.
The other-powered nature is the basis of emptiness.
The object of negation exists on this basis of emptiness. The object of
negation here is imputational nature.
The emptiness or the non-existence of the imputational nature which exists
on any other-powered nature is the thoroughly established nature.
We have finished with the definition of ultimate truth according to the
MOS.
(Root text page 15)
The definition of a conventional truth is: that which is realized by the
direct valid cognizer directly realizing it by way of being together with
dualistic appearance.
Remember I have given you the alternative definition of an ultimate truth.
Essentially a thoroughly established nature is the final object of
observation of a pure path. All those phenomena that are not final object
of observation of a pure path are conventional truth.
If you think about the three natures in term of the two truths, thoroughly
established nature is the ultimate truth. Then those phenomena that are not
ultimate truth are conventional truth; which means both other-powered
natures and imputational natures is conventional truth.
In short, all phenomena that exist basically are either ultimate truth or
conventional truth. We have all these definitions of ultimate truth. If you
think of ultimate truth, what exactly is ultimate truth? Ultimate truth is
the object whereby when you familiarize yourself with it, you can remove
and purify all the obscurations from the roots. So that very object is the
ultimate truth. Conventional truth is the opposite. When you familiarize
with conventional truth, your obscurations cannot be removed from the root.

In the root text, the definition of an ultimate truth is: that which is
realized by the direct valid cognizer directly realizing it by way of the
vanishing of dualistic appearance.
The definition of a conventional truth is: that which is realized by the
direct valid cognizer directly realizing it by way of being together with
dualistic appearance.
Let’s look at the definition of ultimate truth:
Ultimate truth is that which is realized by the direct valid cognizer
directly realizing it by way of the vanishing of dualistic appearance
Here “that” is emptiness. Emptiness is realized by a particular mind; which
is the direct valid cognizer but specifically it refers to the wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness.
What does this wisdom directly perceiving emptiness realize? It realizes
emptiness.
How does it realize emptiness? It realizes emptiness through the vanishing/
subsidence of dualistic appearance. The dualistic appearance here refers to
as:
    ➢ the appearance of external object,
    ➢ the appearance of subject and object, and
    ➢ the appearance of conventional phenomena
When the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness realizes emptiness, it does
so without these dualistic appearances.
A conventional truth is any phenomenon that when it is realized directly by
the direct valid cognizer realizing it, the realization comes with any of
the three dualistic appearances:-
    ➢ the appearance of external object,
    ➢ the appearance of subject and object, or
    ➢ the appearance of conventional phenomena
Let’s use blue as an illustration of conventional truth. Blue is realized
by a direct valid cognizer.
Here the direct valid cognizer would be an eye consciousness apprehending
blue.
An eye consciousness apprehending blue apprehends blue.
How does it apprehend blue? It apprehends blue by way of the dualistic
appearance. The realization comes with the dualistic appearance.
So in the case of eye consciousness apprehending blue, what appear to the
consciousness?
    ➢ There is an appearance of external blue.
    ➢ There is also an appearance of subject and object.
    ➢ There is also an appearance of conventional phenomena- conventional
      blue.
(Root text page 15)
There are two types of conventional truths:
 1. other-powered phenomena and
 2. conventional truths that are included in imputational constructs.
Imputational constructs is kun btags in Tibetan.
If it is a conventional truth, it is either other-powered phenomena or
imputational constructs.
But whatever is an imputational constructs is not necessarily a
conventional truth, because there are imputational constructs that are non-
existent. Therefore, only imputational constructs which are existent are
conventional truth.
So it says here “conventional truths that are included in imputational
constructs”.
(Root text page 15-16)
Other-powered phenomena and compounded phenomena are equivalent.
Conventional truths that are included in imputational constructs and
uncompounded phenomena other than ultimate truths are equivalent.
All things are accepted to be the common locus of being truly existent and
being a falsity; all final realities are accepted to be the common locus of
being truly existent and being true; and all uncompounded phenomena other
than final realities are accepted to be the common locus of being falsely
existent and being a falsity.
In the MOS, all things are accepted to be the common locus of being truly
established and being a falsity.
In the MOS, basically only emptiness is asserted to be a truth.
In Tibetan, there are two words: brdzun pa and bden pa.
In Tibetan, depending on the context, the words can be function as a noun
or adjective.
When we talk about emptiness, emptiness is a truth. Then conventional truth
is falsity.
“All final realities are accepted to be the common locus of being truly
established and being true” – final realities can be translated as
suchness.
“All uncompounded phenomena other than final realities are accepted to be
the common locus of being falsely existent and being a falsity” -
uncompounded phenomena is basically a permanent phenomena.
If you think about this, there is nothing complicated because we have
already talked about this earlier on. If you have memorized them then it
would be very easy as it is straightforward.
As said earlier, thoroughly established natures and other-powered natures
are truly established.
Imputational natures are not truly established.
What we have read out here is just another way of saying of what I have
just said.
Here falsity is conventional truth. Then emptiness or suchness is ultimate
truth and it is truth (bden pa).
Therefore ultimate truth and truth are the same.
Conventional truth and falsity are the same.
(Root text page 16)
Final realities are necessarily non-affirming negatives. Illustrations of
other non-affirming negatives are similar to those of the Proponents of
Sutra.
The five sense objects – forms and so forth – are produced on the basis of
a substance that is an inner consciousness in dependence upon the latencies
of common and uncommon actions deposited upon the mind-basis-of-all. They
are not established as external objects.
Latencies of all kinds of action are deposited on the mind-basis-of-all. It
is through the ripening of these latencies then there is an appearance of
phenomena.
(Root text page 16)
According to the True Aspectarians, even though the five sense objects –
forms and so forth – are not external objects they are accepted to exist as
gross objects.
According to the False Aspectarians, the five sense objects – forms and so
forth – are not gross objects because if they were gross objects they would
necessarily be external objects.
We have already talked about these.
(Root text page 16)
5 Way of asserting object-possessors
True Aspectarians accept a collection of eight consciousnesses because they
assert that in addition to the collection of six consciousnesses accepted
by the other proponents of tenets, there are the mind-basis-of-all and the
afflicted mentality, making a total of a collection of eight
consciousnesses.
This section we are looking at the differences between the True
Aspectarians and the False Aspectarians in their assertion of the number of
consciousnesses. The True Aspectarians assert that there is a collection of
eight consciousnesses whereas the False Aspectarians assert that there are
just six consciousnesses.
The six consciousnesses are the main minds which we have studied in the
previous modules (Lorig).
The six consciousnesses are five sense primary consciousnesses plus the
mental primary consciousness.
If you add the mind-basis-of-all and the afflicted mentality to the six
consciousnesses, then you have the eight consciousnesses.
So the True Aspectarians assert the collection of eight consciousnesses.
(Root text page 16)
 There are illustrations of both a mind-basis-of-all and an afflicted
mentality. The consciousness that is an object different from the
collection of six consciousnesses and that does not depend upon a sense
power which is its own empowering condition is asserted to be the mind-
basis-of-all.
We have talked about the five sense consciousnesses and the mental
consciousness, which are the six consciousnesses that were discussed in the
previous module. In order for any of these six consciousnesses to be
produced, certain conditions must come together. One of which is their
respective uncommon empowering condition which is the sense power.
Each of the six consciousnesses – the five sense consciousnesses plus the
mental consciousness- has their respective uncommon empowering condition
which is a sense power. The mind-basis-of-all is not like that. The mind-
basis-of-all is not dependent upon the sense power.
Why do the True Aspectarians assert that there is a mind-basis-of-all,
which is a depository of all the latencies of karma?
There are the six usual consciousnesses – the five sense consciousnesses
and the mental consciousness. In order for any of this consciousness to be
produced there must be an uncommon empowering condition, a respective sense
power. It is only by depending on the respective sense power then the
consciousness is generated. That mean the consciousness is generated
temporary. This consciousness does not exist all the time. According to the
True Aspectarians, because this consciousness does not exist all the time
therefore this consciousness cannot be the consciousness which receive all
the latencies of the karma that we have accumulated.
The basis of infusion or the depository of all the imprints of our karma
must be something that is stable and enduring at all times. Otherwise it is
difficult to account for karma. Therefore the True Aspectarians think that
there must be a consciousness other than these six consciousnesses and also
a consciousness that does not depend upon a sense power which is its own
uncommon empowering condition, and such a consciousness is called the mind-
basis-of-all.
The mind-basis-of-all is an awareness to which an object appears and is not
ascertained and it does not realize its object. It is neither virtuous nor
non-virtuous. It is specified as neither virtuous nor non-virtuous.
This mind-basis-of-all is the depository of the imprints of all the karma
that we have created and accumulated. According to the True Aspectarians,
this mind-basis-of-all is not virtuous and is also not non-virtuous. It is
unspecified.
Why the mind-basis-of-all is not virtuous?
If it is virtuous then it is very difficult to account for the mind-basis-
of-all being a depository of imprints of non-virtuous actions.
If the mind-basis-of-all is asserted to be non-virtuous then it is
difficult to explain how the mind-basis-of-all can act as a depository of
imprints of virtuous actions.
For the True Aspectarians, on top of the usual collection of the six
consciousnesses they add the mind-basis-of-all. The reason they assert the
mind-basis-of-all is to account for the need of a stable and enduring
depository of all the imprints of the karma. Such a mind is called the mind-
basis-of-all.
According to the True Aspectarians, the usual collection of the six
consciousnesses (5 sense consciousnesses + 1 mental consciousness) is not
enduring and not stable. Therefore they cannot be the depository of the
imprints of all our actions. So they assert that there must be another mind
that act as the depository of the imprints of all our actions. According to
the True Aspectarians, such a mind is called the mind-basis-of-all.
Next is the illustration of the eighth consciousness – the afflicted
mentality
(Root text page 16)
The consciousness that observes the mind-basis-of-all – its observed object
– and apprehends it in the aspect of it being a self-sufficient
substantially existent I is asserted to be the afflicted mentality.
This afflicted mentality here are essentially what the view of the
transitory collection is, according to this school.
The view of the transitory collection is the mind which observes, in this
case, the mind-basis-of-all and apprehends it to be a self-sufficient
substantially existent ‘I’. That is the afflicted mentality.
What does the afflicted mentality observes?
The afflicted mentality observes the mind-basis-of-all.
So the mind-basis-of-all is the object of afflicted mentality.
This afflicted mentality observes the mind-basis-of-all and apprehended the
mind-basis-of-all to be self-sufficient substantially existent I.
(Root text page 16)
The mind-basis-of-all is asserted to be the illustration of the person that
is the support of actions (Skt. karma) and their results.
According to the True Aspectarians, what is the “I” or the person that move
from life to life? For them, it is findable and it must be something that
you can point to. So for the True Aspectarians, it is the mind-basis-of-
all.
What is the person or ‘I’, that move from life to life that creates karma
and experiences the result of karma?
It is the mind-basis-of-all.
For the True Aspectarians, the ‘I’ or person is findable, and if you look
for it, you can point to something and say: “That’s me. That’s ‘I’”.
Ultimately what is the ‘I’ that is finable? It is the mind-basis-of-all.
With the exception of the CMWS, the highest school, everybody else,
starting from the AMWS down to the MOS, SS and GES, all of them assert that
the ‘I’ or person is findable. Not only the ‘I’, anything that exist and
everything that exist is findable.
What is the meaning of ‘findable’?
Finable means that if you look for it, definitely you will be able to point
to something that is the object; whether it is the person, or ‘I’ or
something else.
So all of them say that if it exists, it must be findable and it must be
something that it can point to. If there is nothing that you can point to
that is the object, then that thing do not exist whatsoever.
The GES, SS, MOS and AMWS have their own take as to what an ‘I’ or the
person is. All of them accept that the ‘I’ or the person is findable as you
can point to something that is the person.
To the Mind Only True Aspectarians, the thing that is the person that you
can point to is the mind-basis-of-all.
(Root text page 16)
False Aspectarians assert a collection of six consciousnesses and posit the
mere mental consciousness to be the illustration of the person that is the
support of actions and their results.
The Mind Only False Aspectarians assert a collection of six consciousnesses
and they do not assert the mind-basis-of-all. For them, the illustration of
a person is the consciousness.
What exactly is the person that moves from life to life? To them, the
person must be the mental consciousness, and that is the person or ‘I’.
Next is the discussion of valid cognizers and non-valid cognizers.
(Root text page 16)
[The Proponents of Mind Only] assert two types of awarenesses:
  1. valid cognizers and
  2. non-valid cognizers.
They assert two types of valid cognizers:
  1. direct valid cognizers and
  2. inferential valid cognizers.
The presentation is pretty much the same as before and there is nothing
much to say about it.
(Root text page 16)
6 Way of asserting selflessness
The way of positing illustrations of the coarse and subtle selflessness of
persons is similar to the Autonomists and below.
An illustration of the selflessness of phenomena is, for example, the
emptiness that is a form and the valid cognizer apprehending that form
being empty of being different substances.
According to the MOS, form and the valid cognizer apprehending that form
are the same substance.
But according to the SS, form and the valid cognizer apprehending that form
are different substance and they are of cause and effect relationship.
For the SS, they have difficulty to see how object and subject are of the
same substance. They cannot see how it can be. They say: There can be a
clairvoyance knowing another mind. This clairvoyance is a mind. The object
that is realized by this mind (clairvoyance) is another mind.
This clairvoyance is a subject and another mind is the object. If these two
are of the same substance that mean the clairvoyance and the other mind
that it realizes would become one entity. That would necessary incur the
fallacy that these two mind streams are one then it follows that these two
are one same person.  This is what the SS say to the MOS; “Your mind and
someone else mind is not one substance. You as a person and another person
cannot be the same person”.
SS say to MOS: This clairvoyance which knows another mind is a valid
cognizer. This valid cognizer which is clairvoyance know another mind. If
we posit that this clairvoyance and the mind that it knows are one
substance, it follows that these two would be one entity. This would lead
to the fallacy that these two individuals are one person.
The MOS say; “No problem.”
If you think about this, it is not so straightforward. Even the theory is
mind-boggling at times. When you say; “Everything is in the nature of
mind.” What does this really mean?
When we say that everything is in the nature of mind, we are not saying
that everything is mind. That is definitely not the meaning. If we really
think about it, there is some sense behind it. Of course one can explain
it. What we have discussed in the past, something is pleasant or unpleasant
is determined by that object appearing to you as pleasant or unpleasant;
not appearing to someone else. How you see something as pleasant or
unpleasant does depend on whether the object appear as pleasant or
unpleasant to you and not to someone else.
At the end of the day, if you want to point out exactly what that pleasant
or unpleasant object is basically the appearance of that pleasant object to
your mind or the appearance of that unpleasant object to your mind. It is
the factor of appearance.  In order for there to be a factor of appearance
of pleasant object there must be a cause, in this case, is the imprints for
that appearance of the pleasant object to arise. Without the imprints you
will not experience that appearance of the pleasant object. Likewise, in
order for there to be appearance of unpleasant object, there must be
imprints. Without which there cannot be that unpleasant appearance. Without
the imprints for a particular appearance, there is no way for the
appearance to arise.  When there is an imprint and the ripening of the
imprint in term of the appearance of an object, what exactly the object is
the factor of appearance of that phenomenon, and it is that which perform
the function of the object.
Take for instant of time. During the time when we are suffering, or when we
are unhappy, we feel it is very long. It doesn’t matter the actual moment
of time we are suffering, but during that experience, we feel that is very
long. So there is this appearance that it goes on forever and never ending.
Based on the appearance, we have the feeling it is very long. The suffering
that we experience will be as if we have been suffering for a long time.
Whether we suffer for a long or short period of time, the actual moment
maybe very short but during the time when we are experiencing that
unpleasant feeling it seem to be very long and there is an appearance of
suffering going on and on and never ending. That appearance causes us
suffering. What causes us the suffering is just that appearance.  So
whether we are suffering for long or short period of time, if we really
think about it, it has nothing to do with the actual time in term of hours
or minutes, but what is long or short period of time is what we feel. It is
same as coming to class. Most people probably think that these two hours is
too long, but maybe there are some people who think that is too short.
How the MOS explain a clairvoyance knowing another mind? They have to be
able to explain coherently:
- how this clairvoyance is a direct valid cognizer,
- how it directly apprehend another mind and
- at the same time be able to coherently explain that this direct valid
cognizer and the other mind that it realizes are of one substance.
According to the MOS, for the clairvoyance knowing another mind, how does
this clairvoyance know the other mind?  The way this clairvoyance realizes
another mind is unlike how an eye consciousness realizes vase. An eye
consciousness realizes nakedly. But that is not how a clairvoyance knowing
another mind and that is not how it realizes another mind.
According to the MOS, on the basis of developing a very stable
concentration it will come a point whereby another mind will appear to this
concentration.  The mind of another person is experiencing different things
and has different aspect.
How does the mind of the other person appear to this clairvoyance?
An aspect that is similar to this other mind appears to this clairvoyance.
Because of this, the MOS assert that this clairvoyance knowing the mind of
another person know exactly the mind of another person and can be a direct
valid cognizer.
It is possible to have a prophetic dream; dream whereby you clearly see
what will definitely happen in the future.
You see that appearance in the dream. This prophetic dream can happen due
to the power of karma or through the blessing of the deity. In the
prophetic dream you are seeing something which has yet to happen. Provided
it is an accurate dream, and something definitely will happen, what you are
actually perceiving is something that is similar to that will happen but
you are not perceiving the phenomenon nakedly. What you are seeing is
something that is similar in aspect to what will happen. What you see in
the case of an accurate prophetic dream is exactly that will happen. In
that case, the dream is accurate and what you see is the representation of
what will happen. This is similar to the earlier explanation of how a
clairvoyance knowing the mind of another person and how that is a valid
cognizer, according to the MOS. Although the clairvoyance that know the
mind of another person does not see nakedly the mind of the other person
but an aspect that is similar to that mind appear as it is accurately.
Therefore this clairvoyance can be posited as a direct valid cognizer. So
there is no danger of two individuals becoming one individual. So that is
the explanation of how the clairvoyance sees another mind, according to the
MOS.
The SS has more qualms. According to the SS, let’s say there are two
individuals looking at blue. There is a shared blue, the same blue, appear
to these two individuals. According to the MOS, the blue that is seen and
the eye consciousness apprehending blue are of the same substance.
However, to the SS’ point of view, for these two individuals, there is one
blue. This blue is due to the ripening of the latency of a particular karma
in person A mind. But this blue is also the result of the ripening of the
latency of the person B mind. If there is a common blue that is seen by
these two persons, then it will follow that person A mind and person B mind
are being one entity. That is the SS criticism.
That is why the SS says that things are not in the nature of the mind and
there are external objects. So if you posit external object, then there
will be no problem.
The MOS then explain: The two individuals looking at one vase. The vase
that is appearing to person A is not the vase that is appearing to person
B.
What appear to person A does not appear to person B.
What appear to person B does not appear to person A.
When the person A says; “Vase is impermanent”, but that is not what person
B is saying.
When the person B says; “Vase is impermanent”, but that is not what person
A is saying.
But both are similar in saying that “Vase is impermanent”.
Even though both say the same thing “Vase is impermanent”, but what person
A is saying is not the same thing as what person B is saying.
If you understanding this then it would be quite easy to understand what
person A see is not what person B see. Similarly, what person B sees is not
what person A see. Therefore, the two individuals are not the same
individual.
So the vase that appear to the person A is one substance with person A’s
mind.
The vase that appear to the person B is one substance with person B’s mind.
This is because the vase that appear to person A does not appear to person
B, therefore, the vase that appear to person A is not one entity with
person B’s mind.
It is kind of giving you the answers to the three questions which I have
asked you in the earlier lesson.
Does hell fire appear to the Buddha? If hell fire appears to Buddha, hell
fire will be one entity with Buddha mind.
How hell fire is established?
Hell fire is established from the ripening of a karma to be born in hell as
this appearance can be only be found in hell realm.
Things and phenomena do not appear to Buddha due to ripening of the karmic
imprints, but rather all phenomena appear to the Buddha due to the Buddha
completing the accumulation of the two collections.
Because hell fire exists and that must exist in Buddha’s mind - a direct
valid cognizer apprehending that fire. Similar to the explanation of how
clairvoyance works, according to the MOS, there is a hell fire and the
fully qualified hell fire that appear to hell being. An aspect similar to
that appears to the Buddha’s mind, specifically the Buddha direct valid
cognizer apprehending the hell fire, an aspect similar to the fire that
appear to the hell beings appear to the Buddha’s mind. Buddha does not
nakedly realize it but through the appearance of an aspect similar to the
object.
The reasons why the Buddha can see hell fire is because of the hell beings
see hell fire. The Buddha directly perceives hell fire in dependence upon
the hell beings seeing hell fire. This is just an illustration to help us
to think over and over again of what it is meant by everything is in the
nature of the mind as asserted by the MOS.
As I have mentioned a while ago, you have to experiment and discover for
yourself that if we adopt the view of the MOS of how everything is in the
nature of the mind, whether our destructive emotions has become lesser or
not. First we have to understand the assertion of the MOS. After having
gained a good understanding of their world view, then we look at own
experiences and think according to their world view. We then check for
ourselves whether there is of any benefit in doing that and whether it does
help us to become calmer and becoming less emotionally involved in the
negative way and have less destructive emotion. If we can see that such a
world view can help us to lessen our afflictions then there must be some
truths in it.
I have to go away for one week, there will be no class this coming Thursday
but I would like all of you to come together on next Tuesday. I would like
all of you to come on next Tuesday with a short written essay. What do I
want you to write? We have been talking about the Four Seals. Now imagine
someone is asking you about the Four Seals. How are you going to explain to
that person?
The scenario is this. One person says to you: “Since you have been studying
the Basic Program and also study the Tenets, I really want to learn about
the Four Seals. Can you please explain to me in an easily understandable
manner and in a practical way in one hour?”
The four seals are:
   1. All compounded phenomena are impermanent.
   2. All contaminated phenomena are misery
   3. All phenomena are empty and selfless.
   4. Nirvana is peace.
Your explanation should be based on the self, the person and our
contaminated body and mind. You don’t talk about other things such roses,
cars, apples as these are compounded phenomena. You basically use the
person and our contaminated body and mind to explain to the person in such
a way that he/she can think about it and then put into practice. In order
to help him/her to arrive at an understanding that indeed our life spans,
ourselves, our body is impermanent and how it is the source of problems and
misery. This is what you have to think. You must be able to link
“impermanent” and “in the nature of suffering’; because it is impermanent
therefore it is suffering.
We have also talked about the third seal: “All phenomena are empty and
selfless.” Because of that therefore there is an end to our problems. The
source of our problems is ego grasping, if we can end that then we can end
our sufferings and all our problems. We have to show that person how this
is the case. We have talked lot of it but how does that understanding will
lead to an end of our problems? We have to show and explain clearly in a
practical ways. The main purpose of this it to lead the listener to a
conclusion that enlightenment and nirvana is not a fairy tales but it exist
and it is a possibility. Enlightenment can be obtained. How are you going
to prove this by using the understanding?
Write that before you come on Tuesday. You can write the explanation in two
or three pages. You don’t just write what just come to your mind and also
don’t write for the sake of writing. The point is to be concise with the
words and the meaning. You have to be very clear in your own mind first. It
is only when you are clear in your own mind then you can be clear in your
essay. So think carefully and then write it out however many pages it would
be. The point is that you bring whatever you have written on Tuesday then
you find another person and then present it to him/her. It is like two
persons exchanging of what they have written and then read through what was
written by the other person. If there is anything that you do not agree or
not sure then you can ask the other person; “Why you write about this?”
From the discussion you can see how you can help one another to improve on
what was written so as to raise the standard and improve the quality of
what you have written, or learning new idea or perhaps new way of
expression or new logic. You have to keep in mind that you should be able
to substantiate whatever you have written. When you read out whatever you
have written to many listeners, naturally people will have questions and
ask; “Why do you wrote this? What is your reason? Can you share with us?”,
then you should be able to explain clearly of why and what you have
written. If you have to ask someone of what you wrote, then that is not the
way. For those of you who had studied in the university, it is the same as
the way you present your thesis to your professor.
Khen Rinpoche Spoke in English: That is the idea behind this.
The essence is that you have to be confident and be able to defense of what
you have written. On Tuesday, you come at 7.30pm then you start with the
usual prayers that we normally do in class. After that you chose the person
whom you want to discuss of what you have written. You both can discuss
until 9.00pm.
I thought this is helpful. We may have studied but we may not be confident
of what we know and when someone ask; “What have you learnt?” and we are
not able to say it confidently then it is not good. I thought this exercise
may be helpful. Keep whatever you have written. In the future when we have
the opportunity and time perhaps some of you can share whatever you have
written or perhaps I will just call one of you to present. It is possible
that some individual who cannot write for whatever reason then it is ok and
not to be stressed with it. For those of you who really want to learn and
have the interest especially to those who are committed to this Basic
Program then you must write. It is not an option. As there is no class on
Thursday there is some time between now and next Tuesday then bring along
of what you have written on Tuesday.
