Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson20.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.572181
================================================================================


Question: Regarding the Hinayana tenets and the Mahayana tenets, you
explained that it was the mark of Mahayana tenets that they posit the four
bodies of the Buddha. Is that the only basis for positing the difference
between the Hinayana and the Mahayana tenets? Or are there some other
specific differences for highlighting the difference between the Hinayana
and the Mahayana tenets.
Answer: As mentioned in one of the previous lesson, one of the things that
set the Mahayana tenets from the Hinayana tenets is the Mahayana tenets
presentation of what a Buddha is. In the presentation, they talk about the
four embodiments or the four bodies or four kayas of Buddha. I think the
Hinayana tenets are not able to make such a presentation.
I wonder if the mind of enlightenment/ bodhicitta is also one of the things
that set the Mahayana tenets apart from the Hinayana tenets. I wonder
whether the Hinayana tenets do accept that there is a mind of
enlightenment/ bodhicitta or not.
About using the assertion of external objects as the differentiator between
the Hinayana and Mahayana tenets, I think it is not feasible because one of
the sub-schools of the AMWS asserts external objects and the CMWS also
asserts external objects. These two are Mahayana tenets.
If you look at the Hinayana tenets, I don’t think there is a presentation
of a progressing towards enlightenment by traversing the ten bodhisattva
grounds. Such a presentation is not made in the Hinayana tenets.
This is something that requires further thoughts. About the presentation of
the four bodies, I would think that this is one of the key distinguishing
features of the Mahayana tenets that set them apart from the Hinayana
tenets. The Hinayana tenets do not have such an explanation of the four
bodies of a Buddha.
We have finished the MOS and we have started the MWS in the previous
lesson. If you look at the presentation of the view of selflessness, you
can see that there is a progression in terms of the subtlety of the
explanation as we move from one tenet to the other. If you compare the
presentation of the view of selflessness in the Hinayana and Mahayana
tenets, you will find that the presentation of the view of selflessness in
the Mahayana tenets is more deep and profound. Even within the Mahayana
tenets, one sees also the difference in the subtlety of their respective
presentation of selflessness. All the four Buddhist tenets present a view
of selflessness.
All four Buddhist tenets are the same in asserting that the root of all our
problems, the root of cyclic existence, and the root of all sufferings is
the conception of a self, or the apprehension of a self, or grasping at the
self. All Buddhist tenets say the same thing. All Buddhist tenets say that
the only way to eradicate the apprehension of a self is through realizing
selflessness. They are all the same, and you have to know that. All the
Buddhist tenets say the same thing with regards to what is the root of all
our problems, which is the apprehension of a self. The only antidote to the
apprehension of a self is to realize the selflessness. Having said that,
these four Buddhist tenets have their own way of asserting what exactly
this apprehension of a self is, and they have their own assertions as to
what exactly is the view of selflessness that is the antidote to the
apprehension of a self. As you move through the tenets, you will see that
the presentation of selflessness become increasingly more profound and
extensive.
The most important kind of understanding that the Buddhist can get and the
most important concept to settle is this view of selflessness. What exactly
is selflessness? That is a most important concept to settle and to
delineate clearly in your mind. What exactly that means? We talked about
the Eightfold Noble Paths. One of which is right view. When one gains a
correct meaning of selflessness, I think one can considers this
understanding of the selflessness to be right view. Essentially, what is
right view? Right view is basically seeing things as they are, understand
what exactly reality is, and how things exist. This is of crucial
importance. This is the reason why we educate ourselves about the four
Buddhist tenets. Why do we have to learn? The point here is to discover
what reality is. How do things and events, we ourselves and phenomena
exist? What is their nature? Why is it so important to have right view; in
this case is just seeing/realizing/understanding things as they are?  Why
is it so important to just realize the nature of things and phenomena and
the nature of reality? Because if we have the right view, if our
understanding of reality is right, then the kind of interaction we have
with reality will be valid. On the basis of right view, you have right
analysis or right thinking or right thought. If you look at our lives, all
our problems, unhappiness and sufferings always come from misconception,
and the distorted perceptions of reality. We go against reality. We have
all these wrong conceptions. We suffer because we have all these wrong
concepts. If we want to stop problems and sufferings, we have to stop these
wrong concepts. The only way to stop these misconceptions is to gain an
exact understanding of how things exist. Therefore, right view is the basis
for right thinking, right perception, and the correct interaction with
reality.
On basis of right view we have right thought. On the basis of right
thinking, one has right speech.  Basically whatever physical and verbal
actions that we carry out will be realistic and not harmful to others. So
based on the right thinking, you will know what to say, what not to say,
when to say and when not to say. If you have that, then we have right
action. We could perhaps relate right action to living our lives according
to karma, abandoning non-virtues and creating virtues. All these can only
come from right thought, the right perception of reality, which comes from
right view. Then right livelihood would also follow naturally. One would
engage in right livelihood and right effort as well, by putting effort
correctly into that would also come about.
On the basis of all these, then you can have the correct kind of
mindfulness. Without the earlier understanding or realizations, it is not
really possible to have right mindfulness.  So you see we start from right
view, then you have right thinking, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, then you have right effort. On the basis of all these then come
right mindfulness; the correct kind of mindfulness. So without the earlier
understanding, it is not possible to have correct mindfulness. On the basis
of right mindfulness, correct kind of mindfulness then come right
concentration. Concentration here is not talking about just having single-
pointedness of mind; which being able to concentrate. That is not the
point. The right concentration that is part of the Eightfold Noble Path is
the concentration that has selflessness as its object of observation. This
is the kind of concentration that we need. The whole point of developing
mindfulness is to be able to develop single-pointedness of mind, then
having this single-pointedness of mind focusing on the ultimate nature of
reality - the selflessness. The goal is not to get single-pointedness of
mind for the sake of having single-pointedness of mind. That is the tool.
With right concentration, with the calm-abiding/meditative serenity
focusing on selflessness, then one strives to develop special insight. With
special insight, you will finally be able to disturb the
afflictions/destructive emotions. This is the distinguishing feature of
Buddhist teachings, Buddhism.
As I have mentioned to you a couple of times, you have to see, discover and
realize for yourself how extremely important it is to learn and educate
yourself, especially going deeper into the Buddhist teachings. Literally we
have to study the great treaties, like what we are trying to do here. We
look deeper into the Buddhist teachings, and think about it.  You say you
want to meditate, but you must know how to meditate. What do you want to
meditate? What is the purpose of meditation? As I mentioned in the last
lesson, the whole point of learning, educating and practicing, one of the
most important thing is to discover for ourselves how do we exist, how do
others exist, how do phenomena exist, what is the ultimate nature, what is
the final reality? Of course learning about the ultimate nature of reality
like what is presented in the tenets is not easy feat. Many conditions must
come together for hearing the explanation, reading the texts, reading
different commentaries, discussing with your peers, thinking about stuff.
You have to do all these in order to gain an understanding, to clarify, and
to increase your understanding of selflessness. If you don’t think over
time, and by just listening will not lead you to any understanding. No way.
You need to analyze on something that requires the understanding of
reality. You need to look at the presentation of selflessness from all
different angles using all kinds of different avenues of reasoning, logic
and so forth. Only then you will be able to eliminate your qualms, your
lack of understandings, and your doubts.
(Root text page 19)
2 Divisions
There are two divisions:
1. Autonomists (Skt. Svatantrika) and
2. Consequentialists (Skt. Prasangika).
3 Meaning of each division
The explanation of the Autonomy School and the Consequence School.
There are two divisions of proponents of the Middle Way:
   1. Middle Way Autonomist (Svatantrika-Madhyamaka)
   2. Middle Way Consequentialist (Prasangika-Madhyamaka)
Those proponents of Middle Way who asserts existent by way of its own
character are AMWS.
Those proponents of Middle Way who do not assert existent by way of its own
character is a CMWS.
The thing that differentiates the AMWS from the CMWS is their beliefs that
things and events, basically everything, exists by way of their own
character.
What is existent by way of its own character and what is non-existent by
way of its own character?
What is the difference between these two?
Existent by way of its own character means that when you search for the
imputed object, at the end of the day, you will be able to find it i.e. you
will be able to point to something that is that imputed object.
Because the AMWS asserts that all things and events are findable upon
analysis, when you look for it are findable, such as the person. Therefore
the person and all other phenomena exist by way of their own character,
because when you look for the ‘I’ or the person, according to the AMWS, you
will be able to point to something and say: “There”, “That is”. According
to them, whatever they point to, there is something. Uultimately you can
identify: “That is the person. That is the self.” Therefore, according to
the AMWS, everything exists by way of its own character.
The AMWS asserts that all phenomena exist by way of their character; and if
you look for that imputed object, you will be able to find it. This means
that the person also exists by way of its own character, because the person
can be found if you look for it. At the end of the day, you should be able
to point to something that is the person. That is what they believe. This
is their fundamental premise and from which they are working on. There is
something you can point to that is that very thing. So for the ‘I’, they
posit the mental consciousness is the illustration of the person. They do
think about it, and eliminate the various possibilities, and through their
own thinking, they say; “If you have to say what the person is, the mental
consciousness is the person”.
Basically the AMWS says that if it is an existent, it necessarily exists by
way of its own character. Why? Because when you look for the imputed
object, you definitely will be able to point to something that is the
object. Therefore it can be found. So what they are saying is that if it is
an existent you will be able to find it when you look for it. If you are
not able to find it when you look for it that means it does not exists at
all.
If you do remember the our discussion from the previous lesson, the
proponent of Middle Way, both AMWS and CMWS, do not assert true existent.
So both of them are the same in asserting that phenomena do not exist
truly, and there isn’t true existent. The AMWS says that the meaning of
true existent is not the meaning of existent by way of its own character;
whereas CMWS says that true existent, existent by way of its own character
are different way of saying but they means the same thing.
(Root text page 20)
Autonomy School
The explanation of the Autonomy School (Skt. Svatantrika) has seven
outlines:
1. definition,
2. divisions,
3. etymology,
4. way of asserting objects,
5. way of asserting object-possessors,
6. way of asserting selflessness, and
7. presentation of the grounds and paths.
1 Definition
The definition of an Autonomist is: a Proponent of the Middle Way who, by
way of accepting autonomous reasons, does not assert true existence even
conventionally.
Autonomist (Skt. Svatantrika) and Proponent of the Middle Way who Propounds
Inherent Existence are equivalent.
Let’s try to understand the meaning of true existent.
The AMWS have their own take on what exactly is true existent. Their
interpretation ultimately can be traced to what the Buddha said in “The
Descent into Lanka Sutra”.  There is a quotation from “The Descent into
Lanka Sutra”: “All phenomena exist through appearing to the consciousness,
all phenomena exist conventionally and all phenomena do not exist
ultimately.”
Why is it that all phenomena exist conventionally?
All phenomena exist conventionally because phenomena exist through the
force of that phenomena appearing to a consciousness.
How do we posit the existence of phenomena?
The existence of phenomena is posited through the force of them appearing
to a consciousness. For that reason, all phenomena exist conventionally.
So the Buddha said: “All phenomena exist conventionally”. What is the
reason for Buddha to say that?
All phenomena exist conventionally because all phenomena are posited to
exist through their appearing to a consciousness.
So that is the reason why all phenomena exist conventionally and not
existing ultimately.
For, if a phenomenon can exist without being posited through the force of
appearing to a consciousness, then that phenomenon would be ultimately
existent.
According to the AMWS, if a phenomenon is established by way of its own
uncommon mode of existence without being posited through the force of
appearing to a non-defective awareness, that phenomenon exists ultimately.
According to AMWS this is the meaning of true existent.
If there is anything that you point to that is established by way of its
own uncommon mode of existent (existent from its own side) without being
posited through the force of that phenomena appearing to a non-defective
awareness, then that phenomena would be existing ultimately or truly
existent.
So, if a phenomenon is established by way of its own uncommon mode of
existent without being posited through the force of appearing to a non-
defective awareness, then that phenomenon would be truly existent.
But because according to the AMWS, there isn’t any phenomenon that you can
point to that is established by way of its own uncommon mode of existent
without being posited through the force of appearing to a non-defective
awareness, therefore that phenomenon does not exist ultimately. All
phenomena have to exist conventionally.
According to the AMWS, how do things exist?
In order for something to be considered an existent, it has to be something
that is appearing to a mind.
According to them, all phenomena are posited because they appear to the
mind, i.e. posited through appearing to a consciousness and therefore it
exists.
According to the AMWS, this is the meaning of true existence. If there is
anything that you can point to that is established by way of its own
uncommon mode of existence (i.e. existing from its own side) without being
posited through the force of that phenomenon appearing to a non-defective
awareness, then that phenomenon will exist ultimately or will be truly
existence.
So, if the phenomenon is established by way of its own uncommon mode of
existence without posited through the force of appearing to a non-defective
awareness, then that phenomenon would be truly existence.
According to the AMWS, there isn’t any phenomenon that you can point to
that is established by way of its own common mode of existence without
being posited through the force of appearing to a non-defective awareness.
You cannot point to any phenomena like that.
Therefore phenomena do not exist ultimately.
Therefore all phenomena have to exist conventionally.
How do things exist according to the AMWS?
In order for something to be considered as existence, it has to be
something that is appearing to a mind. According to them, all phenomena are
posited because they appear to a mind, i.e. the phenomena are posited
through appearing to a consciousness. Therefore it exists.
The AMWS assert that in order for something to exist, it has to be posited
by mind.
Here “posited by mind” means that that phenomenon must appear to a mind.
Because it appears to the mind, therefore that phenomenon can be posited.
Therefore it is an existence.
On top of that, the AMWS also assert that there must be something also from
the side of the object, i.e. there must be existence of its own side.
These two collectively account for the existence for any given phenomena.
In short, for anything to exist:
    ➢ It must appear to a mind
    ➢ There is also existence from the side of the object.
When these two come together then there is how thing exists.
The AMWS do not accept that phenomena are established by way of its own
uncommon mode of existence without being posited through the force of
appearing to a non-defective awareness.
Going back to the quotation from the Descent to the Lanka Sutra, all
phenomena exist because they are posited through the force of appearing to
a mind.
If phenomena exist then they must appear to a mind. That is how we can
posit that phenomenon. Therefore it makes it an existence.
So it must appear to a mind. What exactly is this mind? What constitute
this mind?
The AMWS and CMWS have a different assertion as to what this mind is.
What is this mind if a phenomenon appears to it, then it can consider as an
existence?
There is a difference between the AMWS and CMWS.
According the AMWS, this particular mind has to be a non-defective
awareness.
In what way is a non-defective awareness non-defective?
It is non-defective i.e. there is nothing wrong with that particular mind
existing by way of its own characters.
You have to remember the quotation from Descent to the Lanka Sutra, because
that is the basis:
Phenomena are posited through the force of appearing to a mind.
What is this mind? AMWS say that this mind has to be a non-defective
awareness.
What is the meaning of a non-defective awareness? How is a non-defective
awareness non-defective?
What exactly about it is non-defective?
The factor of it existing by way of its own character is non-defective,
because that cannot be harm by a reason. According to them, anything and
everything that exist must exist by way of its own character.
According to AMWS, if it is an existence, that phenomenon is necessarily
posited through the force of it appearing to a non-defective awareness.
If whatever basis in question, if that object or the basis is not posited
through the force of appearing to a non-defective awareness, then that
basis is a non-existence.
[Root text: page 20]
2 Divisions
There are two divisions:
1. Sutra Middle Way Autonomists (Skt. Sautrantika-Svatantrika-Madhyamika)
and
2. Yogic Middle Way Autonomists (Skt. Yogacara-Svatantrika-Madhyamika).
The definition of a Sutra Middle Way Autonomist is: a Proponent of the
Middle Way who propounds a presentation of conventionalities through mostly
conforming with the Proponents of Sutra.
The definition of a Yogic Middle Way Autonomist is: a Proponent of the
Middle Way who propounds a presentation of conventionalities through mostly
conforming with the Proponents of Mind Only.
In these two definitions, the words ‘mostly conforming’ mean most of the
time but not all the time.
[Root text: page 20]
4 Way of asserting objects
Existence by way of its own characteristics, existence from its own side,
and inherent existence are equivalent.
Uncompounded space, true cessations, the past and future, and the subtle
selflessness of persons are both non-affirming negatives and conventional
truths.
Ultimate truth, final reality, and the subtle selflessness of phenomena are
equivalent.
Existence by way of its own character, existence from its own side and
inherent existence are mutually inclusive.
Ultimate truth, suchness, and the subtle selflessness of phenomena are
mutually inclusive.
Here you see there is a difference in the presentation of the two truths
according to the AMWS and the MOS.
In the MOS, emptiness is an ultimate truth. In the MOS, the subtle
selflessness of a person is an ultimate truth.
According to the AMWS:
    ➢ the subtle selflessness of a person is a conventional truth.
    ➢ the subtle selflessness of phenomena is an ultimate truth.
The subtle selflessness of phenomena here is referring to the emptiness of
true existence.
According to the AMWS, ultimate truth and emptiness are mutually inclusive.

The emptiness here is the selflessness of phenomena - the emptiness of true
existence.
Therefore, according to AMWS, the subtle selflessness of a person is not an
emptiness.
The definition two truths -conventional truth and ultimate truth- is not
given in the root text for the AMWS but it is pretty much the same as the
MOS. Page 1 of your chart.
|                       |Conventional truth        |Ultimate truth             |
|Autonomy Middle Way    |An object that is realized|An object that is realized |
|school                 |in a dualistic manner by  |in a non-dualistic manner  |
|(Svantantrika          |the direct valid cognizer |by the direct valid        |
|Madhyamaka)            |that directly realizes it.|cognizer that directly     |
|                       |                          |realizes it.               |
|Mind Only school       |That which is realized    |That which is realized     |
|(Cittamatra)           |through                   |through                    |
|                       |dualistic appearance by a |the subsidence of dualistic|
|                       |valid                     |appearance by a valid      |
|                       |direct perceiver that     |direct                     |
|                       |directly realizes it      |perceiver that directly    |
|                       |                          |realizes it                |


According to the AMWS, what is ultimate truth?
Ultimate truth is the truth for the ultimate awareness.
You can read “ultimate” here as the ultimate awareness.
Ultimate awareness here refers to the meditative equipoise of a superior
being; which is the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness.
Don dam bden pa which we talked about before cannot bring this completely
from the English words ultimate truth.
Don literally means object,
Dam is the short for bden pa which means holy or ultimate.
Bden pa in this context refers to the ultimate awareness, the meditative
equipoise of a superior being.
Don here is the object; the object here is the emptiness.
Simply speaking, emptiness is an ultimate truth.
All phenomena, other than emptiness, are conventional truths.
Although emptiness is an ultimate truth, emptiness does not exist
ultimately.
Why emptiness does not exist ultimately?
Because emptiness exists conventionally.
Why does emptiness exist conventionally?
Because it is posited through the force of appearing to a mind.
According to the AMWS, if it is an existence:
      ⇨ It is necessarily not ultimately existence.
      ⇨ It is necessarily exist conventionally.
There is a reason why you have to make a distinction between emptiness
being an ultimate truth, being ultimate existence and not being ultimately
existence. There is a difference.
Although emptiness is an ultimate truth but emptiness does not exist
ultimately.
Why emptiness does not exist ultimately? Why ultimate truth doesn’t exist
ultimately?
Because everything that exists, include emptiness, have to exist
conventionally.
According to the AMWS, there is nothing that can exist without being
posited through the force of appearing to a mind.
If it is posited through the force of appearing to a mind that means it
exists conventionally. It does not exist ultimately.
[Root text: page 21]
Sutra Middle Way Autonomists assert that the five sense objects – forms and
so forth – are different entities from consciousness and that they are
gross external objects composed of partless particles.
Yogic Middle Way Autonomists assert that the five sense objects – forms and
so forth – are one entity with the consciousness apprehending them.
I just assume that you understand these two paragraphs and I will then move
on.
[Root text: page 21]
5 Way of asserting object-possessors
The mental consciousness is asserted to be the illustration of the person.
They assert a collection of six consciousnesses.
There are two types of awarenesses:
   1. valid cognizers and
   2. non-valid cognizers.
There are two types of valid cognizers:
   1. direct valid cognizers and
   2. inferential valid cognizers.
Sutra Middle Way Autonomists do not assert self-knowing direct perceivers.
Yogic Middle Way Autonomists assert all four types of direct perceivers.
Self-knowing direct perceivers and yogic direct perceivers are necessarily
non-mistaken consciousnesses, while the other two, [sense direct perceivers
and mental direct perceivers,] can be either mistaken or non-mistaken.
Proponents of Sutra, Proponents of Mind Only, and Autonomists all accept
that:
 • a direct perceiver is necessarily a consciousness free from
   conceptuality,
 • a subsequent cognizer is necessarily a non-valid cognizer,
 • a consciousness that is mistaken with respect to its determined object
   is necessarily a wrong consciousness,
 • if it is a mistaken consciousness with respect to a phenomenon, it is
   necessarily not a valid cognizer with respect to that phenomenon,
 • if it is an inferential cognizer, it is necessarily not a valid cognizer
   with respect to its appearing object, and so on.
We did looked at Lorig in the previous module, and we talked quite a fair
bit on all these points so there is no need to repeat them.

[Root text: page 21]
6 Way of asserting selflessness
The person being empty of being permanent, unitary, and independent is
asserted to be a coarse selflessness of persons, while the person being
empty of being self-sufficient substantially existent is a subtle
selflessness of persons.
Yogic Middle Way Autonomists assert that a form and the cognizer
apprehending that form being empty of being different substances is a
coarse selflessness of phenomena.
All phenomena being empty of true existence is asserted to be the subtle
selflessness of phenomena.
The two [subtle] selflessnesses are differentiated by way of the object of
negation and not by way of the basis of the emptiness because the
refutation of the object of negation – true existence – upon the basis of a
person is the subtle selflessness of phenomena, while the refutation of
self-sufficient substantial existence upon the basis of a person is the
subtle selflessness of persons.
The two conceptions of self are differentiated by way of the mode of
apprehension and not by way of the observed object because through
observing the basis – the person – and apprehending it to be truly existent
it is a conception of a self of phenomena, and through observing the basis
– the person – and apprehending it to be self-sufficient substantially
existent it is a conception of a self of persons.
We will do the “Presentation of the grounds and paths” in the next lesson.
Question:  A non-defective awareness is asserted to be a consciousness that
is established by way of its own character because it cannot be harmed by
reasoning. Was there a correct understanding? Therefore does that mean that
since a wrong consciousness is also established by way of its own character
therefore a wrong consciousness is also a non-defective awareness? In fact
all consciousnesses that exist are established by way of its own character
therefore all consciousnesses are non-defective awareness. Is there a
redundancy in saying non-defective?
Answer: The non-defective awareness cannot refer to every mind.
Non-defective awareness specifically refers to a valid cognizer.
For example, a mirage appears to an eye consciousness. Just because a
mirage appears to an eye consciousness, you cannot say that therefore the
mirage is posit to exist. There has to be a non-defective awareness beside
that part of the explanation of earlier about what non-defective means. It
refers specifically to a valid cognizer.
Phenomena are posited through the force of them appearing to a non-
defective awareness. Because these phenomena appear to a non-defective
awareness therefore we say that they exist.  Basically. the positer here is
the mind to which a phenomenon is appearing to and it is a non-defective
awareness. We cannot say that this non-defective awareness means all kinds
of mind. Specifically, it has to be a valid mind/awareness.
Question: Between the MOS and the AMWS, both assert that the object exists
by way of its own character and relying on a consciousness to impute it for
it to exist. How is the AMWS more subtle in this aspect to the MOS?
Answer: In the MOS, although they assert that phenomena are in the
entity/nature of mind, at the same time they assert that there are truly
existence/truly established phenomena such as the mind itself.
For MOS, although they do not assert external object, they do assert true
existence.
The phenomena are truly existence such as the mind itself.
You need a method to deal with the destructive emotions such as anger and
attachment that has the mind as their focus. Just the concept of there
being no external object cannot harm the attachment to, for example, mental
sensation, mental feeling, such as pleasurable feeling, because mental
sensation such as pleasurable feeling are real, and truly existence. In
this case, asserting that the mind is truly established/truly existence
cannot help in dealing with the attachment to the mind such as pleasurable
sensation, whereas understanding that even the mind is not truly existence,
does help.
Basically, the AMWS position is more powerful. Unlike the MOS, their world
view that everything is the entity of mind is helpful in dealing with
attachment to objects other than mind, but ultimately, they think the mind
is truly existence. They still apprehend a truly existence mind, therefore,
the affliction based on that can arise.
But the AMWS, not only assert that phenomena other than mind are not truly
existence, they also assert that the mind itself is not truly existence.
This is so much more powerful.
The AMWS explain how the minds do not exist in the way it appears to us.
Although it appears as truly existence but that is not how it exists.
Of course, the most profound explanation about emptiness of true existence
comes only in the CMWS. It is the CMWS presentation that is the most
profound because they say that all phenomena exist as merely imputed by
thought, imputed by mind, phenomena exists as mere name.
You can actually see and feel that there is a difference between the MOS
presentation and the MWS presentation. The MWS is being more profound in
that not only phenomena other than mind not truly existence, even the mind
itself is not truly existence. So, this is the more profound and deeper
than the MOS.
But within the MWS you have these two schools:
   1. Autonomists (Skt. Svatantrika) and
   2. Consequentialists (Skt. Prasangika).
We haven’t even started. If you think about it, there must be a difference
between these two. As to what a difference is, this is something much more
difficult to distinguish in understanding and in experiencing these two.
Question: In MOS, they have proven the non-existence of external object by
proving there is no such thing as a directionally partless particle. Now
here, we have the higher school assert that there is a partless particle.
So, how do they again prove that there is a partless particle?
Answer: What you just said is the assertion of the Sutra Middle Way
Autonomists (Skt. Sautrantika-Svatantrika-Madhyamika). Remember it is
mostly conforming. It is conforming with the SS and with………
[The recording cut-off at this point.]

