Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson02.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.379330
================================================================================


As the great Kadampa masters of the past had said, “All sentient beings by
nature have the Buddha lineage.” What they are saying is that all sentient
beings from time without beginning, i.e. since sentient beings were in
existence, have the Buddha lineage; or what we called the Buddha nature.
All sentient beings always have this natural potential to become
enlightened and become Buddha. Having said that, however if sentient beings
do not possess the developmental lineage, they will not be able to achieve
the full enlightenment.
Although all sentient beings have this Buddha nature since time immemorial,
but from our side, we need to put in effort and strive to achieve result
such as attaining a good rebirth as a human being or as a celestial being.
By nature, we have the potential to achieve enlightenment. It is there. But
if we don’t put in effort then we would not achieve enlightenment. Of
course enlightenment is made possible because we have the potential. If the
potential is not there in the first place then no matter what we do, it
would be a waste of time.
All of us have the potential to become fully enlightened because we have
the Buddha nature within us. Likewise, all of us have the potential and
ability to actually learn and understand the Buddha’s teachings. Having
said that, however much we can get out from our studies and learning do
depends on our individual effort. When comes to learning and studying the
Buddha’s teachings, individual interest and effort are very important. The
Kadampa masters give an analogy of churning milk in order to get butter.
Although the milk is the cause of butter, if you do not churn the milk you
are not going to get any butter; the butter is not going to come from its
own side. The point that I am trying to make is that you have to put in
effort from your own side. You have the potential to study and learn so all
you need to do is to put in effort.
Do you remember the definition of a consciousness from the previous module?
Consciousness is that which is clear and knowing. It is a naturally
occurring thing. We all have the mind that which is clear and knowing. The
mind has the ability to learn so we just have to activate it.
Root text: Presentation of Tenets by Jetsun Chokyi Gyalten
Reference book - Cutting Through Appearances by Geshe Lhundrup Sopa and
Jeffrey Hopkins

(Root text page 1)
I pay homage to the eminent holy beings who are in essence inseparable from
Guru Protector Manjushri.
Here, in explaining the presentation of tenets, there are three outlines:
   1. definition,
   2. divisions, and
   3. the meaning of each division.
1. Definition
The definition of a person who propounds Buddhist tenets is: a person
propounding tenets who accepts the Three Jewels to be the final objects of
refuge and who does not assert any objects of refuge other than them.
2 Divisions
There are four divisions of proponents of Buddhist tenets:
   1. The Proponents of the Great Exposition (Sanskrit: Vaibhasika),
   2. The Proponents of Sutra (Skt. Sautrantika),
   3. The Proponents of Mind Only (Skt. Cittamatra) and
   4. The Proponents of the Middle Way (Skt. Madhyamika).
The first two are also called ‘the two schools that propound [truly
existent external] objects’.
3 The meaning of each division
The explanation of the
   1. Great Exposition School,
   2. Sutra School,
   3. Mind Only School and
   4. Middle Way School.

In the previous lesson I have talked about the purposes and the reasons of
studying tenets. There are many reasons for studying tenets but one of the
most important reasons for studying tenets is to be able to understand the
subtle meaning of dependent arising. Why is it important to understand the
subtle meaning of dependent arising? Lama Tsongkhapa mentioned in his Three
Principles Aspects of the Path:
[9] Without the wisdom realizing ultimate reality,
Even though you have generated renunciation and the mind of enlightenment
You cannot cut the root cause of circling.
Therefore, attempt the method to realize dependent arising.
One of the main reasons why we are studying tenets is to arrive at an
understanding of the subtle meaning of dependent arising. Lama Tsongkhapa
said that it is very important and without which we cannot cut the root of
our suffering in samsara. In the study of tenets, we are going to look at
the assertions that put forth by the four Buddhist tenets or the four
schools. All of them have their own ways of presenting selflessness. They
have their own ways of explaining what exactly selflessness is. As we
progress up the hierarchy of these Buddhist tenets we will see that the
explanation of selflessness become increasingly more subtle. It is only by
seeing how the presentations of selflessness becoming more subtle as we go
along, only then you are able to appreciate the subtlety of the
presentation of the highest school. It is because you have something to
compare against with.
The word for tenets in Tibetan is grub mtha; which made of two syllables:
grub and mtha. The literal translation of grub mtha in English would be “an
established conclusion”.
In this context what does established (grub) means? It is a thesis that is
decided upon and is established in reliance upon scriptural and/or
reasoning from the perspective of your own mind. From the perspective of
your mind, that decision is correct, but in reality it doesn’t mean it is
correct.
Mtha in Tibetan means a limit. In this case, it can be translated as
“conclusion”. That means you have concluded it is liked that.
So now we roughly know tenets means an established conclusion.
There are two types of person:
1. Those whose minds have been affected by tenets.
2. Those whose minds are not been affected by tenets.
1. Who are those whose minds are not affected by tenets or who do  not  hold
on to any tenet?
  They are people who are not interested in what reality is and don’t
  bother to find out or investigate. When come to past and future lives or
  reincarnation, they are not interested. They don’t analyze and check
  whether there are past and future lives. Rather they just focus on the
  things of this life i.e. what they can just see and hear on this life
  alone. They don’t really think too much about it.
2. Who are those whose minds have been affected by tenets or who hold on  to
a tenet?
  They are people who not just focus on the affairs or happiness of this
  life but also take an interest and put in effort into finding out about
  how things really work and what the nature of realities is; which we have
  talked about in the last lesson the basis - the different facets of
  realities.
  These individuals think about it and then come to their own conclusion
  about what realities are. Based on their own conclusions they live their
  life according to certain principles: abandoning certain activities or
  ways of thinking and cultivating certain ways of thinking or certain ways
  of doing things.
When we talk about tenets, generally speaking, there are two types of
tenets:
   1. Non-Buddhist tenets
   2. Buddhist tenets
Pertaining to the Buddhist tenets, there are four schools.
In the first place, we have to understand the difference between Outsiders
and Insiders; literally in Tibetan. Here we usually say non-Buddhist and
Buddhist. So, we (Buddhists) are the Insiders.
A Buddhist is who:
    ⇨ Accepts the Three Jewels to be the final objects of refuge
    ⇨ Has faith in the Three Jewels’ ability to protect him from:
         o the sufferings of the lower realms and
         o the sufferings of samsara
In short, someone who doesn’t have that single-pointed conviction and faith
in the Three Jewels is not a Buddhist.
We would like to think that Buddhism and being a Buddhist is the best thing
in life. But just thinking that being a Buddhist is the best alone is not
very helpful. It is not sufficient. In order to see that being a Buddhist
is the best thing we can be, we must have an object of comparison. In this
case, who are we comparing ourselves to?  We are comparing to the
Outsiders; the non-Buddhist.  So in order to see the special features of
the Buddhist teachings and the reason why being a Buddhist is so special,
we first must understand the views and the beliefs of the non-Buddhist. On
the basis of understanding the views of the non-Buddhist, we can then
compare those views to the views that are being taught in the Buddhist
teachings.  When we are able to see the big difference, then we will be
able to see the special qualities of being a Buddhist.  Then we will really
start to appreciate how wonderful it is to be a Buddhist. If we have an
understanding of the views of the non-Buddhist, I think it will really make
a big difference to our minds.
In the text, there is a definition of a person who propounds Buddhist
tenets.
[The definition of a person who propounds Buddhist tenets is: a person
propounding tenets who accepts the Three Jewels to be the final objects of
refuge and who does not assert any objects of refuge other than them.]
What exactly is a person who propounds Buddhist tenets (or a proponent of
Buddhist tenets)?
In order to understand this, let us look at three defining characteristics:
   1. The founder/teacher
   2. The doctrine
   3. The view
Our own Buddhist schools have three distinguishing features:
   1. The founder/teacher: Buddha is someone who has :
         ⇨ Extinguished every single fault and
         ⇨ Acquired every single good quality
   2. The doctrine: the teachings of the Buddha are not harmful to any
      sentient beings
   3. The view - in general, the view here is that there isn’t a person or
      self that is permanent, unitary and independent.
People usually called [a person or self that is permanent, unitary and
independent] a soul.
It is the Buddhist’s view that the soul, specifically a permanent, unitary
and independent person, do not exist whatsoever.
In other way of explanation, a person who propounds Buddhist tenets is
someone who asserts the four seals.
The four seals were spoken by the Buddha just before he passed away into
nirvana.
The four seals are:
   1. All compounded phenomena are impermanent.
   2. All contaminated phenomena are suffering [or miserable].
   3. All phenomena are empty and selfless.
   4. Nirvana is peace.
Someone who accepts these four seals is a proponent of Buddhist tenets.
The person who does not accept these four seals is not a proponent of
Buddhist tenets.
To summarize:
   1. A Buddhist is someone who accepts the Three Jewels
   2. A proponent of Buddhist tenets is someone who on the basis of
      accepting the Three Jewels as the object of refuge accepts the four
      seals.

1. All compounded phenomena are impermanent
There is a profound implication behind this statement -“All compounded
phenomena are impermanent”.
The word compounded is also translated as composed. The word ‘composed’
suggest a composed phenomenon is a phenomenon whose existence comes into
being in dependence on the coming together of the various causes and
conditions. Because its existence is dependent on the coming together of
causes and conditions therefore it itself is subject to change. The
phenomenon itself changes. If those causes and conditions do not come
together, that phenomenon in question would not arise.
Similarly, in order for that phenomenon to goes out of existence, the
causes and conditions must also come together. Without which, the
phenomenon will continue to exist.
When we say; “All compounded phenomena are impermanent”, it means that all
compounded phenomena undergo momentary change i.e. in each and every single
moment of time, they are undergoing change.

2. All contaminated things are suffering
Phenomena can be divided into:
   1. Contaminated phenomena
   2. Uncontaminated phenomena
What do contaminated phenomena refer to?  Here the word ‘contaminated’
refers to the afflictions.
Contaminated phenomena are phenomena that are under the influence of
afflictions. Such phenomena are miserable/ suffering. For the
uncontaminated phenomena, they are not in the nature of suffering.
Question: Can contaminated phenomena, which are suffering, be eliminated?
This important question leads us to the third seal - “All phenomena are
empty and selfless”.

3. All phenomena are empty and selfless
If we do analyze, all sufferings arises primarily from anger and
attachment. Where these anger and attachment arises from? If we do analyze,
anger and attachment arises from an apprehension of a self.
Question: Can this apprehension of a self be eliminated?
There are the two things to look at:
   1. The self that is apprehended by such a mistaken mind, in realities,
      does such a self exists?
   2. Is there an antidote to this apprehension of a self?
Using the terminology from Lorig, a wrong consciousness is a knower that
engages its object erroneously.
Through analysis, one can come to understand that an apprehension of a self
is a wrong consciousness because it engages in its object erroneously. Why?
While in realities there isn’t such a self, the apprehension of a self
believes that such a self exists.
Because an apprehension of a self is a wrong consciousness, therefore, in
realities, there must be another mind whose mode of apprehension is the
complete opposite of that apprehension of a self. Such a mind is referred
to as the wisdom realizing selflessness. The wisdom realizing selflessness
is a valid mind. In realities, there isn’t such a self and this wisdom
realizing selflessness realizes it to be so, therefore it is valid mind.
The definition of a valid cognizer is a newly incontrovertible knower.
A valid cognizer is the opposite of a wrong consciousness. A valid cognizer
is a correct mind, a factually concordant mind.
A wrong consciousness apprehends something which doesn’t exist to exist.
A valid cognizer apprehends whatever phenomenon in question in the way it
exists.
So a valid cognizer is the opposite of a wrong consciousness.
We have these two different minds: the apprehension of a self and the
wisdom realizing selflessness.
The apprehension of a self is an erroneous mind and it apprehends its
object erroneously.
Wrong consciousnesses such as the apprehension of a self don’t have the
support of a valid cognizer; they don’t have truth on their side and
therefore are not stable.
Wisdom realizing selflessness is a factual concordant mind; the way it
apprehends the self is exactly the way in which the self exists in
realities. It in accord with realities and can be back up by the facts.
Therefore it is the truth.
On one hand there is a wrong consciousness which has perverted way of
looking at things. On the other hand, there is a mind that sees truth as it
is. It is a valid cognizer because it is valid. It has a valid support and
has the truth from its side.
The valid cognizer can harm and destroy that wrong consciousness.
The apprehension of a self is a wrong consciousness. It is an erroneous
knower that engages in its object erroneously. Why? Although there isn’t a
self, the apprehension of a self apprehends a self.
The wisdom realizing selflessness is a valid mind. Just as there isn’t a
self, the wisdom realizing selflessness realizes that. So, the wisdom
realizing selflessness is a valid mind and is factual concordant.
If you look at how the wisdom realizing selflessness apprehends its object,
it apprehends its object completely opposite to the apprehension of a self.
Because it is so, the wisdom realizing selflessness can harm the
apprehension of a self.
The more we get accustomed to the understanding of selflessness then our
ego-grasping - apprehension of a self - it will become weaker over time.
This is something that we have to see for ourselves. We have to establish
whether cultivating this wisdom realizing selflessness will lead to gradual
weakening of the apprehension of a self.
Assuming you know that by familiarizing yourself with the wisdom realizing
selflessness, the apprehension of a self will be weakened. If the ego-
grasping – the apprehension of a self- can be weakened then logically one
can establish that with more familiarization and by increasing the power of
the wisdom realizing selflessness, one will be able to completely eradicate
the apprehension of a self.
The reason why “All phenomena are empty and selfless” is discussed
immediately after saying that “All contaminated phenomena are miserable”
because there is a solution. If there is no solution then it is pointless
to focus on how contaminated phenomena are miserable.
As mentioned earlier, if you analyze and think about all the problems and
unhappiness, they all originate from either anger and/or attachment. Why
does anger and attachment arise in us? It must be something that causes
them to arise. When you analyze, anger and attachment always arises from
within a very strong sense of self or I. While we have this ego-grasping,
this apprehension of a self, when we think about this, we can come to
understand that this self that is apprehended by the ego does not exist
whatsoever. When we are able to develop the wisdom that see that such a
self does not exist whatsoever then one will be able to oppose to this ego-
grasping. In doing so, through reducing this ego-grasping and eliminating
it, one will overcomes all problems and suffering.
It is very clear that if we look at our own experience, all the problems
and unhappiness arise from the mistaken ways of relating to realities i.e.
mistaken ways of looking at things and events. Of all the numerous wrong
conceptions and mistaken ways we have about the world and ourselves, the
ultimate wrong conception is the strong belief in a self -the apprehension
of a self. Through thinking and analysis, we will gradually come to see
that the apprehension of a self is the root of all the misconceptions which
lead us into sufferings and problems.
Question: Can this ego-grasping – an apprehension of self - be eradicated?
Since an apprehension of self is the root of all the problems and if the
root of all the problems and sufferings can be eradicated, then sufferings
would not arise. In place of sufferings is peace; therefore nirvana is
peace.

4. Nirvana is peace
Because all phenomena are empty and selfless therefore nirvana is peace.
When we destroy the root of all our problems, the ego-grasping –
apprehension of a self - there and then is liberation.
Nirvana means liberation, freedom from all the problems and sufferings
there and then.
Nirvana is not established outside. Nirvana is established right on the
basis of our minds. So come the time when we eradicate the root of all the
problems -the ego-grasping- from the mind, there and then nirvana is
achieved.
In the absence of ego-grasping that means no more problems and sufferings.
Then obviously there is peace.
Selfless means absence of a particular self.
When we say all phenomena are empty and selfless, so what is the self that
does not exist?
In the context here, the self is something that is accepted by all the
Buddhist tenets. The self here refers to a permanent, unitary and
independent self. All Buddhist tenets accept such a self that is permanent,
unitary and independent do not exist whatsoever.
If you look at most of the non-Buddhist tenets, majority of them assert
that there is a permanent, unitary and independent self. (It is known as
soul in the outside world).
All Buddhist tenets say that such a self does not exist. Many non-Buddhist
tenets assert such soul -the self that is permanent, unitary and
independent. It is not that they are making this claim without thinking
through. They have their own way of looking at things. It is not as if they
just believe in it without a reason. They do have their own reason. Within
the many non-Buddhist tenets, there are some who also assert reincarnation.
For these proponents of non-Buddhist tenets who assert reincarnation, in
their mind they are trying to figure out whom or what is the thing that
goes on from lives to lives. To them, there must be a person or a self that
moves from lives to lives.  Obviously they must be able to explain what it
is that moves from lives to lives. Of course, they are not going to say
that it is the body is the self because it is clear that the body is left
behind. These proponents of non-Buddhist tenets holder who assert
reincarnation then come out with the idea that the self or soul that moves
from lives to lives must be something that is unrelated to the body, i.e.
completely non-dependent on the body. They assert that this self or/soul
that moves from lives to lives is completely unrelated to the body and
itself is also unchanging. So for them, they look at the self as permanent.
So permanent means unchanging.
Similarly they assert that this particular self is unitary. Unitary means
not constituted by parts and is partless.
Independent means whose existence is independent of causes and conditions.
So, this self is permanent, unitary and independent.
We have been looking at the non-Buddhist tenet holders’ assertion of a
permanent, unitary and independent self. They believe that such a soul or
self exists as permanent, unitary and independent.
Why do they assert that the self is completely unrelated to the body?
Because they do not know how to posit the self as having the same entity
with the body, so they came out with the explanation that the self is
permanent, unitary and impermanent. However, according to Buddhism, such
the kind of self dos not exist whatsoever.
As I said earlier, who is a person who propounds Buddhist tenets?
The proponent of Buddhist tenets is:
    ⇨ Someone is a Buddhist
    ⇨ Someone who asserts the Three Jewels as the object of refuge
    ⇨ Must be someone who also accept the four seals
There are four divisions of proponent of Buddhist tenets:
   1. The proponents of the Great Exposition
   2. The proponents of the Sutra
   3. The proponents of the Mind Only
   4. The proponents of the Middle Way
You must memorize these four divisions of proponent of Buddhist tenets.
Why are there four divisions of proponents of Buddhist tenets?
This is related to the three turnings of the wheel of dharma. From one
point of the view, he turned the wheel of dharma three times.
When we talk about the proponents of Buddhist tenets, it can also be
divided into:
   1. The proponents of Hinayana tenets
   2. The proponents of Mahayana tenets
In the first turning of the wheel of the dharma, the Buddha taught that all
things are truly established.
In that teaching, you will find them in The Great Exposition School (GES)
and The Sutra School (SS).
The proponents of the GES and the proponents of the SS are the proponents
of the Hinayana tenets.
The intended trainees for the first turning of the wheels of dharma are
those who are propounding the Hinayana tenets; specifically those of the
GES and SS. The Buddha taught in such a way to fit their dispositions.
In the second turning of the wheel of the dharma, the Buddha taught that
all phenomena are not truly established.
The intended trainees for the second turning of the wheel of dharma are
those of the Middle Way School (MWS).
The proponents of the MWS are the proponents of the Mahayana tenets.
In the third turning of the wheel of the dharma, the Buddha then
differentiated between what is truly established and what is not truly
established.
In the third turning of the wheel of the dharma, the Buddha said that:
    - thethoroughly established natures and the other powered natures are
   truly established
   - the imputed natures are not truly established
The intended trainees for the third turning of the wheels of dharma are
those who propound the Mind Only School (MOS).
If you look at it, it is likely that the followers of these four tenets
were already existed during the three turnings of the wheel of the dharma.
In the explanation of the GES and SS, there is an explanation of their way
of asserting objects and object processors (or mind). We have already
looked at this in the previous module in which it talked about the
divisions of object and consciousnesses. Therefore in this module, I will
not go into details into the way of asserting objects and object processors
because we have roughly dealt with it in the previous module. Unless there
are some pertaining points, I will bring them up; otherwise the emphasis
will be looking at the various different tenets, their views on
selflessness and how they explain the different paths and grounds.
The teachings will be based on the root text, so you should read the text.
If there is thing that you are not sure or not clear or don’t understand
along the way, you should bring it up in class.
I did mention in the previous class that this is not easy but is
challenging. Besides the meaning, you have to grapple with the many new
terminologies. But you shouldn’t lose your heart. You will just get at it
and it will become easier as we go along. As I have said it takes time so
for the next one, two, three months you just have to work at it. From your
side, you have to work at it and put in the effort. Read the text, don’t
miss classes and then participate in the discussion. If you do so, then by
the end of this module, you will definitely get something. Whatever
understanding you get formed the basis for you to be able to better
appreciate the teachings of some of the great lamas such as His Holiness
the Dalai Lama. If you have some grounding through studying some of these
things, so when you go to attend His Holiness’s teachings, you will better
appreciate it as it sound familiar to you and so forth.
This is just one of the many reasons why we are learning tenets. We believe
in the future lives, so by studying and learning now, we plant imprints in
our minds. With these imprints, we get better from lives to lives. Sooner
or later we will bring our understanding and knowledge to culmination and
on that basis we will be able to generate the experiences and realizations
on the path. Along the way, we will be able to eliminate many of our
obscurations and our negativities. It is a very long term thing. By
reminding yourself how fortunate you are and how you are accumulating
virtues and merits along the way, then you generate enthusiasm and joy for
having the opportunity to do something like this. Therefore you must come
to class with enthusiasm and the sense of joy.
[Reference book - Cutting Through Appearances by Geshe Lhundrup Sopa and
Jeffrey Hopkins -start from page 149.]

____________________________________________________________________________
________________

Extract from Module 10: The Tathagata Essence  (2008)  Commentary  by  Geshe
Thubten Chonyi
The buddha lineage (or potential) can be defined as the phenomenon  that  is
suitable to be transformed into a Buddha’s body. The Buddha’s  body  can  be
divided into the
  (1) uncompounded (or uncomposed body) and
  (2) the compounded (or composed) body.
The Buddha’s bodies are definitely enumerated as these  two.  There  are  no
Buddha’s body that is neither of the two.
The phenomenon that is suitable to  be  transformed  into  the  uncompounded
body is called the natural lineage.
The phenomenon that is suitable to be transformed into the  compounded  body
is called the developmental lineage.
The naturally abiding lineage has been in our minds  since  they  came  into
existence and has been there since time without beginning.
The developmental lineage refers to the imprints that are left on  the  mind
through the force of hearing, reflection and contemplation  which  have  the
potential to be transformed or developed into a path.
By depending on these two lineages, the  final  result  will  be  the  three
bodies of the Buddha - the truth body, the complete enjoyment body  and  the
emanation body.
By focusing on the naturally abiding lineage, we will  generate  the  wisdom
that realizes it and through that, we accumulate the collection  of  wisdom.
This will result in the attainment of the dharmakaya, the truth body.
By  meditating  on  the  developmental  lineage  conjoined  with  love   and
bodhicitta, we accumulate the collection of merit and we  achieve  the  form
bodies:– the complete enjoyment body and the emanation body.
In other words, we achieve the truth body of the Buddha by depending on  the
collection of wisdom and we  achieve  the  form  bodies  of  the  Buddha  by
depending on the collection of merit.

