Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tenet/lesson13.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.044507
================================================================================


According to the MOS, all phenomena can be grouped into three categories.
These three categories are the three natures:-
   1. The thoroughly established nature
   2. Other-powered nature
   3. Imputational nature
Sometimes people get stuck at the level of words. They cannot go beyond the
level of words, and they are confounded by the terms such as other-powered
nature. You don’t have to be confused or confounded by the words, you just
have to know what exactly it means.
According to this school, other-powered nature is just another way of
saying “impermanent phenomenon, compounded phenomenon, composed
phenomenon”.
So according to this school, other-powered phenomena, composed phenomena,
impermanent phenomena are synonymous.
What is the main characteristic of such phenomena?
Other-powered natures, composed phenomena, impermanent phenomena basically
refer to phenomena that undergo momentary change, i.e. changing from moment
to moment. This change is due to the cause that brought about that
particular phenomenon. So impermanent phenomena or composed phenomena are
under the power of the causes that brought it about, therefore it is called
other-powered.
Why impermanent phenomena change from moment to moment?
What is impermanent phenomenon?
What is composed phenomenon?
Those phenomena undergo momentary change. All impermanent phenomena are
like that- they undergo momentary change.
Why is it the nature of impermanent phenomenon to undergo momentary change?

Because they are under the control of the power of their own respective
causes which brought about its existence. So this is the meaning of other-
powered. The word ‘other-powered” is just a way of helping us to understand
what exactly impermanent phenomenon or composed phenomenon is.
Then there is this thoroughly established nature. Again you are confounded
by the term. Put it simply, thoroughly established nature means emptiness.
In the context of MOS, thoroughly established nature is the same as
ultimate truth.
Thoroughly established nature means emptiness. According to this school,
what kinds of emptinesses are there?
    ➢ There is the emptiness of self-sufficient substantially existent
      person
    ➢ There is the emptiness of subject and object as different entity
    ➢ There is the emptiness of phenomena as naturally bases of engagement
      or referent of names
These emptinesses are all thoroughly established nature.
In short, what is thoroughly established nature? It is emptiness.
Emptiness of what? They are emptiness of self of person and emptiness of
self of phenomena.
In the context of this school, emptiness is an ultimate truth.
In this school thoroughly established nature, ultimate truth and emptiness
are synonymous.
Then you have the imputational nature which is “kun btags” in Tibetan.
Imputational natures are of two types:
   1. Existent
   2. Non-existent
Imputational natures which are existent refer to all permanent phenomena
other than emptiness, for example, uncompounded space.
Imputational natures which are non-existent, for example, external object.
According to this school, external objects do not exist.
What is external object?
According to this school, it is an imputation through the force of
conceptuality.
Another example is sky-flowers which do not exist, but nevertheless it is
imputed by conceptuality.
These are the things that you have to remember. According to the MOS, all
phenomena are included in these three natures. Of the three:-
    - Thoroughly established nature and other-powered nature are truly
      established
    - Imputational natures are not truly established
According to this school, what is ultimate truth?  It is emptiness. If
emptiness is ultimate truth then every other phenomenon that exists would
be conventional truth.  This means out of the three natures:
    - Thoroughly established nature is an ultimate truth
    - Other-powered nature and imputational nature are conventional truth.



|The Three Natures                                          |
|Other-powered      |Thoroughly         |Imputational       |
|phenomena, composed|established nature,|natures are of two |
|phenomena,         |ultimate truth and |types:             |
|impermanent        |emptiness are      |Existent (e.g.     |
|phenomena are      |synonymous         |uncompounded space)|
|synonymous         |Emptiness of self  |Non-existent (e.g. |
|Main               |of person and      |external object)   |
|characteristic:    |emptiness of self  |Imputation through |
|Phenomena that     |of phenomena       |the force of       |
|undergo momentary  |                   |conceptuality      |
|change.            |                   |                   |
|This change is due |                   |                   |
|to the cause that  |                   |                   |
|brought about that |                   |                   |
|particular         |                   |                   |
|phenomenon.        |                   |                   |
|truly established  |truly established  |not truly          |
|                   |                   |established        |


We have to understand why we are learning all these four tenets. It is very
important. We should always link what we are learning back to the four
seals that we have talked about in the beginning of the class. The four
seals attest a particular doctrine is Buddhist; a seal that stamp that is a
Buddhist path.
The Four Seals
   1. All composed phenomena are impermanent
   2. All contaminated phenomena are misery.
   3. All phenomena are empty and selfless.
   4. Nirvana is peace.
In particular, we look at the second seal: All contaminated phenomena are
in the nature of suffering.
At the end of the day, what we are looking for is an end to our problem and
misery. Then the question arises: “Can our misery ever be stop?” The
Buddhist answer is: “All our misery and problem can be stopped because all
phenomena are selfless”. This means that whether we can put an end to our
sufferings or not depends on whether or not we do understand selflessness.
In the four tenets, they have their own presentations, but the essence of
what they are trying to say is their respective ideas as to what
constitutes selflessness. What exactly is this selflessness? If you
realized that, it can put an end to all our misery and problem.
What we don’t want are sufferings and problems. So the question is: “Can it
be put to an end or not?”
The answer that is given in the teaching is: “If we realize selflessness,
then we can put an end to all our problems and sufferings”.
That leads to the question: “How does the realization of selflessness can
reduce and destroy our afflictions?”  That is a question we have to think
for ourselves.
How does each of these tenets say about the selflessness, which supposedly
is the antidote that will put an end to our misery? This is something we
have to learn and to discover for ourselves through our own experience,
through practice, meditation or whatever.  We have to look at our own
experience and then see how it works. You should notice by now that when we
were looking at the Hinayana tenets, the GES and the SS, when they talked
about selflessness, they only talk about selflessness of person. They do
not talk about selflessness of phenomena. But once you start to look at the
Mahayana tenets which we have just began on the MOS, on top of talking
about the selflessness of person, they also talk about the selflessness of
phenomena.
What I am saying to you now is not just a delivery of lecture, but rather
as I talk, you have to think about it. It is something to reflect on and to
meditate upon. In our mind we have different afflictions. We get upset, we
have anger, and we also have desire/attachment. Take for example,
attachment, when attachment arises, we have to ask ourselves, look inside,
and to discover how attachment arises. How does it arise? It is very clear
that whenever we get emotionally involved with an object, attracted to an
object or person, that emotionally involvement always involves the
appearance of a very attractive person or attractive object. Similarly,
when we get upset at some situations or at some person, that emotional
involvement is always based on the appearance of something that is very
unpleasant, something you don’t like or something that look bad. But it is
not just an appearance of an attractive person or object that leads you to
be attached, and it is not just an appearance of a very unpleasant
situations, object or person that makes you upset. It is based on a sense
of “I” - that person looks attractive to me, I find the person attractive
then we get emotionally involved. The “I” is always involved. Similarly,
because the person appears unpleasant to me, ugly, unpleasant or not nice
to me or “I”, then we get upset, isn’t it?
We don’t get attracted to a person or object just because that object or
person appears pleasant to somebody else. It has appeared pleasant and
attractive to the “I” or “me” then we will get emotionally involved.
Similarly, just because somebody looks like an idiot, very unpleasant, or
bad to somebody else, that is not the reason for us to get upset at that
person. That person or the object or the situation has to appear unpleasant
to “me”, then “I” get upset.
In dependence on the object or the person appearing either pleasant to “me”
or unpleasant to “me” then ‘I’ get attached or ‘I’ become angry. All the
afflictions like anger or attachment always arises in dependence of a sense
of “I” or “me”. So whether we get attached or upset at some situations,
objects or person, those emotions always arise from within the sense of
“I”. The object or person appearing either pleasant to me or unpleasant to
me, and base on that, ‘I’ either get attached or upset. This means the
stronger the sense of “I”, the more we think that this “I” is everything,
is the most important, or the most precious, i.e. the stronger the way of
looking at the “I” and that commensurate with the way of looking at the
“I”, then you have either stronger attachment or stronger anger.
This is quite apparent. If you look at how our mind works then it is very
clear. Likewise, we also get very attached to our friends, people who are
my friend, people at my side or of my group. So the stronger the way of
looking at the friends in that way, the stronger the attachment. Similarly,
with regards to the situations or people that we don’t like, “This is not
my side, not my group, my enemy”, then again the anger will be stronger. On
the contrary, if we just relax, just let go and loosen the grip on this
sense of “I” or “me”, from our own experience we can tell that the more we
are able to allow little bit more space in the mind, more relax, loosen the
grip, then definitely we can see the corresponding decrease in the anger,
attachment and so forth. It is clear from our experience, and we can tell
that.
Friends do exist, enemies do exist, my friends exist, my enemies exist. Of
course they exist. While they exist, if we loosen that grip on that “I”, on
the ego, give the mind more freedom and more space, then:
- the attachment that usually arise in dependence on seeing or holding onto
some people as my friends, and
- the anger that usually arise in dependence on holding others as enemies,
will decrease. Even though they still remains as friends and enemies, and
if we loosen the grip on the “I”, the afflictions generated in relation to
them would decrease.
Enemies do exist, friends definitely do exist, and there will be unpleasant
objects and pleasant objects. The thing is that if we loosen the grip on
the “I” then the usual anger and attachment due to holding on to the
concept that they are my friends or enemies would not be as strong.
Just having some idea of selflessness can really help to lessening the
afflictions such as anger and attachment. Imagine that you walk into a
jewellery shop, especially ladies, and you will get very excited when you
look at diamond or whatever.  Then there is an appearance of something very
nice such as diamond, and based on that it is possible for a thought to
arise: “How nice if I have it”. Diamond is just an example. It could be
something that people talk about. Just imagine that something you find it
nice and may have the thought “How nice if I have it.”  Then you acts upon
the thought and buys the diamond. Once you have bought the diamond, it
becomes yours and the “I” come into the picture. Now it is not just a
diamond, it becomes “my” diamond. You can see the difference in the
emotional involvement with the object; just after buying the diamond and
before buying the diamond. After the “I” comes into the picture, the
attachment is so much stronger. Not only the object looks better and more
precious than before, the attachment become stronger than before because
the “I” has come into the picture and the diamond now become “my” diamond.
The object has not changed. It is still a diamond, but what has changed is
that you became the owner. When the “I” come into the picture, then there
is a very strong sense of clinging that is much stronger than before. So
what has changed? Our involvement and the “I” have come into the picture.
Then when you lose your diamond, you will lose your sleep also, because now
it is your diamond. If it is not your diamond, which is the same object,
sitting in the shop, you would not care whatever happens to the diamond.
Even it is being stolen, you can’t be bothered and you won’t lose sleep
over it because it is not yours. However, when it is in your possession and
the “I” has come into the picture, when you lose it, you get upset and
worry.
In those cases when there is a very strong sense of an “I”, what we may be
grasping at is a real permanent ‘I’. We say “Permanent, unitary and
independent I”, and that is what we are grasping at. Also we are grasping
at a self that is able to stand on its own, a self-instituting I, self-
sufficient I.
In the Hinayana tenets, the GES and the SS, we talked about the emptiness
of permanent, unitary and independent self and the emptiness of a self-
sufficient substantially existent person. But what we are talking about is
how they operate. In these Hinayana tenets, these two kinds of self of
person do not exist. We first have to understand how there isn’t a
permanent, unitary and independent self. On top of that, we can see for
ourselves that although it appears but the self-sufficient substantially
existent person does not exist. We can understand that from our own
experience. We have seen through that kind of grasping. With that little
bit understanding of the selflessness of person, definitely you can see a
reduction in the clinging onto the “I”, which then will leads to reduction
in the afflictions, whether is anger or attachment. Definitely we can see a
reduction.
We have been talking so much about meditation on selflessness and
emptiness, but what exactly is that?  It is for us to realize and to
discover for ourselves that the “I” that appears to exist in one particular
way does not exist whatsoever. At the end of the day, from our own
experience we have to discover for ourselves that when we follow after the
belief that there is a real “I”, such as a self-sufficient substantially
existent person, it will leads to an increase in afflictions. We have to
see why in reality a self-sufficient substantially existent person does not
exist.  So, by using reasons, if we can see for ourselves that it doesn’t
exist, and we see through it; “It doesn’t exist”, then we definitely can
see for ourselves the reduction in the afflictions that come with it. The
whole point of meditating on selflessness of person is to reduce and to
weaken the apprehension of a self of person. When we reduce and weaken the
apprehension of a self of person, we also reduce and weaken the
afflictions. If we reduce and weaken the afflictions, definitely we will
have fewer problems and fewer sufferings.
We can discover for ourselves by reflecting and meditating on the
selflessness of person. Then we can discover for ourselves the reduction in
the self-grasping, which we will see a reduction in our afflictions such as
attachment and anger. When we have less grasping and clinging on to “me,
me, me”, then there will be less clinging to “my” friends, “my” group, “my”
enjoyments and so forth.  When we have less attachment for these things,
definitely there will be less anger. A lot of time we get upset because of
our attachment to these things.
If you look at the first two Buddhist tenets, GES and SS, their
presentation on selflessness of person is like the first stage of the
practice. It is through meditating and realizing the selflessness of person
we can see a reduction in our afflictions. So we have to realize for
ourselves how a permanent, unitary and independent self does not exist and
how a self-sufficient substantially existent person does not exist. So by
seeing for ourselves using reasons, then we will be able to reduce the
grasping at a person. When we reduce our self-grasping and clinging onto
this self-identity, which is a mistaken one, then we will see a reduction
in the afflictions. So this is like the first stage of the practice that is
presented in the first two tenets.
Then when you come to the Mahayana Tenets, starting from the MOS, there is
a presentation of the selflessness of phenomena. Why is this so? Yes, you
can train in the initial stage just by meditating on the selflessness of
person which is presented in the Hinayana Tenets and through that
definitely you will see a reduction in afflictions such as anger and
attachment. Nevertheless, pleasant and unpleasant phenomena still appear to
us. There are still appearances of nice things, unpleasant things, good
people, bad people. Based on those appearances, again we get emotionally
involved. We still get upset and we still get attached because we react to
the appearance of pleasant and unpleasant phenomena. This is when the
understanding of selflessness of phenomena comes into play.
Earlier on in the Hinayana Tenets, there is only the presentation of
selflessness of person which only deal with the involvement of the ‘I’, but
that did not deal with the objects to which the ‘I’ is attached to and to
which the ‘I’ is upset at. Here, in the presentation of the selflessness of
phenomena, there is the understanding that the phenomena appear as if they
were self-instituted, they have a self and there is some identity from the
side of the phenomena. Although they appear in this way, in reality there
is not how they exist.  If you combine this understanding with the earlier
understanding of the selflessness of person then in your hands you have
something much more powerful to work at the afflictions.
Now you have the two selflessnesses coming into play. On one hand you have
an understanding of the selflessness of person, and as described earlier,
how the self does not exist in the way it appears. On top of that you
combine the understanding of the selflessness of person [??] with an
understanding that phenomena do not exist in the way they appear to you,
i.e. they don’t exist in the way that you believe them to exist.
Now you have an understanding of the selflessness of person, yourself, and
the selflessness of phenomena that you either attached to or upset at,
don’t you think this understanding is much more powerful than just having
an understanding that the self does not exist in the way it appears?
When we start looking at the Mahayana Tenets, we start with the MOS. On top
of the selflessness of person, they talk about the selflessness of
phenomena. As I mentioned earlier, what exactly is the selflessness of
phenomena? In short, what are you meditating on? Basically, you are to
discover for yourself that phenomena, other than the self, do not exist in
the way they appear. That is the whole point.
|Selflessness of person            |Selflessness of phenomena            |
|How the self does not exist in the|How phenomena, other than the self,  |
|way it appears                    |do not exist in the way they appear. |
|                                  |To MOS, it is the non-existence of   |
|                                  |external objects                     |


At the end of the day, what you are trying to find out is phenomena do not
exist in the way they appear.
According to the MOS, what do we mean when we say phenomena do not exist in
the way they appear?
According to the MOS, this is where the non-existence of external objects
coming into play.
To meditate on the selflessness of phenomena means to discover that
phenomena do not exist in the way they appear to us. According to the MOS,
they say that although there is the appearance of the external objects but
in reality external objects do not exist.
When something pleasant appears to us and our mind, we get attached to it.
We get attached because we think that there is something real out there
outside the mind. There is an appearance of something outside there and we
believe in it; therefore we get attached. Here, according to the MOS, the
appearance of external objects, although they appear but that is not how
things exist.
The MOS explain that all objects, all forms and sounds, that you see do not
exist as separate from your mind; outside of your mind. Rather, how they
exist is just an appearance or a projection of your mind, specifically it
is a projection of the ripening of a karmic seed or imprints in your mind.
Due to the awakening of the seed and the imprints, then you have the
appearance of this object. That is what the object is. It is not something
external to your mind. Therefore, there is no external object.
Your experiencing of an appearance of beautiful object is only due to the
ripening of karmic imprints in your mind. There is nothing coming from an
object outside of your mind. According to the MOS, if we are able to
understand the appearance of this beautiful form and so forth is just a
projection of “my” own mind, it is just a ripening of a particular karmic
imprint in “my” own mind, and other than that there is really nothing out
there outside ‘my’ mind and from its own side a real external object. If we
have this kind of world view then definitely it will help us to reduce our
grasping and attachment to such object.
Sometimes we do have very exciting dream, and we get emotionally involved
in the dream; we get attached or upset about it. When we wake up from the
dream and realize that it is just a dream, then whatever fear or attachment
we have during the dream disappeared. Sometimes, even after we woke up from
the dream, in the initial period there is still some tense feeling or fear
or still excited or attached to it. But after a while, when you are little
bit more awake, because it is just a dream, the emotional involvement will
then goes off.
Based on the world view that there is something right there outside of the
mind, there is a real external object right there and everything is coming
from the side of the object, whether pleasant or unpleasant, then our
emotional involvement will be very strong. But if we think of the MOS’s
view and follow after it and think; “Although there is this appearance of a
real external object right there but I understand this is just a projection
of my own mind and it is just made up by my mind. What I see is none other
than just the result of a ripening of a karmic imprint in my mind, and it
comes as the projection of my mind. No real external object right there
separate from the mind,” I think definitely you can see a reduction in your
emotional involvement with the object; whether it is anger or attachment.
According to the MOS, if we come to realize that all conventional truths do
not exist in the way they appear to us, how there is no external object,
overtime, we will reduce our clinging, grasping, anger and attachment. From
these, one can understand that by delineating the view of selflessness of
phenomena, or in simple English, by understanding what selflessness of
phenomena is, you have more powerful tool in your hands to work at the
afflictions. Besides having the view of selflessness of person, now you add
the view of selflessness of phenomena, definitely what you have at your
disposal is more powerful than just having the view of selflessness of
person.
The MOS, AMWS and CMWS talk about the selflessness of phenomena but they
differ as to what selflessness of phenomena is. According to the MWS, they
say that the way things and phenomena appear to us is not a factual or
accurate representation of the reality. It is not true. According to the
MWS, they explain that when things and phenomena appear to us, they appear
as if that is the way the object actually exists. That is the very nature.
The way the phenomena appear is exactly the nature of the object; how it
actually exists.
We are talking about how, in general, the MWS explains about how things
appear to us, and not talking about reality. According to the MWS,
Madhyamika School, when things appear to us, they appear as if that is the
final/ultimate nature of that object. It is nothing beyond that. That is
what we call, in technical language, the final mode of the abiding of the
object.
According to the MWS, how things and events/ phenomena appear to us? Things
appear to us as if that is the final/ultimate nature on what the object
really is. If phenomena existed in the way they appear to us, that is the
meaning of ultimate establishment.
We are talking about appearance. According to the MWS, things appear to us
as if that is how it is exists finally/ ultimately. In simple English, when
you see a person, you see the actual face without any mask and what you see
is what you get. This is how things appear to us. It is real. That is the
final nature of the object. According to MWS, if phenomena existed in the
way it appears to us that would mean that the object would have to be
ultimately established. That would mean that the object has to be truly
established. That is the meaning of true establishment or ultimate
establishment.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You are getting somewhere or not? You must
squeeze your brain.
It is not easy because we are looking at the great treatises here. Normally
I say receiving initiation is nothing. It is very easy. We just sit there
but whether you receive the initiation or not is a different question. You
just think you received. Thinking about selflessness is much more
challenging than taking initiation, and even much more challenging than
giving initiation. It is very easy to give. I mean anybody can give
initiation, but the difference is whether the person is qualified or not.
But even then, it is very easy of just going through the motion and doing
the rituals. It is much more challenging to present this teaching, and it
is also much more challenging to understand this teaching.  But it only
through understanding this teaching, you see a change in the mind. If you
think about this, these are the things that will cause the mind to change.
Especially when you see the truths for yourself, you are able to eliminate
whatever superimposition or wrong understandings that you have. Then you
gain that joy of that understanding that which is not something you can
gain from the initiation. When you sit through initiation, if you think; “I
generate great bliss” and that is about it. Of course we don’t have the
realization of great bliss then we cannot talk about the feeling of great
bliss. The joy that come from learning and from seeing some truths that we
have discovered for ourselves, that is certain to bring about some real
benefits and joy.
As I have mentioned before about my own experience, because I don’t
understand everything I do think about stuffs. If there is something that I
gained some understanding after I have thought about it, I feel the joy and
thinking: “How wonderful”. If I sit through initiation, I think there is
bliss but that is about it. It is difficult for me to experience the kind
of joy that I find from discovering the teaching. I find it difficult to
experience the same joy when I am attending initiation.
Through our own discovery of the Buddha’s teachings, we study, learn, and
think about it. When we start to see some truths in it then that joy is
very different. It is only then you have some faith in the Buddha’s
teaching. By doing so, you really have some faith in Buddha. It is amazing
and it is heartfelt. It can only come through discovery when you look at
the Buddha’s teaching and think about it. I don’t think it is possible to
have this kind of feeling and this kind of discovery by sitting through the
initiation. Just to be present and receiving the initiation, I think it is
difficult to have the same kind of faith in Buddha. Of course, I am talking
about us ordinary individual. Most of us basically are like that. With the
exception of those who really have very high realization, when they take
empowerment, it is a completely different experience. We would like to
think we are them but we were not. We are ordinary individual. So for us,
the way is to make the discovery for ourselves is through learning the
Buddha’s teaching and then seeing the authenticity and the truth by
ourselves. When we see that truth, the joy that one gained is very
different. Then you really start to have, what you call, the real
understanding on what is a Buddha, and the real faith in Buddha. For us,
that is the only way. That is why Lama Tsongkhapa keep on saying; “Must
learn, must educate ourselves and must reflect about what we have learned.”
You have to think about the four seals. In particular what we don’t want is
suffering. All contaminated phenomena are suffering. At the end of the day,
what we don’t want is suffering. In order to overcome suffering, we have to
overcome its cause, which is ego-grasping, clinging at the self, self of
person and so forth. That is what we need to get rid of. Can we get rid of
our suffering just by attending initiation? No, obviously no. Just by
taking initiation, you get rid of suffering? No. We like to scramble here
and there and everywhere looking for empowerment, but still nothing happen
and still there is suffering. This is because we have not targeted the root
of the problem: ego-grasping, clinging to a self, grasping at the self of
person. In order to overcome suffering, we have to overcome this grasping
at the self of person. The only way to do so and the only method is to
realize selflessness. To realize selflessness, we have to meditate on
selflessness. Before we can meditate on selflessness, we have to find out
what selflessness is. You have to learn and study what selflessness is. Do
you see the process or not? Only then you understand this. Only then you
see how important it is to study tenets. Therefore you have to see the
point for yourself. No matter how you think about it, from whatever angle,
the conclusion is still the same; you have to learn. There must be
education, learning and then reflection. At the end of the day, if what you
do not want is suffering, if what you want is freedom from suffering, and
liberation from samsara then this is the one and only way. In particular,
you have to learn about the selflessness. Before you can even meditate, you
have to learn what selflessness is. Only then you can cultivate the
understanding during meditation. Through that definitely you will be able
to reduce the afflictions.  In so doing, definitely you will be able to
reduce suffering and misery.
It is very important to gain an understanding of selflessness before you
can meditate on it. Even just to gain that, it is not an easy feat. It is
very very difficult. In my case, I have to teach. I find it extremely
difficult to teach. Although I do read different texts and different
commentaries, but it is very difficult to be able to summarize and put them
together in some coherent form “the view is definitely this and not that”.
Sometimes, I even wonder whether I am presenting the right thing or not. I
do get the feeling that is very difficult because it is not straightforward
and it is not easy. Even just to settle the view, in technical language, to
delineate the view “say what is and what is not” that is really very
challenging. Forget about realizing for the time being, even just to be
able to explain what exactly is and not, that itself is very challenging
and very difficult.
According to the MWS, just think about our own experience, how do things
appear to us? We do not question them, isn’t it? We just take as it is.
This is how the object in reality is. (Ven Gyurme: I mean in simple
English. I am not talking about the technical translation, otherwise there
is no point.)  We basically accept what appears to us. This is how the
object exists. There is nothing beyond what appears to us. That is the
object. We take that to be the final object, and the final reality, in
technical language, the final mode of the abiding object. According to the
MWS, they said if this is how phenomena really exist, and if this is how
they really existed in reality, that would mean:
   - that object exist in the way it appears,
   - that object is ultimately established,
   - that object is truly established.
If things and events existed in the way they appear, we do not question
them, and we take it as that is how the things exist, that is the ultimate
way and the only way how it exists. That means that object is truly
established, it is established in the way it appears to us, and it is
ultimately established. If you accept that then you have a problem. Why?
Then that phenomenon would have to exist in the perspective of an ultimate
awareness. If phenomena existed in the way they appear, they would be truly
established, and they would be ultimately established. If that is the case
that would mean the phenomenon would have to exist in the perspective of an
ultimate awareness.
Specifically, what is this ultimate awareness? It is the awareness that
posit an ultimate truth, and specifically it is the wisdom directly
perceiving emptiness. If phenomena existed in the way that it appears, in
short, they would have to exist in the perspective of the wisdom directly
perceiving emptiness.
According to the MWS, when we think about it and think it through, they
said that phenomena are not truly established, phenomena are not ultimately
established. This is just the general procedure of the MWS.
In the MWS, there are two divisions. The ultimate or the highest view is
the CMWS. Their explanation is even more subtle. According to the final
view, the ultimate/ highest school, they say that everything is mere name.
It existence is merely imputed by mind.
I thought to say all these.  I thought what I have said today might be of
benefits. It is natural that people may wonder why we are studying all
these. You feel disconnect, right? Why we must learn about the selflessness
of person, the selflessness of phenomena and so forth?  I thought what I
said today might be helpful. So you think it through again. You go through
that process from the beginning and try to relate it to what you are
studying to your mind. When we say we meditate, what do we meditate on?
Meditation basically mean going through our own mind. We have to do it by
ourselves with our own power. For example, thinking along the line of what
I have talked about today from the beginning, and check them with your own
experience. In order for us to be attached or upset, does the ‘I’ have to
come into picture or not? When the ‘I’ come into picture, how does it lead
to all these emotional involvements such as anger, attachment? Then think
about how phenomena other than the ‘I’ appear to us? When they appear to us
as pleasant or unpleasant, how do we get emotionally involved and through
that do we get upset, do we get attached? If we are able to counteract that
kind of grasping will it lead to a reduction in our afflictions? These are
some of the things that we have to think for ourselves. When we say
meditate, this is meditation. Why else is there?
For now, if you can just think of what I have just said today,  it  is  kind
of like outlines, something for you to think about on your own and  meditate
on. Do your  own  discovery.  So  far,  in  terms  of  the  selflessness  of
phenomena, we have only talked about the emptiness of subject and object  as
different entities. Basically there is no external  object,  and  everything
is the projection of the mind. That is relatively straight  forward  and  is
quite easy. What about the other aspects of the MOS? Example, how  phenomena
do not exist as the naturally bases of  engagement  or  referent  of  names?
Even just to say that, even just to explain that, it is  so  difficult.  So,
this is something maybe I will do in the next lesson. I will try.
