Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L01final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.437574
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 1                                                         30 June
2015


Transforming the mind. Eight Verses of Thought Transformation: Verses 1—2.


TRANSFORMING THE MIND

The subject matter for this module is The  Wheel  of  Sharp  Weapons.[1]   I
will talk a little about  the  Eight  Verses  of  Thought  Transformation[2]
first.  This may take two lessons and thereafter, we will proceed  with  the
actual root text.

The Tibetan word,  lojong,  literally  means,  ‘to  train  the  mind.’  This
particular  genre  of  teachings  is  called  mind  training   (or   thought
transformation). It is not difficult to explain and it is not  difficult  to
understand, but it is very difficult to practise these teachings.

When we talk about mind training in general, there are:
 • the mind training of a person of small capacity,
 • the mind training of a person of middling capacity
 • the mind training of a person of great capacity

When we use the term, lojong, this  particular  genre  of  teachings  refers
primarily to the training of a  person  of  great  capacity.  So  the  Eight
Verses of Thought  Transformation  is  a  text  that  deals  with  the  mind
training of a person of great capacity.

Many of you probably are familiar with the origins  of  these  teachings  on
mind training and bodhicitta.
 • There is a lineage of Mahayana mind training passed down  from  Manjushri
   to Nagarjuna and Shantideva. This system  of  cultivating  bodhicitta  is
   called the instructions of exchanging self and others.
 • There is another system of generating bodhicitta that came from  Maitreya
   and was passed down to Asanga and so forth. That  system  of  cultivating
   bodhicitta is called the sevenfold cause and effect instructions.

These instructions for cultivating bodhicitta  were  passed  down  in  their
respective lineages. I think it was during the time of Lama  Serlingpa  that
these two lineages were combined. As many of  you  are  aware,  Lama  Atisha
travelled for 13 months by boat, going all the way to what  is  present  day
Sumatra in order to receive  the  instructions  for  cultivating  bodhicitta
from Lama  Serlingpa.  (Lama  Serlingpa  is  also  known  as Dharmakirti  of
Suvarnadvipa, Suvarnadvipa referring to a place in Sumatra).

If you look at the life story of Lama Atisha, he spent 13 months  travelling
in a boat, putting up with dangers to his life and  so  forth  in  order  to
receive the instructions for cultivating bodhicitta.  This  shows  how  much
hardship he was willing to endure in order to receive the teachings.  If  we
look at the life stories of these great masters of the  past,  comparatively
speaking, whatever inconveniences, discomforts  or  hardships  that  we  may
experience in learning and practising the Dharma is nothing.  They  pale  in
comparison.

This also shows that if we  don’t  have  a  strong  yearning  to  achieve  a
particular goal, we will never achieve it. Without that  powerful  yearning,
that kind of devotion and faith, it is impossible to develop any  experience
or realisations of the Dharma.

If we look at the situation these days, the Dharma is readily available.  We
can listen to the Dharma at any time and at any place.  There  are  so  many
materials available for us to consult and to read.

Khen Rinpoche: So now there is no need to travel 13 months by ship!

This happens to all of us. Having listened  to  the  teachings,  after  some
time, when we hear again the teachings on the practices  of  the  person  of
small capacity,  we  have  this  attitude,  thinking,  “I  have  heard  this
before.”  Also,  when  we  are  learning  Mahayana  teachings  such  as  the
teachings on thought transformation, we think, “This  is  something  I  have
heard before.”

What are we thinking when we have this kind of view or we say  such  things?
Basically, we are saying that such teachings are of no benefit to our  mind.
This is what we mean.

Khen Rinpoche: It is another way of saying that the  teachings  are  boring.
Maybe that is the right expression, “It is boring!”

Then when we encounter and  study  more  challenging  and  difficult  texts,
because they are difficult, we may think, “This  does  not  benefit  me.  It
cannot benefit my practice. I  don’t  need  something  so  complicated.”  So
again another complication arises in our mind. All these complications  pile
up in our mind, “These teachings are not working out for me. They are of  no
benefit to me. I don’t need these teachings.” We end up  feeling  that  none
of the teachings are effective for our mind.

The mind training teachings expose all our faults, showing us the faults  we
have one by one, just like a doctor who tells us about  all  our  sicknesses
and medical problems. The purpose of the exercise is for us to see the  need
to change ourselves.
It is mentioned very clearly at the beginning in the stages of the  path  to
enlightenment (lam-rim) teachings that  the  purpose  of  listening  to  the
teachings is  to  rectify  our  faults  on  the  basis  of  recognising  and
acknowledging them. So the purpose of listening to and studying  these  mind
training teachings is to recognise our faults for what they are and then  to
correct them.

The purpose is not to help us identify the faults of others.  Therefore,  it
is important not to get the purpose and the motivation wrong from  the  very
onset. It is said in the teachings that if our effort in  listening  to  and
learning the Dharma leads us to seek out the faults of others, then  we  are
sorely mistaken. If that happens to us, i.e., we study the Dharma  in  order
to identify the faults of others, then mind training becomes impossible.

It is emphasised very strongly in the teachings  that  from  the  onset,  we
must not get our purpose and motivation wrong for listening to  the  Dharma.
So whenever we are listening to and  learning  these  teachings,  we  should
remind ourselves that the  purpose  is  to  identify  and  rectify  our  own
faults.

Before we start each teaching session, we always recite the verses of  going
for refuge to the Three Jewels and generating  the  mind  of  enlightenment.
The purpose of reciting those verses is to think about their meaning and  to
generate the thought thinking, “I am going to receive and  listen  to  these
teachings for the purpose of achieving enlightenment for the benefit of  all
sentient beings.”

Generating the mind of enlightenment  means  developing  the  aspiration  to
achieve omniscience, i.e., full enlightenment, for the  benefit  of  others.
If we yearn for enlightenment in order to accomplish our own purposes,  then
it doesn’t become bodhicitta, the mind of enlightenment.

Many of us here have already received the bodhisattva  vows  and  some  have
even received tantric vows. The essence of the bodhisattva  vows  is  taking
the vow to solely work for others and  to  achieve  enlightenment  for  that
purpose. Although we have taken these vows, in  reality,  they  are  nothing
more than words, a mere promise only.

When we took the vows, supposedly with a  bodhicitta  attitude,  of  course,
bodhicitta is something we do not have. After having taken  the  vows,  then
there is supposed to be the  practice  of  cultivating  and  increasing  our
bodhicitta, which we have not done. So the promises we made  are  all  empty
ones. We all are like that.

If you were  to  ask,  “What  is  the  practice  that  should  follow  after
generating the mind of enlightenment and taking the bodhisattva vows?”  this
practice is explained in a very condensed way in this short text called  the
Eight Verses of Thought Transformation.  This practice is a  combination  of
method and wisdom:
 • The first seven verses of the text deal with the  method  aspect  of  the
   path.
 • The last verse deals with the training in wisdom.
So if we want to know, “What should be the characteristics  of  real  Dharma
practice?” the hallmark has to be such  mind  training.  This  is  the  real
Dharma practice.

Receiving initiations and  reciting  sadhanas  will  not  change  the  mind.
Taking the bodhisattva vows alone, without having trained the mind  in  this
way, does not change the mind. Reciting mantras alone does  not  change  the
mind and studying the Dharma does not change the mind. It is very  difficult
for the mind to change simply by engaging in such activities.

If that is the case, then how can we change our mind for the  better?  There
is only one way. The way to transform the mind  is  to  change  our  way  of
thinking. There is no other way.  We have to reflect and think about this.

If we are honest with ourselves, it is very clear when we look  at  our  own
lives—even for those of us who have been studying, who have been exposed  to
and in contact with the Dharma for a very long time, say, 20, 30  years—that
we have nothing to show for it. There has been no progress whatsoever.

It doesn’t matter  how  many  mantras  we  may  have  recited  or  how  many
prostrations we have done if  we  have  never  ever  sat  down  to  work  on
changing our mind and our way of thinking. Since  we  never  practised  mind
training, therefore, we find ourselves pretty much the same as we were  when
we started. There has been no real transformation. The  fault  lies  in  not
having practised mind training.

Not only have we not improved. Perhaps we may  have  even  degenerated  over
time.  There is more anger, more afflictions, more disturbance in  the  mind
and more discursive thoughts. If we look at ourselves honestly, this may  be
the case and it all boils down to not  having  really  practised.  When  the
teachings point out our faults, we really must look  at  our  own  mind  and
recognise and acknowledge those faults.

The way we learn the Dharma makes a difference in our attitude. If  we  have
trust and faith in and respect for the teacher,  then  we  will  take  those
teachings and instructions to heart. We will actually look at ourselves  and
see whether we have this fault and that fault.  If  we  don’t  know  how  to
listen to the teachings, even though we may be physically present  and  hear
him—“He is saying there is this fault and that fault. I have this fault  and
that fault.”—but that’s about it. We may have registered what was  said  but
we will  never  look  at  ourselves  and  acknowledge  that  we  have  those
problems.

This is the reason why the practice of correctly  relying  on  the  virtuous
friend is taught right at the  beginning  in  The  Stages  of  the  Path  to
Enlightenment. From the side  of  you  as  the  listener,  you  have  strong
yearning for the Dharma. Then you seek out and listen  to  the  Dharma  from
someone you can really devote  yourself  to,  someone  that  you  trust  and
believe in. He affects your mind in a very positive  way.   When  these  two
conditions come together—strong yearning from your  side  and  listening  to
the Dharma from someone you really have faith in—then even if you receive  a
very short teaching, that teaching will be very effective for your mind.

The  Stages  of  the   Path   to   Enlightenment   mentions   the   defining
characteristics of the student relying on the teacher. One of  the  defining
characteristics is that a suitable receptacle for the  teachings  must  have
diligence, i.e., it must be someone who has strong yearning for the  Dharma.

When these two conditions come together—strong yearning from your  side  and
receiving  teachings  from  someone  in  whom  you  have  faith,  trust  and
devotion—then  those  teachings  will  become  very  effective.   You   will
experience the teachings, see a positive change and  you  will  really  want
the Dharma.

When that happens, whether you  call  it  receiving  the  blessings  of  the
virtuous friend or receiving blessings of the Buddha, what matters  is  that
there is transformation in the mind.  Your  mind  is  transformed  when  you
receive such blessings and this means that you  have  been  engaged  by  the
Buddha’s enlightened activities.

As said in Verse 27 of the Tathagata Essence, “A perfect  Buddha’s  body  is
pervasive.” This is the meaning: The mind of a person, who has been  engaged
by the enlightened activities of the Buddha, has changed.

In the section on correctly  devoting  to  the  virtuous  friend,  where  we
meditate on our own gurus to be buddhas, one  of  the  reasons  posited  for
asserting that the guru is a buddha is because he is the agent  of  all  the
Buddha’s activities. It is only when the mind has transformed in a  positive
way—through learning and listening to the instructions of our  own  virtuous
friend and having some experience  of  the  Dharma  after  practising  those
teachings—that we can start truly to see the virtuous friend  as  the  agent
of all the Buddha’s activities.

We must never lose the meaning of Dharma in whatever we do. Whether  we  are
listening to the Dharma, learning the Dharma, reciting Om  Mani  Padme  Hum,
making prostrations and so forth, we must  never  ever  forget  the  purpose
behind and the meaning of those activities.

What are the essential purpose and meaning  behind  those  activities?  They
are all ways of subduing and disciplining  our  mind.  We  must  never  ever
forget this. This should be in the back of our mind all the time.

In Engaging in the Bodhisattva’s Deeds, Shantideva said  very  clearly  that
if we engage in our Dharma activities with a  distracted  mind—be  it  doing
prostrations, reciting mantras, reciting prayers, studying or  listening  to
Dharma and so forth—then all these activities become  meaningless  and  will
not fulfil their purpose.[3]

Why do all these  activities  become  meaningless  if  we  do  them  with  a
distracted mind?
If the mind hasn’t changed for the  better,  they  are  meaningless  because
their purpose has not been fulfilled.

We hear all these points but somehow, our minds always remain very hard  and
very stubborn. Even as we continue to listen to the teachings, yet our  mind
still doesn’t change.



EIGHT VERSES OF THOUGHT TRANSFORMATION

      Verse 1
      Determined to obtain the greatest possible benefit from  all  sentient
      beings, who are more precious than a wish-fulfilling  jewel,  I  shall
      hold them most dear at all times.


The verse is saying that from our own side,  we  should  view  all  sentient
beings without exception as more precious than wish-fulfilling jewels.   The
first verse highlights the need to generate the mind that cherishes  others.
There are a few things that we need to think about.

There are some commentaries that explain that sentient beings are like wish-
fulfilling jewels. If a wish-fulfilling jewel is covered with mud,  it  will
not be of benefit to anyone. It is said that if one  was  to  find  a  wish-
fulfilling jewel, one should take it out of the mud, clean it  well,  anoint
it with scented water and on the fifteenth day of the lunar calendar,  place
it on top of a  victory  banner.   One  should  supplicate  it.  Then  one’s
material needs or wishes will be granted.

Likewise, if our view of sentient beings do not change and  we  continue  to
look at them in the usual ordinary way, from  the  side  of  those  sentient
beings, they would not be able to give us the  happiness  of  future  lives,
liberation and enlightenment.

However, we can change our way  of  looking  at  sentient  beings  by  first
recognising that they are the bases for our  practice  of  generosity.  They
are the objects in relation to whom we can practise ethical  discipline  and
likewise  patience,  joyous  effort  and  the  other  perfections.  Then  by
focussing  on  sentient  beings  and  by  practising  generosity,  cultivate
ethical discipline, practise patience and so forth,  these  sentient  beings
can give us the happiness of this life, the happiness of liberation and  the
happiness of full enlightenment.

This is how we can understand that sentient beings are similar to the  wish-
fulfilling jewel. So this verse points out that if from  our  own  side,  we
were to benefit and cherish others, those sentient beings  will  become  the
source of our happiness.

It is clear that the happiness we experience in this life  is  dependent  on
others. If we do not rely on others, there is no way we can achieve much  of
the happiness and pleasures of this life. Likewise,  we  can  never  achieve
the  bliss  of  liberation  without  relying  on  others  and   of   course,
enlightenment is impossible if we do not rely on others.

The point here is that if we cherish others,  the  happiness  of  this  life
will come, the happiness of liberation can be achieved,  and  likewise,  the
happiness of full enlightenment. If we do not cherish sentient beings,  then
none of this will happen.

Not only are sentient beings similar to a wish-fulfilling jewel,  the  verse
is saying that sentient beings are  more  precious  than  a  wish-fulfilling
jewel. As I mentioned earlier, if we were to find  a  wish-fulfilling  jewel
and supplicate it, it will grant us all our material wishes. But  the  wish-
fulfilling  jewel  can  never  grant  us  the  happiness  of  future  lives,
liberation and full enlightenment, unlike sentient  beings  in  the  example
mentioned earlier. From our own  side,  if  we  train  to  cherish  sentient
beings, then in dependence on sentient beings, we can achieve the  happiness
of future lives,  liberation  and  full  enlightenment.  As  such,  sentient
beings are more precious than a wish-fulfilling jewel.

The verse is saying that with  the  determination  to  achieve  the  highest
goal—the happiness of future lives, liberation and enlightenment—these  will
happen if from our own side,  we  change  our  perspective  with  regard  to
sentient beings and cherish them instead. Then we  will  achieve  all  these
goals. Because we, ourselves will achieve all these goals if we  change  our
mind and cherish them, the conclusion is in the last  line,  “I  shall  hold
them most dear at all times.”

The usual way these verses are phrased, they always  end  with,  “May  I  do
this … May I do that …” In this case, the last line will  read  as,  “May  I
hold them most dear at all times.” But there are some versions in which  the
last line states, “I shall hold them most dear at all times.” This  is  more
powerful.

In the usual version it is like a prayer or merely making a wish, “May I  do
such and such ….” But if we change it to, “I shall hold them  most  dear  at
all times,” it is more forceful in  that  one  is  making  a  commitment  by
telling oneself, “This is what I must do.” Then it becomes like a pledge  or
an oath.

In order for that pledge to be effective, first,  you  must  understand  why
you are doing this. You must see what  is  in  it  for  you.  What  are  the
benefits of cherishing others and of changing our world-view of  others?  As
the verse says, “Determined to obtain the  greatest  possible  benefit  from
all sentient beings.” So if you see  the  benefits  and  the  advantages  of
cherishing others, then you would make such a pledge.

Shantideva said in his Engaging in the Bodhisattva’s Deeds:

      A Buddha’s qualities are gained
      From the sentient beings and the Conquerors alike,
      So why do I not respect them
      In the same way as I respect the Conquerors?

                  (Verse 13, Chapter 6)

In order to achieve enlightenment, we have no choice  but  to  rely  on  the
Buddha.  Without  relying  on  the  Buddha,  there  is  no  way  to  achieve
enlightenment. In the same way, in order to achieve enlightenment,  we  must
rely and depend on sentient  beings  as  well  without  which  there  is  no
enlightenment either. As such, sentient beings are equal to the  buddhas  as
causes of enlightenment. This is another reason why from our  own  side,  we
have to change our way of thinking and cherish sentient beings. If  we  want
enlightenment, this is what we have to do.

There is  no  way  to  achieve  the  state  of  full  enlightenment  without
cherishing sentient beings. The  whole  point  of  generating  the  mind  of
enlightenment and then taking the bodhisattva vows is to pledge  to  achieve
enlightenment for the purpose of benefiting others. As such,  from  our  own
side, if we do not cherish sentient beings,  then  how  is  it  possible  to
achieve enlightenment?

The very first step in mind training, in moving towards  bodhicitta,  is  to
cultivate this expansive  world-view.  This  comes  from  understanding  the
different points and reasons mentioned and the purpose of  doing  so,  “What
is in it for me?” First, we have  to  cultivate  this  expansive  world-view
that encompasses all sentient beings and cherishes them.

After that, on a practical level, what must we do? Even if we  do  cultivate
such an expansive mind, that is still at the level of a  mere  wish.  It  is
just an attitude. If we only have that attitude alone, we will not be  in  a
position to be of real  benefit  to  all  sentient  beings.  So  how  do  we
translate this into practice? How  should  we  conduct  ourselves?  This  is
indicated in the second verse.

      Verse 2
      When in the company of others, I  shall  always  consider  myself  the
      lowest of all, and from the depths of my heart hold  others  dear  and
      supreme.

On the practical level, you apply this attitude in life. As the verse  says,
“When in the company of others, I shall always consider  myself  the  lowest
of all.” This means that when we interact  with  others,  we  should  always
consider ourselves the lowest of all.

This is an  antidote  to  pride.  Having  very  strong  pride  creates  many
problems and disturbances for ourselves. In our  interactions  with  others,
we either consider ourselves superior to the other person or we  think  that
we are their equal or peer.  But this kind of attitude—seeing  ourselves  as
superior  or  equal  to  others—brings  about  many  complications  in   our
relationships with others. This is quite evident  from  our  experiences  in
life.

In  our  interactions  with  others,  when  there  are   problems   in   the
relationship, when there is disharmony  or  when  relationships  do  not  go
well, these happen because of our attitude of either  holding  ourselves  as
superior—“I know better. I’m better than you”—or seeing ourselves  as  equal
to the other party.

From our own side, if we take a lower position, seeing ourselves  as  lower,
then it makes our interactions with others  far  smoother  and  easier.  For
example, if we really consider ourselves as lower than  others,  if  someone
were to say something bad about  us  or  look  down  on  us,  seeing  us  as
inferior, we can accept it from the very beginning, “OK. I am  lower.”  Then
our mind will not be disturbed. This is quite obvious.

What is expressed in this verse is very clear. It is not something  that  is
hidden or obscure. All of us have experienced it. It is very clear that  our
ego and our pride cause problems in our interactions with others and in  our
relationships. So this verse is telling us where our  problems  lie.  It  is
saying that we must  recognise  and  identify  our  ego  and  pride  and  do
something about it. There is no other way to deal with pride other  than  to
see ourselves as lower than others.

The verse continues, “… and from the depths of my  heart  hold  others  dear
and supreme.” “From the depths of my heart” means that we should not  simply
pay lip service, saying, “Oh, you are wonderful. You are  so  precious.  You
are so nice!” These sentiments should genuinely come from the depths of  our
heart.

So on the one hand, we have to lower ourselves to become the lowest of  all.
At the same time, we must sincerely feel that others are  supreme.  I  guess
it is natural that we may wonder, “How is it possible that I am  the  lowest
of all? I may be lower than some but how is it  possible  that  I  am  lower
than everyone else? I am definitely richer than some. I am  definitely  more
handsome or prettier than some. I am more intelligent than some.”  The  list
goes on. We may wonder, “How is this possible?”

Khen Rinpoche: Maybe the one thing we won’t think  is,  “I  am  fatter  than
him!”


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] Ven Gyurme: In Tibetan, the word  “sharp”  is  not  there.  It  is  just
called Wheel-Weapon.
[2] Pages 161—163, Essential Buddhist Prayers —A FPMT Prayer Book, Volume
I. ©2008 FPMT Inc.
[3] “The Knower of Reality has said/ That even if recitation and physical
hardships/ Are practiced for long periods of time,/ They will be
meaningless if the mind is distracted elsewhere.” (Verse 16, Chapter 5).

