Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L18final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:48.019509
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 18                                                 22 September 2015


Meaning of being dull-facultied and sharp-facultied. The root text: Verses
67—78. Verse 67: Desiring the best of everything. Verse 68: Entrusting
oneself to evil spirits. Verse 69: Worshipping evil spirits. Verse 70:
Carried away by distractions. Verse 71: Not seeking liberation. Verse 72:
Wandering in remote places. Verse 73: Not attending teachings. Verse 74:
Improperly using shared possessions. Verse 75: Seeking clairvoyance and
fleet-footedness. Verse 76: Setting aside useful advice. Verse 77: Telling
others’ secrets. Verse 78: Short temper and excessive thinking.


MEANING OF BEING DULL-FACULTIED AND SHARP-FACULTIED

Question: I wanted to clarify the actual  meaning  of  being  dull-facultied
and sharp-facultied. The reason I am asking this is because I  am  not  sure
whether this is necessarily the factor of being intelligent. There are  very
intelligent people who have no interest in the Dharma or who don’t put  much
effort into Dharma practice even after meeting the  Dharma.  Yet  there  are
people who are not so academically  gifted  but  has  tremendous  faith  and
great determination in their practice.

Also Khen Rinpoche previously shared with us that  even  for  yourself,  you
considered yourself not as intelligent as some of your classmates  when  you
were studying but you completed your studies because  you  were  very,  very
hardworking.  So I thought it would be helpful to have an  understanding  of
what it means to be dull-facultied and sharp-facultied.

Answer: What is the difference between a person of  sharp  faculties  and  a
person of dull  faculties?  In  the  Abhisamayalankara  (The  Study  of  the
Perfections), you will find these two terms;
1. follower of faith—the dull-facultied
2. follower of doctrine—the sharp-facultied

Khen Rinpoche: That’s it.

Followers of faith
There are people who have faith in Buddha. They have great devotion  towards
the Buddha because they think that he is very  precious  and  holy.  Someone
may have told them that the Buddha is precious and  holy  and  they  believe
this person. They don’t think much about why  the  Buddha  is  precious  and
holy. They just  believe  that  he  is  so.  Such  people  are  examples  of
followers of faith. The followers of faith are those who simply believe  but
they don’t really know why they believe and they don’t have a  valid  reason
for their belief.

Followers of doctrine
Then there are people who don’t believe  right  away  just  because  someone
says the Buddha is very precious and very holy. Rather, they  would  analyse
and think, “Why is the Buddha holy? Why is  the  Buddha  precious?”   Having
sorted that out, when they are able to find the answers, then  they  develop
faith in the Buddha. These people are said to be the followers  of  doctrine
or literally, followers of Dharma.

So this is a difference between these two types of people.

If we were to compare the faith of the followers of faith and the  faith  of
the followers of the doctrine, whose faith is of a better quality? It  would
be the faith in the minds of the followers of the doctrine, because they  do
not just develop faith in the Buddha without thinking. They think about  it,
“Why is the Buddha precious? Why is the Buddha holy?” Once they  sorted  out
the answers, then they  know.  Because  they  see  the  reasons,  then  they
develop faith in the Buddha. So the faith of the followers of  the  doctrine
is definitely more stable and of much better quality. That is real faith.

In the teachings, it is mentioned  that  the  faith  in  the  minds  of  the
followers of the doctrine is irreversible. Once they  have  developed  faith
through thinking, nothing can change their mind.  Therefore,  the  faith  in
the followers of the doctrine necessarily will not change.

Although the faith in the minds of the followers of faith is  faith,  it  is
not stable at all and is subject to change.

Khen Rinpoche: Is it clear?

Question: In one of the lessons, it  was  mentioned  that  the  practice  of
exchanging self and others does not  fit  the  mind  of  the  dull-facultied
bodhisattva. How do I relate this to what you have just explained?

Khen  Rinpoche:  In  the  practice  of  the  sevenfold  cause   and   effect
instructions for generating bodhicitta, one has to train  according  to  the
steps, starting from:
1. recognising all sentient beings to be one’s mother
2. remembering their kindness
3. generating the wish to repay their kindness
4. generating the love that sees all sentient beings  to  be  very  precious
   and pleasant
5. generating compassion
6. generating the whole-hearted resolve (or pure superior intention)
7. generating bodhicitta

For the person who is training to develop bodhicitta through the  exchanging
self  and  others  instructions,  actually  the  essential  points  of   the
sevenfold cause and effect instructions are contained in that practice.
The sharp-facultied trainees have the wisdom to be able to  reflect  on  the
essential points of the sevenfold cause and effect instructions  while  they
are training their minds in the system of exchanging self and others.

The very first step in training the mind in exchanging self  and  others  is
to equalise self and others. We have to ask whether we would need  the  view
of emptiness in order to be able to fully equalise oneself with  others.  Do
we need the view of emptiness to be able  to  fully  equalise  oneself  with
others by seeing how in emptiness  oneself  and  others  are  equal  in  the
ultimate sense? That is something for you to think about.

Normally, it is said that the  sharp-facultied  trainees  realise  emptiness
first before they generate bodhicitta, the mind of enlightenment.  They  are
considered sharp- facultied due to that reason as well.

It is said in the lam-rim text, Liberation in the Palm of  Your  Hand,  that
the essential points of the sevenfold  cause  and  effect  instructions  are
contained  in  the  practice  of  exchanging  self  and  others,   but   not
necessarily the other way round.

The quality of the compassion that is generated through  training  the  mind
in exchanging self and others is very  different.  The  compassion  is  very
powerful, especially if it is influenced by the view  of  emptiness.  People
who have the view of emptiness realise the root of samsara, the root of  all
our problems and how due to ignorance,  sentient  beings  circle  in  cyclic
existence. That kind of understanding induces very strong compassion in  the
trainees when they focus on how sentient beings are suffering.  That  strong
compassion comes about because it is influenced and backed up  by  the  view
of emptiness.

Those trainees who have realised the emptiness  of  inherent  existence  see
for themselves that what ignorance believes in actually does not exist,  has
never existed, and will never exist. But due to this fundamental mistake  of
not having realised this, then one and others  circle  in  cyclic  existence
and suffer. Because of  that  single  mistake—believing  in  something  that
never existed—one suffers and takes rebirth over and over  again  in  cyclic
existence. The compassion  that  is  generated  on  the  basis  of  such  an
understanding and influenced by such a  view  would  be  much  stronger.  As
such, the strength of the bodhicitta that is induced by that kind of  strong
compassion will be stronger also. The  wish  for  enlightenment  to  achieve
omniscience is much stronger because  it  is  influenced  by  this  view  of
emptiness. As a result of this, one can posit that the  speed  of  achieving
enlightenment by such trainees would be faster than others.

In the common usage of the words, dull and sharp, the person  who  is  sharp
is someone who understands right away when we tell him something or  explain
something to him. Generally, we say that such people are very sharp.

Then there are others who need repeated explanations many times before  they
get it. Such people are called slow, “This person is quite  slow  and  is  a
bit dull-witted.”

Those of sharp faculties who have  joyous  effort  will  definitely  achieve
their goals very quickly. But even if one has very sharp  faculties  but  is
not very hardworking and don’t have much joyous  effort,  one  isn’t  really
going to achieve the goal.

Although dull-facultied trainees may take a longer  time  to  achieve  their
goal, but if they work hard, they will still  achieve  their  goal  provided
they continuously put in joyous effort. They may  take  a  longer  time  but
they will definitely achieve their goal. So that is better than someone  who
has sharp faculties but doesn’t do anything with them. They  are  not  going
to achieve the goal.

In general, the intelligent ones are usually a little less hardworking  than
those who are not so intelligent. I am not saying  that  is  necessarily  so
but those who are not so intelligent tend to work harder because  they  know
that they are not as quick as others so they put in more effort.

Khen Rinpoche: There is the story of the rabbit and the  tortoise.  You  all
know the story? Who wins in the end, the rabbit or the tortoise?  There  was
a competition. It was F1 racing for them! In the end, the tortoise  won.  He
reached the finish line first. As for the rabbit, he started  quickly,  then
he rested and fell asleep  or  something  like  that.  The  tortoise  walked
slowly and he won the first prize.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

DESIRING THE BEST OF EVERYTHING


      Verse 67
      All desires enter into me and I blame all my quarrels on others for no
      reason.  Roar  and  thunder  on  the  head  of  the  destroyer,  false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!

“All desires entered into me” means that we desire the best  of  everything.
We want everything.

Just as it is said in one of the verses  of  the  Eight  Verses  of  Thought
Transformation, when others insult or abuse us out of  jealousy,  we  should
accept defeat and offer the victory  to  others.  In  the  context  of  mind
training, a pure practitioner of Mahayana does that.

We are the complete opposite. We don’t want any loss. We only  want  victory
and the best of everything for ourselves. We don’t wish  for  any  loss  for
ourselves. We wish that it doesn’t happen to us, “If it has to  happen,  may
it happen on someone else and not me.”

When someone points out our mistake or accuses us of being  responsible  for
something  bad  that  has  happened,  usually   we   do   not   accept   the
responsibility. Instead, we would say, “No, I didn’t do this. It is  someone
else’s fault. This person did this. He said that ...” We shift the blame  to
others. It is our self- cherishing that motivates us to behave in this  way.
As such, we need to destroy our self-cherishing.

ENTRUSTING ONESELF TO EVIL SPIRITS


      Verse 68
      Although I have put on the saffron robe, I appeal to evil spirits  for
      protection. Although I have taken  religious  vows,  my  behaviour  is
      demonic. Roar  and  thunder  on  the  head  of  the  destroyer,  false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!

“Although I have put on the saffron robe,  I  appeal  to  evil  spirits  for
protection.” This refers to the conduct of some ordained  people.  The  vows
of ordination, the pratimoksha vows,  are  taken  on  the  basis  of  taking
refuge in the Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sangha.  Although  one  may  have  taken
ordination vows, starting from the novice ordination, instead of  entrusting
oneself to the Three Jewels, the object of refuge that one entrusts  oneself
to are the spirits. That is incorrect. Again that is the behaviour of  self-
cherishing.

This also applies to Buddhists. A Buddhist is someone who has  taken  refuge
in  the  Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sangha.  So  as  Buddhists,  we  should  only
completely entrust ourselves, our hopes and so forth to  the  Three  Jewels.
But instead of doing that, we entrust ourselves to and rely on  spirits  and
worldly beings. Among the refuge  precepts,  one  of  the  things  that  one
should not do after having gone for refuge to the Buddha is that one  should
not take refuge in spirits and worldly beings.

We may have taken the different classes of vows: the pratimoksha  vows,  the
bodhisattva vows and the tantric vows.  But  instead  of  living  our  lives
according to the boundaries set up by these different vows, we  do  not  pay
attention to them. We do not keep the vows well. Instead,  our  conduct  and
our actions of body, speech and mind are contrary to the vows. In fact,  our
actions of body, speech and mind may be like the spirits  and  demons.  Such
demonic behaviour again is the result of our self-cherishing.  As  such,  we
must destroy our self-cherishing.

WORSHIPPING EVIL SPIRITS


      Verse 69
      Although the gods give me happiness, I worship evil spirits.  Although
      the Dharma guides me, I deceive the Three Jewels. Roar and thunder  on
      the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at  the
      heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

When we talk about the enlightened activities  of  the  wisdom  truth  body,
there are two divisions:
1. There is the enlightened activity of the wisdom  truth  body  abiding  in
   the truth body itself.
2. There is the enlightened activity of the wisdom  truth  body  abiding  in
   the sentient beings who are to be helped.

The first line of Verse 27  of  the  Tathagata  Essence—“Because  a  perfect
Buddha’s body is pervasive”—talks about how the  enlightened  activities  of
the dharmakaya reach out to sentient beings.  Sentient  beings  can  receive
the enlightened activities of the wisdom truth body because the  enlightened
activities of the dharmakaya engage sentient beings. From that  perspective,
sentient beings possess the buddha nature or tathagata essence.

The teachings say that every single virtue  in  the  continuum  of  sentient
beings is the enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body. It  arises  due
to the blessings of the wisdom truth body. Earlier  on,  we  mentioned  that
there  are  two  kinds  of  enlightened  activities.  One  of  them  is  the
enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body that exists  in  the  sentient
beings that are to be helped. The happiness that all of us are  looking  for
is the product of its cause, virtue. Happiness  arises  from  virtue.  Every
single virtue in our continuum arose due to  the  blessings  of  the  wisdom
truth body. This is the enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body.  This
is something that we really need to think about—that every single virtue  in
the continua of sentient beings is basically  the  enlightened  activity  of
the wisdom truth body.

Although  all  our  happiness  comes  from  virtue  and  in  itself  is  the
enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body, we are  not  aware  of  that.
Instead, we seek refuge in and entrust  ourselves  to  spirits.  We  worship
spirits and worldly entities, believing that our prayers to them bring  much
success.

It is said very clearly in the eighth  chapter  of  the  Ornament  of  Clear
Realisations on the topic of the wisdom truth body that every virtue in  the
continua of sentient beings is the enlightened activity of the wisdom  truth
body. In reality, the main  thing  that  protects  us  from  unpleasant  and
undesirable effects and all the sufferings is the Dharma. However, we  don’t
accept that. We don’t believe it is so and we think it is  not  the  Dharma.
We think it has to be something else. It is because of that person  or  this
being or something else, but never the Dharma.

CARRIED AWAY BY DISTRACTIONS


      Verse 70
      Although I have always resorted to secluded places, I am carried  away
      by distraction. Although I request instruction in the holy Dharma  and
      the religious sciences, I cherish divination and shamanism.  Roar  and
      thunder on the head of the  destroyer,  false  construction!  Mortally
      strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

“Secluded  places”  are  isolated  places;  “divination”  refers   to   mos;
“shamanism” includes rituals, prayers and pujas.

Although we may resort to physical isolation and  live  in  secluded  places
for the purpose of training our mind and practising the Dharma,  our  bodies
may be isolated but our minds are always “going to town.” Again this is  due
to our self-cherishing.

Although one may come to  a  place  for  learning  the  Dharma  and  may  be
physically present, again the mind is somewhere else.

The supreme Dharma to be learnt and practised is the lam-rim, the stages  of
the path to enlightenment, and the  Mahayana  mind  training.  What  ideally
should be done is that we engage in extensive learning and reflect  on  what
we have learnt so that we can internalise it and use it to train  the  mind.
Although that is how we should  go  about  doing  things,  i.e.,  study  and
reflect, but when it comes to putting the teachings  into  practice,  we  do
something else such as learning how to  do  divinations  (mos)  for  people,
learning astrology and so forth to foretell  the  future  and  spending  our
time doing pujas here and there.

NOT SEEKING LIBERATION


      Verse 71
      Forsaking the moral path to liberation, I cling to my home. Pouring my
      happiness into the water, I run after suffering. Roar and  thunder  on
      the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at  the
      heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

“The moral path” is the practice of ethics that is the path  to  liberation.
This verse refers to people who are ordained. To be ordained, one  needs  to
have some thought of renunciation, on the basis  of  which  one  then  seeks
liberation. The point of becoming an  ordained  person  is  that  with  that
lifestyle, it is the method to achieve liberation.

But after becoming ordained, one doesn’t keep one’s ethical  discipline  and
at the same  time,  one  has  no  wish  for  liberation.  Subsequently,  one
disrobes  and  becomes  a  layperson  again.  Because  of  that,   so   many
complications arise in life with all kinds of problems and  so  forth.  This
happens as a result of self-cherishing.

WANDERING IN REMOTE PLACES


      Verse 72
      Turning away from the  gateway  to  liberation,  I  wander  in  remote
      places. Despite acquiring the precious jewel of a human body,  I  wind
      up in hell. Roar and thunder on  the  head  of  the  destroyer,  false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!

The gateway or the door to liberation is the  practice  of  the  Dharma.  In
order to achieve liberation from cyclic existence, i.e., real, ultimate  and
permanent happiness, one has to practise the Dharma. Although one  may  wish
and be looking  for  liberation,  instead  of  practising  the  Dharma,  one
wanders “in remote places” for the sake of achieving the happiness  of  this
life alone. Then one may  even  disregard  non-virtue  and  accumulate  many
negativities that are the causes for rebirth in the lower realms.

NOT ATTENDING TEACHINGS


      Verse 73
      Putting aside the particulars of spiritual development,  I  engage  in
      business. Leaving my guru’s school, I idle about the  town.  Roar  and
      thunder on the head of the  destroyer,  false  construction!  Mortally
      strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

Instead of going to where teachings are given  by  our  teacher,  we  wander
about in town.

That is again the result of our self-cherishing attitude.

IMPROPERLY USING SHARED POSSESSIONS

      Verse 74
      Abandoning my own livelihood, I plunder others’ property. Forsaking my
      parents’ food, I rob others of sustenance. Roar  and  thunder  on  the
      head of the destroyer, false  construction!  Mortally  strike  at  the
      heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

There are possessions that are collectively owned  by  a  group  of  people.
Let’s take the possessions of the Sangha community as an example. There  are
common or shared possessions of the Sangha community. An  individual  member
of that community may not use them without prior permission. If one were  to
use this common property without permission,  instead  of  using  one’s  own
possessions, as mentioned in the lam-rim, the negative  karma  is  extremely
heavy. One will definitely  experience  and  cannot  escape  the  fruitional
effect of that action.

“Plunder” here refers to the act of using such shared  possessions,  and  in
this context, using the shared possessions of the Sangha  community  without
prior permission. The same applies to using the  shared  possessions  of  an
organisation such as a Dharma centre. If one uses such  possessions  without
proper permission, it is also a negativity.

There may be occasions where we actually have enough for  ourselves  and  we
can survive on our own. We can use our own possessions such as  food,  money
and so forth but we don’t want to use them. Instead, we take  or  steal  the
possessions of others. Again this is the result of our self-cherishing.

SEEKING CLAIRVOYANCE AND FLEET-FOOTEDNESS

      Verse 75
      Aha! Although my endurance for meditation is small, my precognition is
      sharp. Though I have not realized even the beginning of  the  path,  I
      run around to no  purpose.  Roar  and  thunder  on  the  head  of  the
      destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at  the  heart  of  the
      butcher, the enemy, Ego!

“My precognition is sharp” can be understood to mean,  “I  have  a  wish  to
develop clairvoyance.”

There are people who seek to be clairvoyant because they want  to  read  the
minds of others, to see what they are thinking.  In  order  to  achieve  any
clairvoyance, one has to strive at the method for developing it over a  long
period of time, for months and years. Although one may have  the  desire  to
develop clairvoyant powers, one’s  endurance  for  the  practice  is  small.
After practising for a few months, nothing happens.  But  one  gives  people
the impression that one has developed  clairvoyance  although  one  has  not
done so. One gives people this  false  impression  and  lies  that  one  has
clairvoyance.

It is not unusual to have different kinds of meditative experiences.  During
meditation, one can see all  kinds  of  things.  Often,  people  think  that
seeing such visions or experiences is something very special and very  good.
They feel good thinking they are progressing well and developing  some  kind
of special  abilities  and  powers.  They  may  even  think  that  they  are
beginning to have some kind of clairvoyance. They tell people, “I saw  this.
I saw that. I had all these kinds  of  experiences.”  They  want  people  to
agree that their experiences are true, valid and correct. But  most  of  the
time, all these happenings are due to the influence of spirits or maras.

“Though I have not realized even the beginning of the path, I run around  to
no purpose.” Literally, this line refers to seeking abilities such as fleet-
footedness.  As a practitioner, our goal is enlightenment  and  omniscience.
What we should do is to run quickly towards enlightenment. In  order  to  do
that, our mind must be conjoined with the path. We must enter  the  path  in
order to achieve it. This is the way to progress towards enlightenment.

But instead of doing that, we  may  look  for  instructions  for  developing
common worldly attainments such as the attainment  of  fleet-footedness.  By
depending on certain practices and substances, one can develop  the  ability
to walk very quickly and to cover a huge distance over  a  short  period  of
time. Instead of developing the path in our mind, we pay attention  to  such
unimportant accomplishments such as developing the power to be able to  walk
quickly!

SETTING ASIDE USEFUL ADVICE

      Verse 76
      When someone gives me useful advice, my hostile mind takes that person
      for an enemy. When someone deceives me, I  repay  that  heartless  one
      with kindness. Roar and thunder on the head of  the  destroyer,  false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!

When people like our teachers and parents give us  useful  advice  or  point
out our faults and mistakes with the thought to benefit us, we  regard  them
as enemies. Then there are people who agree with everything we  do  or  say,
even though our actions may be wrong.  But  because  they  accord  with  our
wishes, we regard these people who are actually deceiving us as kind.

“The heartless one” in Tibetan is an adjective  that  qualifies  the  person
who is being deceived, i.e., oneself, and not the person  who  is  deceiving
us. What it means is that we lose our common  sense  and  are  not  able  to
recognise what is right, what is wrong, what is beneficial for us  and  what
is harmful to us.

TELLING OTHERS’ SECRETS

      Verse 77
      I tell my intimate friends’ secrets to their  enemies.  I  shamelessly
      take advantage of my acquaintances. Roar and thunder on  the  head  of
      the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the
      butcher, the enemy, Ego!


SHORT TEMPER AND EXCESSIVE THINKING

      Verse 78
      My frustration is intense and my thoughts are  coarser  than  everyone
      else’s. I am hard to get along with and I continually provoke  others’
      bad character. Roar and thunder on the head of  the  destroyer,  false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!

“My frustration is intense” refers to people who  are  very  short-tempered.
It doesn’t take much to agitate them. All it takes is for someone to  do  or
say something or maybe even  look  at  them  in  a  certain  way.  They  get
agitated and then bear grudges easily with a lot of resentment.

“My thoughts are coarser” refer to some people who have a lot of  discursive
thoughts and many worries. They think too much, “If I say this,  what  would
this person think? What will he do to me? If I  do  this,  what  would  this
person think?” They think so much until they find it very  difficult  to  do
anything. Such people generally find it difficult to get along with others.

Again, it is our self-cherishing attitude that makes us very  short-tempered
and easily agitated. It makes us hold on to grudges and also makes us  think
unnecessarily to no purpose.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
