Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L06final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.649007
================================================================================


Transcript  of  the  oral  commentary  by  Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson  6                                                           23  July
2015


The root text. Verses 1—3: The analogy of peacocks thriving on poison.
Verses 4—6: Utilising the afflictions as aids on the path or as the path.
Essential preliminaries to training in the practices of the person of great
capacity. The bodhisattvas’ disenchantment with samsara. How bodhisattvas
work with their afflictions.


THE ANALOGY OF PEACOCKS THRIVING ON POISON

      Verse 1
      When the peacocks roam the jungle of virulent poison, the flocks  take
      no delight in gardens of medicinal plants,  no  matter  how  beautiful
      they may be, for peacocks thrive on the essence of virulent poison.


      Verse 2
      Similarly, when the heroes roam the jungle of cyclic  existence,  they
      do not become attached to the garden of happiness and  prosperity,  no
      matter how beautiful it may be, for heroes thrive  in  the  jungle  of
      suffering.

It is said that peacocks are not interested  in  the  fruits  and  beautiful
flowers that can be found in a  garden.  Rather,  they  look  for  poisonous
plants and take delight in them, extracting their  poison  and  thriving  on
them. It is said that when peacocks ingest poison, the poison helps them  to
look even more beautiful with an even more splendid body. The point is  that
peacocks are able to thrive on  poison  because  they  can  use  it  as  the
condition for them to become more beautiful  and  more  attractive.  Because
they know how to do this, therefore,  they  ingest  poison  voluntarily  and
happily.

“The heroes” are those who work for the happiness  of  sentient  beings  and
for the welfare  of  others.  In  the  context  here,  the  heroes  are  the
bodhisattvas.

“The jungle” is  analogous  of  the  three  poisons—  ignorance,  anger  and
attachment. It is very  dark  in  a  jungle  and  one  can’t  see  anything.
Likewise, “the jungle of cyclic existence” is enveloped by the  darkness  of
the three poisons.

When the bodhisattvas roam the jungle of cyclic existence,  they  are  never
attached to samsaric perfections, no matter how beautiful or appealing  they
appear to be because they know fully the faults and disadvantages of  cyclic
existence. They also know what  suffering  is  and  how  samsaric  suffering
arises. They are like the peacocks that  are  not  interested  in  beautiful
gardens. The bodhisattvas are not interested in the garden of happiness  and
prosperity of cyclic existence.

It is said that  the  bodhisattvas  voluntarily  accept  the  suffering  and
difficulties that they face while abiding in samsara. They are  able  to  do
so because they know how to use those difficulties and suffering to  enhance
their practice of the bodhisattva deeds, just as the peacocks  know  how  to
thrive on poison to enhance their looks.

      Verse 3
      Therefore, it is due to cowardice that persons avidly pursue their own
      happiness and so come to  suffer;  and  it  is  due  to  heroism  that
      bodhisattvas,  willingly  taking  the   suffering   of   others   onto
      themselves, are always happy.

If one does not voluntarily accept  the  suffering  of  samsara  but  follow
one’s self-cherishing attitude  instead—being  unhappy  due  to  some  small
difficulties or easily excited by some  meagre  samsaric  pleasure—then  one
will face many problems. People who follow  their  self-cherishing  attitude
and  run  after  the  happiness  of  this  life  bring  great  suffering  to
themselves in this life. Not only that. They will also experience  suffering
in all their future lives to come.

The heroes or  the  bodhisattvas  on  the  other  hand  cherish  others  and
voluntarily accept and take onto themselves  their  suffering.  It  is  said
that in this way, they will be happy in this life and also in all  of  their
future lives.

UTILISING THE AFFLICTIONS AS AIDS ON THE PATH OR AS THE PATH

      Verse 4
      Now here, desire is like a jungle of virulent poison: the hero, like
      the peacock, masters it; the coward, like the crow, perishes.

We are talking here about the practice of a person of great capacity who  is
able to utilise the challenges presented by  difficult  situations  and  the
afflictions as aids along their path to  enlightenment.  They  are  able  to
bring these challenges into the path, so to speak.

The teachings state very clearly that one must train one’s mind well in  the
practices of a person of small and medium capacity before one  is  qualified
to start  training  one’s  mind  in  the  practices  mentioned  here,  i.e.,
utilising challenges and the afflictions by bringing them onto the path:
 • In the Mahayana Paramitayana (or  Perfection  Vehicle),  the  bodhisattva
   superiors are allowed to use some afflictions as aids to benefit sentient
   beings.
 • In Mahayana tantra, these practitioners can then take the afflictions  as
   the path to enlightenment, i.e., not only are the  afflictions  taken  as
   aids to benefit sentient beings but rather, one takes the afflictions  as
   the path. In Verse 4, the “desire” that is specifically  mentioned  is  a
   kind of sensual desire,  a  clinging  mind  or  attachment.  In  Mahayana
   tantra, afflictions such as desire can be taken as the path.

Desire arises so easily in everybody’s mind, yet it  is  very  difficult  to
recognise even that there is desire  in  the  mind.  Although  it  rises  so
easily, it is difficult to really  know  that  desire  is  manifesting  very
strongly in the mind. We can be attached to almost anything, even  something
that is fairly insignificant like a cup of tea. So many types of  attachment
can arise with regard simply to a cup of tea.  For  the  same  cup  of  tea,
there can be an attachment to the taste of the tea. There  can  also  be  an
attachment to the smell of the tea and even perhaps  to  the  appearance  of
the tea. So even for a simple cup of tea, there are so many different  forms
of desire grasping at that cup of tea.

The object of desire or attachment can be a person or an  inanimate  object.
Whatever the object of desire may be, the point is that desire can arise  so
easily.

What do you think about the example of the cup of tea? There are five  sense
objects.  A cup of tea possesses these five  qualities—form,  taste,  smell,
touch and sound. So I guess we can be attached to how the tea looks, how  it
tastes, how it smells and how it feels, i.e.  whether  the  texture  of  the
tealeaves is soft or hard. Then what about the sound?

Khen Rinpoche: Is there any sound? You say there is sound in  teh  tarik?[1]
I don’t know anybody who is attached to the sound of teh tarik.  It  is  not
really the sound that you attached to.  You are attached  to  the  sight  of
the skill used in the pulling of the tea, not to the sound.

When I was on a trip to Tibet, I noticed when we were in  China  that  there
was a tea shop selling 20, 30 different types of tea. They  would  say  that
this is a good tea and they would teach us how to drink the tea in  a  small
cup. Each time they drank a type of tea, they would make a  different  noise
in their mouth. They said you must drink this tea with this kind  of  sound.
Then you would get a better taste. So you have to make all  these  different
noises (smacks his lips). It is interesting how they would sell the  tea  in
this way.

So desire can arise very easily and it is  also  very  difficult  to  really
know what desire is. Here, desire is likened to poison. There  may  be  some
poisons that grow very easily.
Here, desire is likened to “a jungle of virulent poison” that arises  easily
and strongly in many forms.

The  heroes  are  like  the  peacocks  that  master  these  poisons.   Among
bodhisattvas, it is mainly the bodhisattva superiors who can use  desire  as
the path. If you are speaking from  the  tantric  perspective,  these  great
heroes are the ones who  can  use  desire  as  the  path  whereas  from  the
perspective of Mahayana sutra, the bodhisattva superiors use  desire  as  an
aid to benefit sentient beings.

Only  such  heroes  or  great  bodhisattvas  who  have  completely  forsaken
themselves in working for others and who are totally immersed in  cherishing
others are able to use desire as an  aid  to  benefit  sentient  beings.  If
people who are only concerned with their own welfare, who have not  forsaken
themselves and who do not cherish others  completely  were  to  try  to  use
desire in the same way as  the  bodhisattvas,  then  they  will  ruin  their
chances of their own liberation from samsara. Not only that. They will  fall
into the lower realms. So such ordinary people who want  to  use  desire  in
the path are like the crows that perish when  they  eat  poison  unlike  the
peacocks, which are able to thrive on the poison that makes them  even  more
beautiful and splendid. That is why the following verse says:

      Verse 5
      How can persons concerned only with  their  own  desires  master  this
      poison? If they involve themselves in the other afflictions  as  well,
      it will cost them their chance for emancipation, just like the crow.


      Verse 6
      Thus the bodhisattva roams like the peacock in the  forest  of  cyclic
      existence, converting the afflictions, which  are  like  a  jungle  of
      virulent poisons, into an elixir. Willingly embracing the afflictions,
      the hero shall conquer the poison.


The great beings, the mahasattvas, are  like  peacocks  in  their  being  in
samsara whilst at  the  same  time  utilising  their  afflictions,  such  as
desire, as aids for their path  to  enlightenment.  They  can  also  utilise
their afflictions as the path.

When  we  encounter  samsaric  enjoyments  such  as   great   wealth,   many
possessions  or  a  luxurious  home,  our  usual  reaction  is  to  generate
attachment immediately. But the bodhisattvas are not attached  in  this  way
no matter how wonderful the samsaric perfections they encounter may be

Even if they were to generate some attachment to these samsaric  enjoyments,
because of who they are, they are able to use  all  these  opportunities  as
means for benefitting sentient beings and to  achieve  enlightenment.  Their
attitude is this, “I must achieve  enlightenment  for  sentient  beings  and
therefore, I am going to utilise these enjoyments.” As such, they  are  able
to transform their enjoyments into conditions for enlightenment.  It  is  in
this way that these  great  beings  are  said  to  willingly  embrace  their
afflictions and conquer poison.

ESSENTIAL PRELIMINARIES TO TRAINING IN THE PRACTICES OF THE PERSON OF  GREAT
CAPACITY

We also need to understand the reason why it is  an  absolute  necessity  to
train the mind in the practices of the person of small capacity  and  medium
capacity prior  to  training  in  the  practices  of  the  person  of  great
capacity, i.e., prior to attempting any form of Mahayana practice.

In the practices  of  the  person  of  medium  capacity,  the  focus  is  on
developing renunciation, the determination to be free. In order to  generate
renunciation, one must know thoroughly in  detail  the  four  noble  truths,
starting with true sufferings and true origins.

When we say that we want to generate renunciation and be free,  what  do  we
need to give up?  We  need  to  give  up  true  origins.  We  need  to  know
comprehensively what exactly true sufferings and true  origins  are.  It  is
only on this basis that we can develop the  wish  to  abandon  and  distance
ourselves from them. Only then will we come to develop the wish  to  achieve
the peace, i.e., nirvana, that is the pacification of  true  sufferings  and
the true origins of suffering.

Generating  renunciation  or  the  determination  to  be  free   from   true
sufferings and true origins is strongly  emphasised  in  the  teachings.  We
need very strong renunciation  before  we  can  move  on  to  do  any  other
practice. It is mentioned in the lam-rim  that  our  level  of  renunciation
should be even stronger than someone who  is  desperate  to  escape  from  a
house that is completely engulfed in flames. At the very  least,  our  level
of renunciation, should be  stronger  than  a  prisoner  who  detests  being
imprisoned and who just wants to get out of prison. Until  we  are  able  to
develop this level of renunciation, then we need to think about it over  and
over again.

First, we must be disgusted with true  sufferings  and  true  origins.  That
disgust must be so strong that we don’t want to have  anything  to  do  with
true sufferings and true origins. When such strong disgust and  dislike  for
true sufferings and true origins are absent, then we will not have any  real
interest in being free of them. If we do not mind being in the middle  of  a
burning house or being in prison, then we can never truly develop  the  wish
to be free from these situations.

When we don’t  have  a  good  understanding  of  true  sufferings  and  true
origins, our disgust and dislike for true sufferings and true  origins  will
be weak. Then our wish to achieve freedom  and  liberation  from  them  will
also be weak. Since our wish for liberation  is  very  weak,  then  our  so-
called practice to achieve liberation from samsara will likewise be  at  the
level of mere words.

If we do not have a real wish to free ourselves  from  true  sufferings  and
true origins and we do even exert  the  effort  to  achieve  this  goal  for
ourselves, then how is it possible for us to develop genuine compassion  for
others who are suffering in samsara?

If there is no real renunciation on our part, there  is  no  room  for  real
compassion,  especially  great  compassion,  to  arise.  If  genuine   great
compassion does not arise, then it  is  impossible  to  develop  bodhicitta,
that uncontrived,  spontaneous  desire  to  achieve  enlightenment  for  the
benefit of sentient beings. It is impossible for  such  a  thought  to  ever
arise.

From this, you can see why it is absolutely necessary  first  to  train  the
mind in the practices of a person of medium capacity even before  attempting
any Mahayana practice. If the mind is not well-trained in the  practices  of
a person of medium  capacity, if there is no renunciation, then there is  no
way we can generate real compassion, especially  great  compassion.  Without
developing great compassion, there  is  no  hope  whatsoever  of  developing
uncontrived bodhicitta.  Without  this  actual  realisation  of  uncontrived
bodhicitta, we cannot enter the ranks of the Mahayana.  We  cannot  even  be
considered a Mahayanist. From  this,  we  can  see  that  it  is  absolutely
necessary to train the mind in the practices of a person of medium  capacity
that is essentially developing the realisation of renunciation.

THE BODHISATTVAS’ DISENCHANTMENT WITH SAMSARA

Bodhisattvas do not like samsara at all.  The  bodhisattvas’  disenchantment
with samsara is greater than such disenchantment in the minds of  people  on
the Hinayana path. We must understand that the bodhisattvas’  disenchantment
with samsara and their wish to be free from samsara  is  much  greater  than
that of the hearers and solitary realisers.

There is a qualm related to this issue in the Great Treatise on  the  Stages
of the Path to Enlightenment, (Lam-rim Chen-mo) by Lama Tsongkhapa.

      Qualm: Although  it  is  appropriate  in  the  Hinayana  to  cultivate
      disenchantment  with  cyclic  existence,  it  is   inappropriate   for
      bodhisattvas, for, if bodhisattvas were to cultivate  intense  disgust
      and disenchantment with cyclic  existence,  they  would  be  like  the
      sravakas and fall into an extreme of peace, having  become  displeased
      with their involvement in cyclic existence.[2]

So  if  the  bodhisattvas  were  to  generate  disenchantment  with   cyclic
existence, they will  not  take  rebirth  in  cyclic  existence  to  benefit
sentient beings. This actually becomes  an  obstacle  for  bodhisattvas  and
therefore,  they  should  not  meditate   on   renunciation   and   generate
disenchantment.

The answer to this qualm is that it is not  that  the  bodhisattvas  do  not
renounce taking rebirth in samsara due to karma and  afflictions.  In  fact,
they have great fear of taking rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma  and
afflictions and they do want to renounce that.

Bodhisattvas do take rebirth in cyclic existence.  Here,  we  are  referring
primarily to the bodhisattva superiors who take rebirth in cyclic  existence
willingly. It is the choice that they made  out  of  compassion.  They  take
rebirth due to the power of their  prayers,  not  due  to  their  karma  and
afflictions. They take  rebirth  in  samsara  due  to  the  power  of  their
compassion and their prayers.

Bodhisattva superiors are completely disenchanted  with  taking  rebirth  in
samsara due to karma and afflictions. This is certain but  they  still  take
rebirth in samsara. They have a choice because they have  control.  They  do
so  due  to  their  compassion  and  their  prayers.  They  are   definitely
disenchanted with taking rebirth in samsara due  to  karma  and  afflictions
because if it is a rebirth due to karma and afflictions,  it  is  definitely
suffering.

How can one be of real benefit to others  when  one  is  suffering?  If  one
takes rebirth in samsara due to karma and afflictions, one will  suffer  and
will not even achieve one’s own goal. If one cannot even achieve  one’s  own
purpose and goal, how  can  one  be  of  any  real  benefit  to  others?  So
bodhisattva superiors understand that a rebirth in samsara due to karma  and
afflictions is an impediment to helping others.

It is essential  to  understand  that  bodhisattvas  are  disenchanted  with
taking rebirth in samsara due to karma and afflictions.

HOW BODHISATTVAS WORK WITH THEIR AFFLICTIONS

It is said that  bodhisattva  superiors  can  utilise  afflictions  such  as
desire  as  aids  to  benefit  sentient  beings.  Bodhisattva  superiors  of
definite lineage do  not  focus  so  much  on  abandoning  afflictions  like
desire. They do not see that as the primary goal of  their  life,  “My  main
practice is to abandon desire.” They don’t look at desire in that way.

It is mentioned in the sutras that those who have generated  bodhicitta  and
are engaged  in  benefitting  sentient  beings  do  not  abandon  all  their
afflictions. I am stating the scriptural authority for  this  statement—that
desire is not the main object of abandonment of  the  bodhisattva  superiors
of definite lineage.  There  are  scriptural  citations  and  also  in  Arya
Vimuktisena’s explanation of  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra  in  Twenty
Thousand Verses that the bodhisattvas’ main object  of  abandonment  is  the
apprehension of true existence.

These bodhisattvas are primarily interested in benefitting  sentient  beings
in samsara. As such, they do not abandon the desire  of  the  three  realms,
i.e., the desire, form and formless realms. Desire is not their main  object
of abandonment. They do not focus so much on abandoning the  desire  of  the
desire realms and the desire of the  form  realms  because  these  forms  of
attachment can be utilised by these great beings to benefit  others.  It  is
mentioned in the teachings that such great beings can utilise  their  desire
and take rebirth as a  universal  monarch  or  wheel-turning  king  who  has
control over a particular world system  and  can  father  many  children  to
benefit sentient beings.

If you add something medicinal to poison, this  can  make  the  poison  less
deadly and it even could be beneficial. So the desire  in  the  continua  of
the bodhisattvas is something like that.

Khen Rinpoche: The idea is this. In most medicines, some kind of  poison  is
added in the mix. If you eat the  poison  directly,  it  doesn’t  cure  your
sickness but when it is  mixed  with  something,  the  poison  becomes  less
powerful. This is how it  is  done  in  a  lot  of  Tibetan  medicine.  Some
poisonous parts are mixed in and at the  same  time,  they  add  many  other
different  medicinal  plants.  When  combined  together  and  you  take  the
medicine, it is able to cure your sickness. The poison doesn’t harm you.

The  arhats  have  abandoned  the  afflictions.  Because  they  don’t   have
afflictions, they can never be harmed by them. Bodhisattva superiors have  a
similar experience. Many bodhisattva superiors  still  have  afflictions  in
their mind but their afflictions do not harm them. It is as if they did  not
have the afflictions.  Bodhisattva  superiors  cannot  be  harmed  by  their
afflictions even though some of them still possess afflictions. Because  the
bodhisattva superiors cannot be harmed by their afflictions such as  desire,
they are able to use  those  afflictions  as  an  aid  to  benefit  sentient
beings.

Ordinary beings are not able to do this,  in  particular,  those  who  still
have self-cherishing. Those who focus on their own welfare alone  are  never
able to use their afflictions to benefit others. Ordinary beings are  beings
that take rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions. As  long
as one has not abandoned self-cherishing, as long as there  is  still  self-
cherishing in the mind, one will  never  be  in  a  position  to  use  one’s
afflictions as an aid to benefit sentient beings. This  is  the  reason  why
the main practice of hearers  and  solitary  realisers  is  to  abandon  the
afflictions for as long as there is  self-cherishing,  the  afflictions  can
harm us.

Bodhisattvas on the other hand have no self-cherishing. They have  abandoned
self-cherishing. Not only that. The bodhisattvas regard all  afflictions  as
faults but some bodhisattvas can use afflictions such as desire  as  an  aid
to benefit sentient beings. Because they  don’t  have  self-cherishing,  the
potential harm that they may receive from  their  own  afflictions  is  much
lower.

In particular, when we talk about the bodhisattva superiors, they cannot  be
harmed by their afflictions. Some bodhisattvas still have afflictions.  They
have not fully abandoned them but  nevertheless,  their  afflictions  cannot
harm them. As such, you will find it mentioned in  the  teachings  that  the
bodhisattva superiors happily enter  samsara  in  order  to  accomplish  the
welfare of others. They do it happily,  willingly  and  by  choice  for  the
benefit of sentient beings. As such, these bodhisattva  superiors  are  said
not to fear samsara.

There are different ways that one takes rebirth in samsara depending on  who
one is.
 • Ordinary beings take rebirth in cyclic existence  due  to  the  power  of
   their karma and afflictions.
 • Bodhisattva superiors take rebirth in cyclic existence due to  the  power
   of their compassion and prayers.
 • It is said that ordinary bodhisattvas in the pure land also take  rebirth
   in samsara due to the power of their prayers.
 • The bodhisattvas abiding on the pure grounds—the eighth, ninth and  tenth
   grounds—take rebirth in samsara due to their levels of the predisposition
   of ignorance and their uncontaminated karma.

Verses 1 to 6 are  general  explanations.  The  actual  body  and  the  main
subject of the text starts from Verse 7.
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

Question:  How  can  persons  of  small  and  medium  capacities  use  their
afflictions to develop renunciation while at the same  time,  the  teachings
are telling us to  train  the  mind  to  abandon  afflictions?  Is  fear  an
affliction?

Answer: Fear in this context is not an affliction. Disenchantment is not  an
affliction.

Question: Can you explain how in one context, fear is an affliction  and  in
a different context, it is not an affliction?

Answer: Let’s say we are talking about  the  fear  of  suffering  in  cyclic
existence. The bodhisattvas have this fear, as do the solitary realisers.

Question: The contradiction has to do with ordinary sentient beings. On  the
one hand, we are supposed to abandon afflictions and on the  other,  we  are
supposed to use our fear.

Answer: First, you must understand  what  the  fear  of  taking  rebirth  in
samsara due to karma and afflictions is. That kind of fear is  possessed  by
hearers, solitary realisers, and  bodhisattvas.  When  you  hear  statements
like bodhisattvas are not afraid of  taking  rebirth  in  cyclic  existence,
this  means  that  they  take  rebirth  in  cyclic  existence  motivated  by
compassion. They do it willingly by choice due to the power of prayers.

That statement does not mean that the bodhisattvas are not afraid of  taking
rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma  and  afflictions.  In  fact,  they
are. Definitely all bodhisattvas are afraid  of  taking  rebirth  in  cyclic
existence due to karma and afflictions.

It is not that we purposely cultivate fear, making  ourselves  afraid.  That
is not the point. We do cultivate fear of samsara  and  the  fear  of  lower
realms’ suffering. But  it  is  not  as  if  that  is  the  practice,  i.e.,
developing fear. Fear has to be abandoned one day. But  the  point  here  is
“What do we fear?” Or is there a point or purpose in cultivating that  fear?
It is not that we are purposely focusing on cultivating such fear. You  must
know what the fear is and what the problem is.

Question: Can ordinary bodhisattvas take rebirth in  samsara  and  are  they
harmed by afflictions?

Khen Rinpoche: I think so.

Ordinary bodhisattvas are bodhisattvas who  are  ordinary  beings.  Ordinary
beings are those who take rebirth in cyclic existence due to  the  force  of
karma and afflictions. As such ordinary bodhisattvas  can  take  rebirth  in
cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions.

Student: As they do not have self-cherishing, they shouldn’t  be  harmed  by
the afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche: I will answer this next time.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] Local colloquialism for milk tea.
[2] Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment (Lam-rim Chen-
mo), vol. 1, pg. 328.

