Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L08final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.836810
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove: Two Buddhist Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for use in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 8                                                          30 July
2015


Discussion session.


Question: In an earlier lesson you mentioned that the bodhisattva  superiors
of definite lineage don’t have any more karma and afflictions. They take  on
the suffering of sentient beings and take rebirth in samsara willingly.  I’m
trying to link this information with what we have learnt  in  the  Tathagata
Essence.

I refer to the bodhisattva superiors that have the level of  predispositions
of  ignorance  who  are  free  of  contaminated   karma   but   still   have
uncontaminated karma. In the  context  of  the  Wheel-Weapon  Mind  Training
text, are the bodhisattva superiors who willingly  taking  rebirth  for  the
sake of sentient beings bodhisattva superiors of the  eighth  to  the  tenth
grounds?

When they take rebirth willingly without karma  and  afflictions,  how  does
their level of predispositions of ignorance affect their karma in the  sense
that they are still taking rebirth and still have those subtle afflictions?

Can you please explain this in more  detail  from  the  perspective  of  the
sutric path?

From the tantric perspective, how  do  we  use  the  information  about  the
bodhisattva superiors who are willing to take rebirth  to  benefit  sentient
beings in terms of their utilising afflictions, such as  attachment  and  so
forth?

How  does  that  differ  with  the  different  levels  of  tantra?  Does  it
specifically focus on just taking desire into the path or can  a  particular
bodhisattva superior willingly choose to display wrath for  the  benefit  of
sentient beings?

Answer: The bodhisattva superiors that are mentioned in the text  are  those
who take rebirth in cyclic existence intentionally, i.e., due to  the  force
of their prayers. This can be  any  bodhisattva  superior,  not  necessarily
those who are on the pure  grounds.  Even  the  bodhisattvas  on  the  first
ground takes rebirth in cyclic existence intentionally to  benefit  sentient
beings. Their taking rebirth in cyclic existence is not  due  to  karma  and
afflictions.

It is said that the bodhisattva superiors do  not  possess  true  suffering,
i.e., their bodies are  not  true  suffering.  Usually  we  talk  about  the
suffering of birth, aging, sickness and death. The bodhisattva superiors  do
not experience them. When one becomes a  bodhisattva  superior,  one’s  body
becomes a mental body.

When the bodhisattva superiors achieve the eighth  ground,  the  afflictions
are abandoned. Prior to that, the afflictions are not abandoned. It  is  not
that they can’t  abandon  them  but  they  don’t  focus  on  abandoning  the
afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche: I have my qualms regarding this.

The bodhisattva superiors abandon the afflictions on the  eight  ground.  If
we say that the afflictions are not the main objects of abandonment  of  the
bodhisattva superiors from the first to the  seventh  grounds,  this  begets
the question: Up to the achievement of  the  eighth  ground,  what  then  is
their principal object of abandonment? If you are asked this question,  what
are you going to say?

Khen Rinpoche: Does anybody have  an  answer?  Somebody  says  subtle  self-
cherishing.

I guess we can say  that  the  principal  objects  of  abandonment  are  the
apprehension of true existence and the view of  the  transitory  collection,
not desire or attachment. It is clear that desire is not the main object  of
abandonment for these bodhisattva superiors.

The bodhisattva superiors abandon the afflictions on the eighth ground.  The
bodhisattva superiors  on  the  three  pure  grounds  take  rebirth  due  to
uncontaminated karma and the level of the predispositions of ignorance.

From the first to the eighth grounds, the bodhisattvas still need to  depend
on coarse exertion to take rebirth. Coarse exertion is  exhausted  upon  the
achievement of the eighth  ground.  But  on  the  three  pure  grounds,  the
bodhisattvas still need to depend on subtle exertion to take  rebirth.  That
rebirth  happens  due  to  uncontaminated  karma  and  the  level   of   the
predispositions of ignorance.

The ordinary bodhisattvas on the  path  of  accumulation  and  the  path  of
preparation  do  take  rebirth  in  cyclic  existence  due  to   karma   and
afflictions.

There is also taking rebirth through the force of prayers. For example,  the
bodhisattvas abiding in the pure land take rebirth in cyclic  existence  due
to the force of their prayers.

It is said  that  there  is  no  negativity  in  the  pure  land.  Do  these
bodhisattvas in the pure land possess afflictions? What do you think?

(Various responses from students).

If you say that  they  do  have  afflictions,  does  that  mean  they  would
accumulate karma in the pure land?

Can these bodhisattvas take rebirth in cyclic existence?
Are there bodhisattvas abiding in the pure land who take rebirth  in  cyclic
existence due to karma and afflictions? When you say,  “No  pervasion,”  are
you saying that there are bodhisattvas who take rebirth in cyclic  existence
due to karma and afflictions?

It is clear in the teachings. It is said that the  bodhisattvas  abiding  in
the pure land take rebirth in cyclic existence due to  the  power  of  their
prayers, not through the force of karma and afflictions.

If the bodhisattvas in the pure land take rebirth in  cyclic  existence  due
to their karma and afflictions, then why would they want to go there in  the
first place? What is the purpose of going  to  the  pure  land  since  being
there is no different from somebody who is not in the pure land, i.e.,  that
person has no control over his rebirth? If bodhisattvas abiding in the  pure
land take rebirth in cyclic existence due to  karma  and  afflictions,  what
you are saying is that they  also  have  no  control  and  have  no  freedom
whatsoever.

Student 1: As Khen Rinpoche said, “In the first place, what is the point  of
going to a pure land as a bodhisattva if he were to take rebirth  in  cyclic
existence due to karma and afflictions?”

My proposal is that the whole idea of a bodhisattva praying to go to a  pure
land, such as Amitabha pure land,  is  because  it  is  said  that  one  can
quickly become  enlightened  there  by  receiving  teachings  from  Amitabha
Buddha. So when one has become a buddha in the pure land, one can come  back
to help sentient beings as a buddha.

I’m not sure whether a bodhisattva will return  to  cyclic  existence  as  a
bodhisattva still or as a buddha. If he returns still as a  bodhisattva,  in
that sense, there is no benefit in going to the pure land. The  only  reason
for going to the pure land  is  because  one  wants  to  become  enlightened
quickly.

Khen Rinpoche: Going by what you have said, isn’t the path to  enlightenment
quicker when one is abiding in cyclic existence.  Does it  not  take  longer
to be enlightened in the pure land?

Student 1: Is that so?

Khen Rinpoche: You don’t think so?

Isn’t it the case that  the  bodhisattva  will  achieve  enlightenment  more
quickly by being in a samsaric environment  rather  than  being  in  a  pure
land. Here the person in question is a bodhisattva.

Student 1: I’m not sure.

Khen Rinpoche: There is a stronger renunciation when one  is  abiding  in  a
samsaric environment. Due to the force of that  stronger  renunciation,  the
compassion that is generated is also much stronger.

Student 1: I don’t think that is necessarily the case.

Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t there more suffering here?

Student 1: I think it would depend on the bodhisattva  practitioner  because
everybody has a slightly different path and a different inclination.

Khen Rinpoche: If you think about this, according to your logic, the  people
who go to the pure land are of lesser faculties.

Student 1: Is that a statement of fact?

We are talking here about whether the bodhisattva  is  remaining  in  cyclic
existence or choosing to go to a  pure  land.  Are  we  forgetting  that  by
definition as a bodhisattva, he has already  renounced  self-cherishing?  He
cherishes others on the basis of the recognition of the suffering of  others
and by recalling the kindness of others. That is why he wants to practise.

I’m not sure whether it is the case that it is easier to  practise  here  or
in the pure land. It depends on his mind. He may decide that maybe  for  him
as a practitioner, “It is better that I go to the pure  land  quickly,  meet
Amitabha Buddha and become enlightened and then  come  back  as  a  buddha.”
Otherwise, what is the purpose of pure land practice? I’m just wondering.

Student 1: Is it a statement of fact that a pure land practice is  only  for
practitioners of lesser  faculties?  What  I’m  hearing  now  is  that  only
practitioners of  lesser  faculties  ngage  in  pure  land  practice.  Am  I
misunderstanding this?

Khen Rinpoche: The main point is this: You are saying that one  can  achieve
enlightenment more quickly in a pure land. What I  am  saying  is  that  one
will achieve enlightenment more quickly in a samsaric environment.  That  is
the difference in our views.

Which path will  lead  to  the  quicker  achievement  of  enlightenment?  It
doesn’t matter whether one is a bodhisattva or not. But  which  practitioner
will achieve enlightenment faster?

Student 1: I’m no longer sure. If Khen Rinpoche says that  one  can  achieve
enlightenment faster in cyclic existence, then  that  must  be  the  correct
answer! But my viewpoint is based on what I’ve heard  in  the  past.  During
Vesak Day, Khen Rinpoche gives instructions on how to go to a pure land  and
why people should try to go to a pure land.

Khen Rinpoche: I said (enlightenment can be achieved)  faster  in  the  pure
land?

Student 1: No, you didn’t say that. But I am asking what is the  purpose  of
the pure land practice is? We know that there is no suffering there.

Khen Rinpoche: What was the original point? What  were  you  trying  to  put
across?
Student 1: The original  point  was  that  Khen  Rinpoche  was  asking,  “Do
bodhisattvas  take  rebirth  in  cyclic   existence   due   to   karma   and
afflictions?” The ordinary  bodhisattvas  still  have  afflictions  but  the
bodhisattva superiors on the eighth ground do not any afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche: It is stated clearly that there is no true suffering  in  the
pure land. I guess then that probably you would have to say that  there  are
no true origins.

If you say that the people in the pure land have true suffering, it  follows
that their aggregates, i.e., whatever body they have,  is  necessarily  true
suffering. If that is the case, then it is in the nature  of  suffering.  If
it is in the  nature  of  suffering,  it  follows  then  that  there  is  no
difference between the bodies of those people in pure land  and  the  bodies
that we have.

Student 1: Agreed.

Khen Rinpoche: As a practitioner, it does make a big difference going  to  a
pure land as there is  no  suffering  there.  There  is  suffering  here  in
samsara. Because there is no suffering there but there is so much  suffering
here,  renunciation  will  be  generated  more  quickly  here.  It  is  more
difficult to generate renunciation in a pure land.

Student 1: Granted. But he is not going to the  pure  land  as  an  ordinary
practitioner. He is going as a bodhisattva.

I have a question then. How does a  bodhisattva  end  up  in  a  pure  land?
Because I thought a bodhisattva is practising  for  full  enlightenment.  If
the argument is that it is better for him to practise  in  samsara—it  is  a
faster way of becoming fully  enlightened  in  samsara—how  come  this  poor
bodhisattva ended up in a pure land?

Is it the way he dedicated his prayers and  then  something  went  wrong  so
that  he  ended  up  in  a  pure  land  where  his  ability  to  gain   full
enlightenment for the benefit of others is going  to  be  delayed.  This  is
what I’m getting from this discussion.

Khen Rinpoche:  It is clear that  there  are  ordinary  beings,  i.e.,  non-
bodhisattvas, who take rebirth in a pure land. It is also clear  that  there
are ordinary bodhisattvas who take rebirth in a pure land.

If there are ordinary bodhisattvas who take rebirth in pure  land,  then  we
need to ask the question you asked—why did they end up  in  the  pure  land?
Why did they go there?

To take rebirth in a pure land, first, you need a very  strong  yearning  to
be reborn there. Based on that, you need to make  very  strong  aspirational
prayers. Then maybe you will end up there. But certainly you  don’t  end  up
there by accident. The point is that you end up in a pure land through  full
intention.

Student 1: Noted. I accept that. That is exactly my point.

Khen Rinpoche: If it is quicker to achieve enlightenment in samsara than  to
achieve enlightenment in a pure land, why do bodhisattvas want to  go  to  a
pure land?

Student 1: Exactly! That is my question. They  end  up  there  because  they
aspire to do so and by make strong prayers.

Khen Rinpoche: Why?

Student 1: We are going around in circles.  Khen  Rinpoche,  that  was  your
question to us!

Khen Rinpoche: If you think about it, these  bodhisattvas  go  to  the  pure
land because of their fear of the suffering in cyclic existence. So what  is
the implication of that?

Student 1: The implication is that they chickened out! They  got  scared.  I
don’t think they gave up their bodhicitta but they got scared  of  the  hard
work involved. I mean even Chenrezig got scared. So it is not a big deal  to
feel scared.

It is natural to feel that level of fear. In  that  sense,  it  sounds  like
these bodhisattvas lost their courage to work for sentient beings  but  that
doesn’t mean that they gave up their bodhicitta.  They  got  scared  because
they realised how much hard work is involved but they  still  want  to  work
for sentient beings. Therefore, they pray to go to a pure land  instead.  Is
that what Khen Rinpoche is saying?

In the pure land, they are still bodhisattvas. That means by  definition  as
a bodhisattva, they are still working for the benefit  of  sentient  beings.
So maybe going to a pure land may be an easier way of  becoming  enlightened
for the benefit of sentient beings.

Khen Rinpoche: Probably, the bodhisattvas who pray for and end up in a  pure
land are those who are afraid of being sucked  in  into  the  sufferings  of
cyclic  existence  and  then  coming  under  the  control   of   karma   and
afflictions. They are afraid of that, so they pray to go to the  pure  land.
But I guess their goal remains the same, i.e., to achieve enlightenment.

Student 1: I have a related question. I  am  wondering  whether  they  could
have ended up in the pure land not necessarily because they prayed  for  it,
but because of the power of their practice.

The reason I’m saying this is I’m recalling the story of Potawa, one of  the
composers of these mind-training texts. I  may  have  remembered  the  story
incorrectly but apparently, it was said that he prayed day and night  to  go
to the hell realms to rescue the hell beings there. But as he was dying,  he
complained to his attendant, “I prayed so hard my entire life to go  to  the
hell realms to help hell beings but all I can see  now  are  the  dakas  and
dakinis around me.” That was due to the sheer power of  his  bodhicitta  and
his practice.

So due to the positive nature of his actions and his thoughts,  although  he
prayed to go to the hell realms, the visions he had when he  was  dying  was
of all the dakas and dakinis coming to bring  him,  presumably,  to  a  pure
land.
So I am just wondering whether another way of ending up in the pure land  is
not merely praying for it but because of  certain  practices  that  one  had
done, one automatically ends up in there. I am not sure  if  it  relates  to
this discussion.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know.

Student 1: We are not talking only about the speed of gaining  enlightenment
but the purpose of a bodhisattva to actively make prayers to go  to  a  pure
land. In the case of Potowa, he did not pray for that.

Khen Rinpoche: It is stated very clearly in the teachings that for  ordinary
beings to be  reborn  in  the  Amitabha  pure  land,  you  need  to  do  the
following:
 • You need the single-pointed yearning to go there.
 • You have to bring to mind over and over again  Amitabha  Buddha  and  his
   pure land.
 • You need to make continuous aspirational prayers to go there.

There is the account that you mentioned but I think that account  is  spoken
of in the context of the benefits of generating bodhicitta.  It  illustrates
how beneficial generating bodhicitta is. The stronger  the  bodhicitta,  the
more merit you  accumulate.  Likewise,  the  stronger  the  bodhicitta,  the
further away one is from the lower realms. One is not going  to  end  up  in
the lower realms. Because of the vast  accumulation  of  merit,  instead  it
could result in a rebirth in a pure land.

Among the historical accounts one finds in the  teachings,  there  are  many
such examples that go against the general course of things.  They  do  occur
and we should think why that is so.

So, generally speaking, for an ordinary person to  be  reborn  in  the  pure
land, the above prerequisites must come together.

In Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakosha, the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge,  it  is
stated that one achieves the path of seeing for the very first time  on  the
basis of a desire realm body.  I  am  not  sure  whether  this  position  is
necessarily an assertion of Hinayana tenets since the Abhidharmakosha  is  a
text of Hinayana tenets.

In order to generate the path of seeing for the very  first  time  in  one’s
existence since beginningless time, one needs very strong  renunciation.  As
such, it is said that the initial achievement of the path of seeing must  be
accomplished on the basis of a desire realm body.

It is also mentioned  clearly  in  the  Abhidharmakosha  that  when  one  is
already on the  level  of  the  supreme  mundane  quality  of  the  path  of
preparation, one will not take  rebirth  in  the  form  or  formless  realms
because the transition from the level of the supreme mundane quality of  the
path of preparation to the path  of  seeing  occurs  within  one  meditative
equipoise.

But prior to that, on the preceding  levels  of  the  path  of  preparation,
i.e., heat, peak and forbearance, there are individuals who take rebirth  in
the form or formless realms.

Gathering all this information together, does it mean  that  those  who  are
not superiors yet in the pure land have to take rebirth in the desire  realm
before they can achieve the path of seeing for the first  time  since  there
is not much disenchantment with cyclic existence in the pure land?

If  one  was  to  say  “yes,”  it  follows  then  that  one  cannot  achieve
enlightenment in the pure land. There is  no  achievement  of  enlightenment
when one is in the pure land because one still has to get a rebirth  in  the
desire realms.

There are two views pertaining to this issue:
 • One view quotes what Vasubandhu had said  in  his  Treasury  of  Manifest
   Knowledge—the position that one cannot achieve enlightenment in the  pure
   land.
 • But there are other masters who said that once one gets to a  pure  land,
   one will definitely achieve enlightenment there.

So there is a position that asserts that when one takes rebirth  in  a  pure
land, one has no negativities and suffering. One will  never  have  to  take
rebirth in cyclic existence again due to the force of karma and  afflictions
because of the power of the basis, i.e., the kind of rebirth that one has.

In the commentary on the Amitabha  Buddha’s  pure  land,  it  is  said  that
beings in Amitabha Buddha’s pure  land  can  only  take  rebirth  in  cyclic
existence due to the force of their prayers. The people  in  the  pure  land
who actually make strong prayers  to  be  reborn  in  cyclic  existence  are
probably the bodhisattvas because only they have the courage  to  aspire  to
that in order to work for sentient beings.

Student 1: Earlier you mentioned that one of the reasons  that  bodhisattvas
end up in the pure land is because they were  scared  by  the  suffering  in
cyclic existence. They thought, “At least if I go to  a  pure  land,  I  can
become enlightened there.”

But here now, you are saying that these bodhisattvas are the  ones  who  are
likely to make strong prayers to return to cyclic existence. So I am  trying
to clarify. Is that because of the power of the practice  that  they  do  in
the pure land? There must be a reason why they somehow became  less  scared.
Something must have happened to  this  bodhisattva  who  got  scared  so  he
prayed to go to the pure land.  But  what  happened  to  this  bodhisattva’s
practice in the pure land?  He  doesn’t  have  suffering,  he  doesn’t  have
afflictions, he doesn’t have karma now and yet he can  make  strong  prayers
to come back so something must have happened to transform  his  practice  up
in pure land.

Khen Rinpoche: We are discussing the possibilities here. We are  not  saying
that it is definitely 100 per cent like this or that.

The teachings clearly state that there are people in the pure land who  pray
to come down. They take rebirth in cyclic existence  due  to  the  power  of
their prayers. It is also clear that those who go to the  pure  land  do  so
out of fear. However, there are people who are coming  down  from  the  pure
land. The question is, “Why are they coming down?”

It is not possible to make prayers when one is in the pure  land  to  return
to cyclic existence when one does not have the courage, a strong  motivation
and strong compassion. In the first  place,  those  who  don’t  have  strong
courage and compassion would not have such aspirations. So we are  pondering
about this.

What other answer can there be besides saying that they see that it takes  a
longer time to achieve enlightenment in the pure  land?  They  see  that  by
taking rebirth in a samsaric environment, their disenchantment with  samsara
will be stronger and their bodhicitta will be stronger. If their  bodhicitta
is stronger, won’t they achieve enlightenment more quickly?   I  think  this
is the reason for them making prayers to get out of the pure land.

Student 1: Thank you very much, Khen Rinpoche. That makes sense to me.

Student 2:  For the ordinary bodhisattvas from the pure  land  who  pray  to
take rebirth in cyclic existence, since that rebirth is  not  due  to  karma
and afflictions, I am wondering what kind of aggregates they will  have.  It
is not a mental body. It is not true  suffering.  What  kind  of  aggregates
will they be?

Khen Rinpoche: Good question! Anybody has  the  answer?  All  the  scholars,
please come up and answer this question.

The question is, “When you come back from the pure  land  to  samsara,  what
kind of body do you have?”

Khen Rinpoche: Is the body of the bodhisattva from the  pure  land  who  has
taken rebirth in this world a true suffering like our bodies?

Student 1: It is said that certain of our teachers come down from  the  pure
land to help us, but  they  manifest  experiencing  illness,  aging  and  so
forth. That is why I  said  that  theirs  is  not  a  fully  qualified  true
suffering body.
Khen Rinpoche: There is no qualm with regard to the  bodhisattva  superiors.
That is quite obvious.

We are talking about ordinary bodhisattvas in the pure land who  end  up  in
the desire realms. What kind of body do they have? Is it true  suffering  or
not? Just answer yes or no.

The body of this individual is not a mental body.  What  other  options  are
left? Is it not true suffering? There are no other options. But if  you  say
it is true suffering, what are the implications?

(Responses from students are inaudible).

The implication is that if you were to say that the body  of  this  ordinary
bodhisattva who has just descended from the pure  land  is  true  suffering,
that must be the result of karma and afflictions  since  true  suffering  is
the result of karma and afflictions. It follows then  that  there  is  karma
and afflictions in the continuum of that bodhisattva in the pure land.

(Comments from students are inaudible).

Student 3: In the first place,  there  wasn’t  any  explanation  of  how  an
ordinary person or ordinary bodhisattva who has ended up in  the  pure  land
does not possess karma and afflictions.  He  has  not  practised  abandoning
these yet when he ended up in the pure land, it is not logical  to  me  that
his karma and afflictions automatically disappeared.

Khen Rinpoche: We are not saying that their karma and afflictions have  been
abandoned. The teachings mentioned that the afflictions  of  the  person  in
the pure land are stopped simply by virtue of the power  of  the  pure  land
itself, i.e., the power of the place.

Student 3: That means they still can be  in  possession  of  the  karma  and
afflictions? Therefore when they come  back,  those  karma  and  afflictions
will manifest as true suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: They do not manifest in the pure land.

Student 3: They do not manifest in pure land but they manifest back here  in
samsara.
They are stopped  in  the  pure  land  but  they  still  possess  karma  and
afflictions. Somewhere in their continuum,  they  still  possess  karma  and
afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche: If you think of the twelve links  of  dependent  origination,
in order to get the  result  of  contaminated  aggregates,  true  suffering,
three actualising factors must be present—craving,  grasping  and  potential
existence. If these are not manifest, you cannot actualise  the  result.  If
the actualising  factors  are  not  manifest,  then  the  actualising  karma
doesn’t come into being. Then you cannot have this result.

Student 3: Do they possess these  actualising  factors  in  their  continuum
while they are in the pure land? Even  though  they  are  stopped,  do  they
possess these actualising factors? If  they  cannot  manifest  in  the  pure
land, there is no way they can take rebirth in cyclic  existence.  The  same
reasoning applies.

Khen Rinpoche: That is why it is said that rebirth from the pure  land  into
cyclic existence is not due to the force of karma and  afflictions.  We  are
now trying to ascertain whether rebirth from the pure  land  to  the  desire
realms is due to karma and afflictions.

Student 3: It is very clear it is not due to karma and  afflictions.  It  is
due to the power of their prayers.

Khen Rinpoche:  If it is not due to karma and  afflictions,  you  have  only
one answer left—that it is due to the power of their prayers.

Student 3: So, there is a body that is formed due  to  the  power  of  their
prayers. This is the first time I am hearing this.

Khen Rinpoche: This is why we have this qualm: If you take rebirth from  the
pure land, you become a human being. Is that human body that you  have  true
suffering or not?

Student 2: No it is not.  You  mean  it  is  true  suffering  due  to  their
prayers? He prays, “I want to have true suffering.” That  is  the  only  way
because (the actualising factors) cannot manifest. I  don’t  see  any  other
possibilities.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Why  is  the  body-mind  complex  that   we   have   called
contaminated appropriated aggregates? The only reason is because it  is  due
to karma and afflictions. That is why they are called suffering  aggregates.


If one takes rebirth as a human being from the pure land,  that  rebirth  is
not due to the force of karma and afflictions. That rebirth is  due  to  the
force of prayers. Then you have to say that this  human  body  is  not  true
suffering.

Student 4: That is exactly what I thought! When rinpoches take rebirth,  are
those bodies true suffering? I think not.

Khen Rinpoche: If the guru in question is in reality a  buddha,  then  there
is no need to talk about  this.  Or  if  he  is  in  reality  a  bodhisattva
superior, there is also no need to say that it  is  not  due  to  karma  and
afflictions.

Here what we are discussing is if the person  in  question  is  an  ordinary
person, not a superior.

It is mentioned in the teachings on the stages of  clear  realisations,  the
Perfection of Wisdom literature,  bodhisattva  superiors  can  take  on  the
aspect of an animal body but that is not an actual animal body.

Can we then extend  this  line  of  reasoning  or  explanation  to  ordinary
beings? In the teachings of correctly devoting to the  virtuous  friend,  it
is said that from your side, you have to look at the virtuous friend as  not
being sick but that he is only showing the aspect of being sick.

If the virtuous friend  in  question  is  really  a  buddha  or  bodhisattva
superior, then there is meaning to saying they  are  showing  such  aspects.
But if the person is an ordinary being, there is no meaning to  saying  they
are showing the ordinary aspect of being sick because he really is sick.  He
is sick and he is dying.

In the Buddha’s life story, he was born, then he aged and passed away.  From
the Mahayana’s perspective, it is said that  the  Buddha  did  not  die  but
manifested passing away.

Student 4: I have heard that bodhisattvas  in  the  pure  land  pray  to  be
reborn in our world because with the aggregates of a human  body,  it  makes
easier for  them  to  practise  tantra  and  achieve  enlightenment  in  one
lifetime.
I have not heard of them praying to be reborn here because it is  easier  to
develop renunciation quickly. I guess the reason could  be  that,  in  order
for them to be reborn as bodhisattvas in the  pure  land,  they  would  have
bodhicitta already, which means  that  they  would  have  already  developed
renunciation.  Why  do  they  still  pray  to  be  reborn  here  to  develop
renunciation more quickly?

Khen Rinpoche: There is a difference in the  strength  of  the  renunciation
and compassion that they generate.

Shakyamuni Buddha and Maitreya Buddha,  prior  to  achieving  enlightenment,
were both bodhisattvas. But  who  achieved  enlightenment  earlier?  It  was
Shakyamuni Buddha. Why? It was said that  his  compassion  was  stronger  so
Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment before Maitreya  Buddha.  But  when
both of them were bodhisattvas, who  became  a  bodhisattva  first?  It  was
Maitreya  because  Maitreya  generated  bodhicitta   much   earlier   before
Shakyamuni  Buddha.   In  the  end  however,  Shakyamuni   Buddha   achieved
enlightenment earlier than Maitreya Buddha because of the  strength  of  the
bodhicitta that Shakyamuni Buddha generated while he was on the path.

The point is that there is a difference in the strength of the  renunciation
and bodhicitta in the mind of the person who is in the  pure  land  compared
to the mind of the person who is in this world. Because of that  difference,
there is a difference in the strength of  the  bodhicitta  and  therefore  a
difference in the speed of achieving enlightenment.

Khen Rinpoche: What we discussed today is not my final answer. It is just  a
discussion for you to get more ideas. That is all. You can think more  about
this. I don’t have the exact answer. But it is  good  to  think  more  about
these points.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
