Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L13final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.967262
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove: Two Buddhist Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for use in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 13                                             3 September 2015


The root text: Verses 34—39. Verse 34: Sinning against the gods and
mantras. Verse 35: Driving spiritual teachers and others from their homes.
Verse 36: Not guarding one’s vows and moral conduct. Verse 37: Not giving
charity or offering to the Three Jewels. Verse 38: Erecting ugly images.
Verse 39: Hardening one’s malevolent, evil mind. Answering of qualms from
Module 6 on the Tathagata Essence.


SINNING AGAINST THE GODS AND MANTRAS


      Verse 34
      When conceptual construction rises up as  pollution  demons  and  evil
      spirits, it is the weapon of my own evil  deeds  turned  upon  me  for
      sinning against the gods and mantras. From now on I  shall  crush  all
      conceptual construction.

In the Tibetan edition, “When conceptual construction rises up as  pollution
demons and evil spirits” reads  as,  “When  experiencing  spirit  harms  and
accumulating negativities from having degenerated or  broken  the  spiritual
vows and commitments.”

Sometimes when one experiences harm from external spirits, it could  be  due
to  transgressing  or  breaking  one’s  vows  and  samaya.   Due   to   that
transgression, this appears as an external spirit that is causing harm.

Whatever the specific karmic cause may be, in general,  if  we  analyse  the
main cause of receiving spirit harm, at the end of the day, it always  comes
back to our own afflictions.

I don’t remember exactly who said this. It could be Lama Atisha and it  goes
like this, “If your mind is subdued, the external spirit  cannot  harm  you.
But if your mind is not  subdued,  then  that  external  spirit  acts  as  a
condition for your own mind to be burnt.”

In the context of this  verse,  what  it  is  saying  is  that  due  to  the
degeneration of one’s samaya or vows, negativities arise in the form  of  an
external harm—non-human entities, spirits or whatever causes  you  problems.
This is due to having sinned against the deities or the gods in the past.
“The gods” here could  be  a  worldly  god  or  deity,  or  it  could  be  a
transcendental deity. Whatever it is, one may have despised them,  put  them
down or criticised them in the past.

“Sinning against mantras”: Mantra is a Sanskrit  word  and  when  translated
into Tibetan, it means “mind protection” or “protecting the mind.”  In  this
case, we can take it to mean protecting the mind from non-virtue.

The entire Dharma can be condensed into the practices of  the  path  of  the
three types of persons:
1. the person of small capacity
2. the person of medium capacity
3. the person of great capacity

Whichever Dharma it may be, starting from the Dharma of a  person  of  small
capacity, it is a method that protects our mind  from  non-virtuous  states.
So criticising, despising, disregarding or putting down such a Dharma  would
lead to the accumulation of negativities that will ripen in the form  of  an
external harm such as a spirit that causes us problems.

What should we do henceforth? “From now on  I  shall  crush  all  conceptual
conception.” In the Tibetan text, the word is namtog.  This  means  negative
concepts or negative thoughts. The thoughts  that  we  should  overcome  are
those thoughts that do not accord with the Dharma. Here  one  undertakes  or
pledges to vanquish such negative thoughts.

We have all kinds of discursive or negative thoughts  that  arise  from  our
anger and attachment that are induced by our ignorance. All these  are  non-
beneficial negative thoughts so we should try to overcome them.

DRIVING SPIRITUAL TEACHERS AND OTHERS FROM THEIR HOMES.


      Verse 35
      When I wander far from home like a helpless person, it is the weapon
      of my own evil deeds turned upon me for driving spiritual teachers and
      other from their homes. From now on I shall not expel anyone from
      their home.

This verse gives the example of being expelled from a place.  Sometimes  you
may be living in a pleasant environment but somehow somebody  who  has  more
power than you comes along and forces you to leave  that  particular  place.
Or sometimes at work, somebody who is  more  powerful  does  something  that
makes you leave your job. Or in a community or  organisation,  somebody  who
is more powerful for whatever reason  expels  you  from  that  community  or
organization. These experiences cause us suffering.

If you are a Buddhist, the way to think when  encountering  such  situations
is to remember karma, “Whatever I am experiencing is the result  of  my  own
actions.” It is not about looking for the source  of  the  problem  outside,
pointing the finger at somebody out there but rather to remember that it  is
the result of your own karma. This is the approach of a  Buddhist.  This  is
the way to experience the situation  without  disturbing  or  upsetting  the
mind and to bring peace to your heart. This is the best way of thinking.

If one were to ask, “What kind of  karma  did  I  accumulate  to  experience
this?” the teachings tell us that this is the result of having  expelled  or
driven  people  away  from  their  homes.  The  verse  mentions   “spiritual
teachers” but this is just one of the  examples.  Essentially  motivated  by
anger, jealousy or competitiveness,  one  expels  someone  from  where  they
live.

Henceforth, if one does not want to experience something like  this  in  the
future, the solution is that one  needs  to  avoid  expelling  anybody  from
their home,  community  and  so  forth,  motivated  by  anger,  jealousy  or
competitiveness, especially when one has the power and authority to do so.

NOT GUARDING ONE’S VOWS AND MORAL CONDUCT


      Verse 36
      When calamities occur like frost and hail, it is the weapon of my own
      evil deeds turned upon me for not properly guarding my vows and moral
      conduct. From now on I shall keep my vows and moral conduct pure.

There is nothing much to say about this verse.

NOT GIVING CHARITY OR OFFERINGS TO THE THREE JEWELS


      Verse 37
      When I, a greedy person, lose my wealth, it is the weapon of my own
      evil deeds turned upon me for not giving charity or making offerings
      to the Three Jewels. From now on I will zealously make offerings and
      give charity.

This does happen. Generally speaking, people are looking for  material  gain
or profits. They work very hard, investing all their money, time and  effort
towards this end. But despite their hard work and effort, they still do  not
meet with any success. Not only that. They lose what they have invested  and
end up with nothing.

If we were to experience this, we would be very upset. At  that  time,  when
we experience such problems, suffering or unhappiness, it  is  important  to
bring karma to mind. We have to  think,  “This  is  the  result  of  my  own
karma.” Which particular karma? Here it says, “This is  due  to  not  having
practised giving in the past or making offerings to the Three Jewels.”

It is said that not meeting with success in  one’s  work,  business,  career
and not making profits and money out of  such  ventures  is  the  result  of
having been tight-fisted and very miserly in the past. Even though  one  had
the resources and money, one didn’t practise giving or making  offerings  to
the Three Jewels.

What is the solution if we don’t want to experience similar problems in  the
future? The solution is to practise giving and make offerings to  the  Three
Jewels.

It is mentioned in the lam-rim literature that having perfect  resources,  a
perfect body, perfect enjoyments, perfect helpers and a perfect  environment
are  the  results  of  having  practised  generosity,  ethical   discipline,
patience and joyous perseverance in the past.

But having these attributes alone are not sufficient. If we have  some  kind
of  meditative  stabilisation  or  concentration,  and,  more   importantly,
wisdom, then having a perfect body, perfect resources, perfect  helpers  and
so forth could be useful and beneficial. But if we don’t have some  kind  of
concentration, in particular some kind of wisdom, just  having  money,  lots
of helpers because we have an attractive physical appearance,  a  nice  home
and so forth do not necessarily mean we will end up to be  a  happy  person.
This is because such things could actually  be  the  conditions  for  us  to
become even more afflicted. They can be conditions for negative emotions  to
arise. So having those  things  without  concentration  and  in  particular,
wisdom, is not sufficient.

If we do not have the wisdom that enables us to  discriminate  between  what
is good and bad, what is right and  wrong,  what  is  harmful  and  what  is
beneficial,  and  in  particular,  if  we  do  not  have  the  wisdom   that
understands karma and its effects, then even though we  are  rich  and  have
many possessions, we  will  be  just  using  up  our  merit.  Regardless  of
whatever enjoyments we own and partake of,  we  are  simply  exhausting  our
merit. If we are not accumulating merit  at  the  same  time,  then  we  are
depleting our merit. This happens when we don’t have  wisdom.  And  when  we
don’t have wisdom,  then  having  money,  wealth  and  possessions  actually
become the causes for more delusions to arise, stirring up more  attachment,
more anger and more ignorance.

Just as we have wealth and prosperity now,  we  know  that  we  need  to  do
something to ensure we will continue to have wealth and  prosperity  in  the
future. If we have the wisdom that understands karma, then  we  will  create
the causes to experience wealth  and  prosperity  in  the  future.  We  will
happily practise giving and happily make offerings to the Three  Jewels.  If
we have wisdom, this will happen.

The explanation in the Lam-rim Chen-mo  in  the  section  dealing  with  the
introduction to the perfections is very good. It is  really  very  good  and
very effective advice. So we should get acquainted with and think about  the
advice given.

In the Tibetan text, it says, “From now on, I  shall  strive  in  practising
giving and making offerings purely.” The word “purely” indicates the  purity
of intention.  So whenever we are practising giving or making offerings,  it
has to be done sincerely with a  pure  motivation  and  not  in  a  slipshod
manner. That should not be the way.

Rather when we are making offerings, it must be done with a pure  intention.
That means we should not make offerings motivated by partisanship,  bias  or
in pursuit of fame, power and reputation. Nor should we expect something  in
return. It is important to make offerings and to practise giving purely.
If  we  look  at  the  practice  of  giving  from  the  perspective  of  the
bodhisattvas, it is  mentioned  that  bodhisattvas  give  without  expecting
anything in return, without expecting any kind of  reward.  They  would  not
even  expect  to  experience  the  ripening  effect  of  giving.  So  making
offerings to the Three Jewels and practising giving  without  any  hopes  of
reward or even to experience the positive ripening effect of  those  actions
is the practice of the bodhisattvas.

But this doesn’t mean that there is anything wrong  with  practising  giving
in search of the happiness of future lives. That is good.  It is alright  if
you practise giving just looking to be rich and  wealthy  in  future  lives.
But if you are talking  about  the  practice  of  a  bodhisattva,  then  the
bodhisattva gives without the slightest expectation.

There is much discussion about karma in the Buddhist teachings such  as  the
benefits of giving and the practice  of  ethical  discipline.  For  example,
from giving comes  resources  and  from  ethical  discipline  comes  a  good
rebirth. These things are explained in detail. That is the  theory  that  is
mentioned many times in the teachings.

However, if we look at the actual reality in  the  practical  world,  if  we
look at the Buddhist community at large, generally speaking, we don’t do  as
well as followers of  the  other  religious  traditions  when  it  comes  to
extending  practical  assistance  to  society  such  as  helping  the  poor,
building schools and so forth. We may talk a lot, but in  terms  of  action,
generally speaking, we pale in comparison to  the  followers  of  the  other
religious traditions.

So we have to think for ourselves. If we have sufficient resources and  have
enough to give, then we should help others. When we talk about  giving,  the
practice of giving is mainly to those who are destitute,  to  the  poor  and
the underprivileged.

The advice here is that we should practise giving and make offerings  purely
as much as possible within our own ability and means. We should try  to  put
this into practice.

ERECTING UGLY IMAGES


      Verse 38
      When my companions mistreat me for being ugly, it is the weapon of  my
      own evil deeds turned upon me for venting my  rage  by  erecting  ugly
      images. From now on I shall erect images of the gods and  be  slow  to
      anger.

“Venting my rage  by  erecting  ugly  images”  can  be  understood  to  mean
erecting holy objects improperly, making bad  representations  of  them  and
includes instances when the mind is disturbed in relation to holy objects.

As mentioned in the lam-rim, one of the eight fruitional effects  is  having
a good physical appearance in the context of  benefitting  sentient  beings.
Having this quality is useful  because  by  having  a  pleasant  appearance,
people are attracted to you and it becomes easier to benefit those  sentient
beings.

It is stated clearly in the stages  of  the  path  literature  that  if  one
acquires a special  body  of  the  high  status  that  possesses  the  eight
fruitional effects (or the eight special qualities), that will  make  a  big
difference to one’s  progress  on  the  path  to  enlightenment.  The  eight
qualities stated in the lam-rim literature are[1]:
1. consummate life span
2. consummate colour (i.e., an excellent body)
3. consummate lineage
4. consummate power
5. trustworthy words
6. renown as a great power
7. being a male
8. having strength

What kind of karma do you need to accumulate to be born as a male? You  will
find in many sutras the advantages of having a male body.  Many  sutras  say
that one needs a male body to achieve the path of seeing.

Khen Rinpoche:  Fourteen years ago, I went to  a  conference  in  Singapore.
There were many speakers there, from the Theravada tradition,  the  Mahayana
tradition  and  also  from  the  Vajrayana  tradition.   There   were   some
discussions about whether females can achieve  enlightenment  or  not.  That
was one of the topics of discussion. There was  much  discussion  over  this
question.

One of the monks from the Theravada  tradition  said  that  one  cannot  get
enlightened in a female body. One must be a man. One Kagyu nun, Ven.  Tenzin
Palmo, was against that and she said, “I think it is  not  true.  Women  can
get enlightened too.”  So there was a lot of discussion.

(Student’s comments are inaudible).

All I said was that many sutras state that one needs a male body to  achieve
enlightenment.  But  in  tantra,  it  is  mentioned  that  one  can  achieve
enlightenment on the basis of a female body.

Anyway, this is not a critical issue. It is not important.  We  have  to  be
aware that the  Buddha  would  say  one  thing  in  one  situation  and  say
something different in another situation. What  we  have  to  understand  is
what the Buddha’s intent is and  the  purpose  for  saying  these  different
things at different times to  different  people.  Therefore,  when  we  talk
about the four reliances, one of them is not to rely on  the  interpretative
meaning but to rely on the definitive meaning. That is very important.

In order to achieve a special body of high status that possesses  the  eight
fruitional effects or fully ripened qualities such as the ones we  mentioned
earlier, it is not  sufficient  just  to  keep  the  ethical  discipline  of
refraining from the ten non-virtues. There are many qualities. So there  are
many different karmas that need to be accumulated such  as  reducing  pride,
practising patience and so forth.

Here, in order to achieve the quality of having a good body that includes  a
pleasant physical appearance, the cause is practicing patience. It  is  also
mentioned in the lam-rim that constructing holy objects such as  the  statue
of a buddha and making offerings of garments to the statue of a  buddha  are
also causes for achieving a good body.

When one makes a statue of a buddha or a holy object or  one  commissions  a
holy object, it is important to do it  properly.  The  statue  or  the  holy
object must be  made  properly  with  the  proper  proportions,  dimensions,
measurements and so forth. The  final  product  should  be  such  that  when
people look at it, they find it very appealing. That is  important.  If  you
achieve that, that becomes the cause to have a good body in the future.

You may already know of  the  practice  of  making  tsa-tsas,  i.e.,  making
images of the Buddha using clay or plaster. What I personally think is  that
one should not emphasise the quantity  made.  It  is  the  quality  that  is
important for the reasons we have looked at so far. The priority  should  be
the quality. It  should  be  made  well  such  that  the  final  product  is
appealing to people when they look at it. That leaves a positive  impression
on people. With regard to the material for the  holy  object,  according  to
one’s ability, one should use the best material if one can afford it.

If you are thinking about erecting a holy image of a buddha  using  clay  or
plaster versus using gold—which material will help you gain more  merit?  If
you can do it well, then just by doing one tsa-tsa can be the cause  to  get
a good body in the future. So it is important to make holy objects  properly
with the  proper  measurements,  proportions  and  dimensions,  not  missing
anything out.

Sometimes when people make holy objects or tsa-tsas, in the  final  product,
you see that the eyes are missing, the hands are missing or  the  hands  and
the legs are out of proportion or crooked.  These are defects in  the  final
products. These are the causes to be born  in  the  future  with  incomplete
sense faculties, sense powers or missing parts of the body and so forth.  So
one has to be very careful.

There are also people who disrespect holy objects such  as  statues,  Dharma
texts and so forth because of anger.  There  are  people  who  destroy  holy
objects or destroy Dharma texts by  burning  them  motivated  by  anger  and
afflictions. These are causes to have a bad body in the future.

In society, we see people who are considered ugly  or  people  who  are  not
physically attractive. People who are ugly  tend  to  have  a  harder  time.
People make fun of them, jeer at them and say all kinds of nasty things.  It
is not pleasant to experience all that.

The solution then is this: “From now on I shall erect images  of  the  gods
and be slow to anger.” “Be slow to anger” means  that  one  should  not  be
short-tempered.  There are people who are very short-tempered.  It  doesn’t
matter who they meet. They just get upset almost immediately  for  whatever
reason. So we should try not to be like that. We should “be slow to anger.”


HARDENING ONE’S MALEVOLENT, EVIL MIND

      Verse 39
      When lust and hate are stirred up no matter  what  I  do,  it  is  the
      weapon  of  my  own  evil  deeds  turned  upon  me  for  hardening  my
      malevolent,  evil  mind.  Obstinacy,  from  now  on  I  shall  totally
      extirpate you!

We may be aware of the defects of being attached to people who  we  consider
to be on our side, i.e., our loved ones and so forth.  We are also aware  of
the disadvantages of having anger towards those who we considered not to  be
on our side. Although we may be aware of all this and we  may  even  try  to
stop such a biased attitude, somehow we don’t succeed. It is said that  this
is the result of having come under the control  of  our  self-cherishing  in
the past.

Henceforth, by recognising the  source  of  the  problem,  i.e.,  our  self-
cherishing,  we  undertake  to  vanquish  our  self-cherishing  and  promise
ourselves to expel it once and for all.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

QUALMS FROM THE TATHAGATA ESSENCE

1) Does the developmental lineage  include  the  wisdom  directly  realising
   emptiness that is the cause for the dharmakaya, in particular, the wisdom
   truth body?  Is the wisdom realising emptiness  the  cause  of  both  the
   wisdom truth body and the nature body?

Response: The wisdom directly perceiving emptiness is the substantial  cause
of the wisdom truth body but it is not the  cause  for  the  natural  purity
that is the nature body. The emptiness of  the  wisdom  directly  perceiving
emptiness is that which becomes the natural purity that is the nature body.

2) Is the tathagata essence an extremely hidden phenomenon? If so,  then  it
   cannot be proven but rather one can  only  understand  it  based  on  the
   testimony of somebody else.

Response: No, the tathagata essence that is the emptiness  of  the  mind  is
not an extremely hidden phenomenon. Initially, one can  come  to  understand
it through reasoning. As such, it is not  an  extremely  hidden  phenomenon.
For example, one can realise the emptiness of a  person  through  reasoning,
i.e., a person is not truly existent and does not exist  inherently  because
the person is a dependent arising. Through the reason of dependent  arising,
by depending on this reason, one comes to understand that  the  person  does
not exist inherently.

However, the tathagata essence that is the emptiness of the mind is  not  an
obvious or manifest phenomenon. It is a slightly hidden phenomenon.

Objects of knowledge or comprehension can be divided into three:
1. manifest (obvious, evident) phenomena
2. slightly hidden phenomena
3. extremely hidden phenomena
Of these three, the tathagata essence is a slightly hidden phenomenon.

It is good to know a little  bit  more  about  these  ways  of  categorising
phenomena.
 • Manifest phenomena are phenomena that you can understand directly without
   the need for reasoning such as a pillar or the flowers that  we  see.  We
   can experience and see the flowers directly. We don’t need to  depend  on
   any thinking or reasoning to realise these  are  flowers.  So,  phenomena
   that can be experienced  directly  without  depending  on  reasoning  are
   called manifest phenomena.
 • Slightly hidden phenomena are those phenomena that  we  cannot  initially
   realise directly. Initially at least, we have  to  realise  them  through
   reasoning. Emptiness of inherent existence is an example  of  a  slightly
   hidden phenomenon. Subtle impermanence is another example of  a  slightly
   hidden phenomenon.
 • An example of an extremely hidden phenomenon is the  subtle  presentation
   of karma and its effects that we see in the teachings—if we do this, then
   we will get this particular result. It is not possible to understand this
   or prove it through  reasoning.  We  can  only  understand  it  based  on
   testimony.  In  this  case,  the  mind  that  realises  extremely  hidden
   phenomena is an inferential  cogniser  generated  through  belief,  i.e.,
   inference through belief.

Although we can only understand and accept extremely hidden phenomena  based
on the testimony of someone else, in our case,  we  have  to  base  this  on
scriptures. It is not so straightforward. It does not mean that we  have  to
accept whatever is said in the scriptures. Yes, ultimately, we  accept  them
because they are the words of the Buddha.  But there  is  a  whole  line  of
reasoning that should  precede  the  acceptance  of  what  is  said  in  the
scriptures. We have to subject the scriptures, the words of the  Buddha,  to
scrutiny and analysis.

There are three kinds of analysis. If the Buddha’s words or  scriptures  are
not harmed  by  the  three  kinds  of  analysis,  then  we  can  accept  the
testimony, the scriptures and the Buddha’s words.

3) Are all buddhas the same or are some buddhas superior to others?  If  all
   buddhas are the same, why don’t we see more buddhas around us?

Response: All  buddhas  have  the  same  realisations.  Their  qualities  of
abandonment and realisation are the same.

Khen Rinpoche: Who asked this question? I am wondering about the  last  part
of the question: If all the buddhas are the same,  then  why  don’t  we  see
more buddhas around? What is the purpose of asking this?

4)   When   the   defilements   are   completely   eradicated,   does    the
   disintegratedness of the defilement still exist?  If  so,  what  function
   does it perform?

Khen Rinpoche: Did  you  all  get  this  question?  If  you  don’t  get  the
question, then there is no point in answering it.
Response: I did talk about  this  in  class  before.  This  is  an  uncommon
assertion of the Consequence  Middle  Way  School.  The  Prasangikas  assert
disintegratedness, the past of the disintegration, which is a composite  (or
composed) phenomenon. This is something that you can think about. The  topic
of disintegratedness is a challenging  one.  Those  of  you  who  have  been
around  for  a  while,  at  least  you  have  heard  of  the  term  and  the
explanation. So you will have  something  to  think  about.  For  the  newer
students, just be aware that there is such a question.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1]  The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment by Tsong-
kha-pa, Volume One. Snow Lion Publications, Page 243.

