Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L03final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.798922
================================================================================


Transcript  of  the  oral  commentary  by  Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 3                                                             7  July
2015


Eight Verses of Thought Transformation (cont’d): Reviewing Verse 3.
Practising mindfulness and introspection to counter our afflictions.
Applying the three approaches. Correlating them with the three higher
trainings. Verse 4: The practice with bad-natured people. Verse 5: Offering
the victory to others. Verse 6: Seeing the harm-doer as the holy guru.


EIGHT VERSES OF THOUGHT TRANSFORMATION (CONT’D)

Reviewing Verse 3
      Verse 3
      Vigilant, the moment a delusion appears in my mind, endangering myself
      and others, I shall confront and avert it without delay.

Verse  3  speaks  of  the  need  to  continually  rely  on  mindfulness  and
introspection  so  that  the  moment  we  find  an  affliction  arising  and
manifesting in our mind, we should be able to notice it and then attempt  to
stop it. We need to see for ourselves the faults and  disadvantages  of  our
afflictions. As I said in the previous lesson, we need to  think  about  how
harmful our afflictions are from many different angles. We also need to  see
how they harm ourselves and others. As Verse 3 says, “Vigilant,  the  moment
a delusion appears in my  mind,  endangering  myself  and  others,  I  shall
confront and avert it  without  delay”  on  the  basis  of  relying  on  our
mindfulness and introspection.

In  his  Supplement  to  the  Middle  Way,   Chandrakirti   spoke   of   the
disadvantages and faults of anger. When we are upset, we  lose  the  ability
to differentiate between what is right and what is wrong. He  was  referring
to anger but this particular fault  applies  equally  to  other  afflictions
such as desire. This is quite evident because we all  have  experienced  the
disadvantages of our afflictions ourselves. When we are upset or  when  very
strong desire is manifesting in our heart, we somehow lose  the  ability  to
think straight and we cannot really distinguish between  what  is  good  and
what is bad. Our ability to distinguish between what is beneficial and  what
is harmful, what is right and what is wrong, is greatly diminished.

As a result, all the decisions we make and  the  actions  we  take  in  that
state are hardly fruitful and they won’t turn out well. We have  experienced
that many times in the past. We should remember all those mistakes  we  have
made in the past. By recollecting these past experiences, whenever  we  find
ourselves coming under the influence of these strong afflictions  again,  we
should then remember immediately, “If I were to continue in this  same  way,
thinking in the same way by following my afflictions, the  result  will  not
be any different from what I have already experienced in the past.”

The antidotes that we use to counteract our afflictions are weak because  we
are still beginners but there are ways for us, beginners, to deal  with  our
afflictions by modifying our external and verbal behaviour.  “Vigilant,  the
moment a delusion appears in my mind” means that we should be  mindful  with
respect to our physical and verbal actions. We have to  watch  our  mind  to
see exactly what it is up to.  There  are  many  advices  in  the  teachings
pertaining to watching our physical and verbal  conduct.  For  instance,  in
the teachings, there is the advice of restraining our senses  where  we  are
advised not to gaze or look at those objects that may cause us  to  generate
desire.

~ The practice of ethics
The practice of ethics (or ethical discipline) is  very  important  for  us,
beginners. Ethics is primarily about  restraining  the  non-virtues  of  our
body and  speech  such  as  killing,  stealing,  sexual  misconduct,  lying,
divisive speech, offensive speech  and  meaningless  speech.   So  prior  to
engaging in such activities with our  body  or  speech,  we  should  examine
whether those actions will harm someone or whether those actions will  cause
our afflictions to arise and increase.

By relying on mindfulness and introspection, if we find that the  action  we
are about to engage in physically or verbally may lead  to  harming  someone
else or lead to the increase of our afflictions, it is  said  that  we  must
turn away immediately from that  action  and  distance  ourselves  from  the
object of that action. This is how we,  as  beginners,  can  work  with  our
afflictions by modifying our behaviour and conduct.

For example, in the instructions  for  developing  meditative  serenity  (or
calm abiding), one of the prerequisites is to  stay  in  an  isolated  place
away from the hustle and bustle of life. This is a crucial prerequisite  for
developing calm abiding. Otherwise, we will not be  living  a  simple  quiet
life, which will tend to lead to many distractions as  the  mind  is  easily
distracted. It is very difficult to achieve any kind of  concentration  when
the mind is constantly distracted. As such, one should live in  an  isolated
place with a simple life, not a busy one, away from hustle  and  bustle  and
distractions. Since there are fewer  distractions,  it  is  much  easier  to
develop calm abiding.

There are a number of causes and conditions for the arising of  afflictions.
In his  Abidharmakosha,  Vasubandhu  said  that  when  the  following  three
conditions come together, afflictions will arise:
1. Being near the objects that contribute to the generation of afflictions
2. Having incorrect attention
3. Not acting to abandon the afflictions

~ Modifying our conduct
As beginners, we can start working with our  afflictions  by  modifying  our
conduct.  Primarily, this means distancing ourselves  as  much  as  possible
from the objects that contribute to the arising of our  afflictions  and  to
turn away from these objects.
But  that  alone  will  not  stop  the  afflictions  from  arising.   Simply
distancing ourselves from such objects  will  not  help  us  to  remove  the
afflictions. As such, we also have to rely on meditation. It is said in  the
teachings that different afflictions have  their  own  different  antidotes.
For example, the meditation on ugliness is prescribed  as  an  antidote  for
attachment and the meditation on love  is  prescribed  as  an  antidote  for
anger.

~ Meditating on the practices of the person of small capacity
The practices of the person of small capacity are essentially the  antidotes
to the afflictions. Such a person is striving  to  discipline  his  mind  by
working with the afflictions. All of you  have  already  heard  this  before
since all of you already know the lam-rim.   Right  from  the  beginning  of
the lam-rim, everything is for working with  the  afflictions  and  reducing
the afflictions.

The lam-rim starts with the topic of  correctly  devoting  to  the  virtuous
friend. It is said in the lam-rim that one  of  the  benefits  of  correctly
devoting to the virtuous friend is that it will  naturally  reduce  mistakes
in our conduct and our afflictions will then decline.  So  if  we  have  the
correct faith and truly know how to devote to the virtuous  friend,  one  of
the benefits is that our mind will become more subdued and disciplined.

In the section on correctly devoting to our virtuous friend, nine  attitudes
are taught.  For example, in relation to our virtuous friend or  guru,  from
our own side, we should regard ourselves as a  servant  to  the  master  and
behave like an obedient dog.

      Verse 2
      When in the company of others, I  shall  always  consider  myself  the
      lowest of all, and from the depths of my heart hold  others  dear  and
      supreme.

Verse 2 is  the  advice  to  consider  ourselves  lower  than  others.  This
practice first starts with our virtuous friend. We consider ourselves  lower
than the virtuous friend or the spiritual master  in  order  to  reduce  our
self-cherishing and pride.  So right from the very beginning, this  practice
starts with the virtuous friend.

In the practice of the person of small capacity, there is the meditation  on
our own impermanence and impending death. It is said  in  the  lam-rim  that
one of the disadvantages of not remembering death and impermanence  is  that
we don’t remember the Dharma. This means that our mind is  always  following
after some affliction. But if we meditate well  on  our  own  mortality  and
impermanence, naturally, many of our  mental  disturbances  and  afflictions
will naturally subside.

Similarly, if we have a good practice of  going  for  refuge  to  the  Three
Jewels, many of our afflictions will be stopped.

If we  meditate  well  on  karma  and  its  effects  and  we  find  definite
conviction in karma and its effect through that meditation,  then  naturally
many of our mental disturbances or afflictions will also subside.

So if we understand well how to proceed with the practices of  a  person  of
small capacity—especially if we are able to reflect  and  meditate  well  on
those points—then many of our afflictions can be stopped.

~ Meditating on the practices of the person of medium capacity
When we meditate on the practices of  the  person  of  medium  capacity,  of
course, the positive effects will be even greater, especially if we  reflect
on the four noble truths and the twelve links of dependent origination.

There is much discussion here as to how all our problems can be traced  back
to our afflictions. The afflictions are the  source  of  all  our  problems.
There is also much discussion on  the  faults  of  the  afflictions  and  so
forth.

The practices of the person of medium capacity  are  essentially  the  three
higher trainings. If the person is able to reflect well on these points  and
cultivate the antidotes, this will  deal  with  so  many  of  that  person’s
afflictions.

~ Meditating on the practices of the person of great capacity
The  practices  of  a  person  of  great  capacity  essentially  relate   to
destroying his own self-cherishing. This is done by considering first,  from
every possible angle, how  self-cherishing  is  harmful  and  how  extremely
beneficial cherishing others is. If that person is able  to  work  with  his
own self-cherishing and weaken it, then so many  afflictions  can  be  dealt
with.

The whole point of training the mind and  meditating  on  all  these  topics
that are found in the practices of the person of small capacity, the  person
of medium capacity and the person of the great capacity is for  disciplining
the mind and working with the afflictions.

 • So there is the approach of dealing with our afflictions by modifying our
   conduct.
 • Then in this context there are these meditations on  the  entire  lam-rim
   that comprise of the path  that  is  shared  with  the  person  of  small
   capacity, that path that is shared with the person of medium capacity and
   the path of the person of great capacity.
 • The last approach to dealing with the afflictions is through the view.

~ Dealing with the afflictions through the view
Here, we look at the nature of the afflictions themselves  by  understanding
and  realising  how  the  afflictions  themselves  are  empty  of   existing
inherently.  For  example,  we  take  our  ignorance—our  grasping  at  true
existence—as the object of analysis. We have to see for ourselves that  what
our ignorance is grasping at, i.e., true existence, has  never  existed.  If
we can realise that the object that our  ignorance  believes  in  has  never
existed, not only will we deal with the afflictions but we will be  able  to
uproot them, i.e., destroy them completely from the root.

~ Correlating the three approaches with the three higher trainings
We  can  also  correlate  the  three  approaches   of   dealing   with   the
afflictions—conduct,  meditation  and  the  view—with   the   three   higher
training.
1. The higher training in ethical discipline correlates with conduct,  i.e.,
   dealing with the afflictions  through  modifying  our  conduct.  That  is
   essentially what ethical discipline is.
2. When one has a good stable practice of ethical discipline, then  one  has
   a much higher chance of succeeding in one’s  practice  of  concentration,
   i.e., the second higher training. The main obstacles to developing single-
   pointedness of mind are mental excitement and laxity. But when one has  a
   good practice of ethical discipline, one would have already removed  many
   distractions and causes for excitement and mental  laxity.  As  such,  it
   makes the job of achieving concentration much easier.
3. Through the force of that concentration, many of the afflictions  do  not
   manifest but this doesn’t mean that they  have  been  removed.  As  such,
   there is the practice of the higher training in wisdom. Therefore, it  is
   said that the wisdom realising selflessness is  essential  without  which
   there is no way to remove the afflictions completely from their root.

With the generation and development of the  wisdom  realising  selflessness,
the  various  levels  of  defilements  are  abandoned  gradually.  When  one
directly realises selflessness, one starts to abandon  the  path  of  seeing
abandonments that we had learnt in the previous module. One  then  moves  on
to  abandoning  the  path  of  meditation  abandonments.  Through  continual
familiarisation with that wisdom, there will come a point when  the  process
of removing the knowledge obscurations will start.

In whatever we do, whether we are walking, travelling, sitting  down,  lying
down  or  going  about  doing  whatever  we  are  doing,  we  have  to  rely
continually on mindfulness and introspection to check whether we are  coming
under the  control  and  influence  of  our  afflictions.  By  depending  on
mindfulness and introspection, the  moment  we  notice  the  arising  of  an
affliction, the teachings tell us that we should apply  the  antidote  right
away.

Verse 4: The practice with bad-natured people
      Verse 4
      Whenever I see beings who are wicked  in  nature  and  overwhelmed  by
      violent negative actions and suffering, I shall hold  such  rare  ones
      dear, as if I had found a precious treasure.
Those who are “wicked in nature” refer to  those  who  are  bad-natured.  In
spite of what you do or say, they will never change. This verse also  refers
to people who are always  involved  in  very  strong  non-virtues,  such  as
killing. These bad-natured sentient  beings  are  always  engaging  in  non-
virtues and they experience a lot  of  suffering  and  pain,  such  as  very
strong illnesses.

The practitioners of bodhicitta  are  so  happy  when  they  meet  with  the
conditions that enable their bodhicitta to increase more and more,  just  as
a hungry person is overjoyed  when  he  finds  food  or  a  poor  person  is
overjoyed when he becomes very  rich.  They  are  so  happy.  Likewise,  the
practitioners of bodhicitta become  very  happy,  like  a  poor  person  who
suddenly finds a very precious jewel, when they meet  with  people  of  bad-
nature who are always engaging  in  non-virtue  or  people  who  are  really
suffering.
When  these  practitioners  see  such  bad-natured  sentient  beings,   they
generate very strong compassion as they reflect on the suffering that  these
people will have to experience in the future as a result  of  their  current
actions. Likewise, when the practitioners of bodhicitta find people who  are
suffering greatly, being very sick and so forth, they feel as if  they  have
found a precious jewel.

Verse 5: Offering the victory to others
      Verse 5
      When, out of envy, others mistreat me  with  abuse,  insults,  or  the
      like, I shall accept defeat and offer the victory to others.

This is how a practitioner of  bodhicitta  reacts  when  he  is  in  such  a
situation.

This verse is conveying the situation when others out of jealousy  scold  us
directly or indirectly behind our back even though we are not at  fault  and
have not done anything wrong.  Yet  we  are  still  criticised  directly  or
indirectly.  So  this  mistreatment   is,   in   the   conventional   sense,
unjustified.

This verse is telling us that in the face of such unjustified  mistreatment,
the first thing is not to  put  up  any  defence  by  trying  to  prove  our
innocence but to remain calm and mentally undisturbed. With  that  state  of
mind, the verse continues, “I shall accept defeat and offer the  victory  to
others.”

The teachings say that the  practice  of  generosity  and  the  practice  of
ethical discipline are very  important.  The  teachings  tell  us  that  the
reason for doing these practices  is  mainly  to  accumulate  merit  and  to
purify our negativities.

The teachings say that in the situation laid out in  Verse  5—where  others,
motivated by their jealousy, accuse us of doing something  we  did  not  do,
accuse us of having certain faults, criticise us directly  or  bad-mouth  us
behind our back—we should be patient, mentally undisturbed,  accept  it  and
offer the victory to others. It is said that the benefit of  doing  so  will
greatly exceed the benefit we gain from  the  practices  of  generosity  and
ethical discipline. The purification that  we  experience  will  be  greater
than the purification that comes  from  practising  generosity  and  ethical
discipline. Likewise, the accumulation of merit will also be far greater.

There must be the causes and conditions in order to be  able  to  engage  in
the practice of patience. In order to practise patience, we need  an  object
for cultivating patience. Generally speaking, we would need someone  who  is
upset with us, who is opposed to us or who dislike us.  Such  an  object  of
patience is necessary.

Since that is a condition for  the  development  of  patience,  that  person
should be worshipped in the way we  would  worship  the  Dharma.  Shantideva
said as much in his Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds. [1]
It is helpful to think of how we will never  meet  with  the  result  of  an
action that we have never  done.  This  is  impossible.  It  is  helpful  to
remember this when we are trying to cultivate patience.

Returning to the scenario of being accused by others of something  we  truly
had not done in this life. Since it is not possible to meet with the  effect
of an action that we have not  done,  therefore,  this  means  that  we  are
experiencing the result of an action that we had done some time in the  past
or in one of our past lives. If we reflect well on karma  and  its  effects,
although we may not have done anything in  this  life,  we  must  have  done
something in our past lives. This is the  reason  we  are  experiencing  the
ripening effect in this life.

But how do most people deal with this  situation?  Conventionally  speaking,
when one is falsely accused  of  something  that  one  did  not  do  and  is
innocent of, most people would say that it is wrong to put up with  such  an
accusation. One is justified in correcting that  mistake  and  one  is  even
justified in being upset. Only a foolish person will practise patience  when
one is actually innocent. How can one practise patience? It is  wrong,  just
plain wrong.

Is this not how we think?

Khen Rinpoche: Am I correct? So what is to be done?

Student: Rinpoche, if one thinks that the other person is making  a  mistake
by wrongly accusing and  insulting  oneself,  don’t  you  think  one  should
correct him out of a sense  of  compassion  rather  than  let  him  continue
making such a mistake? Otherwise, one will only be encouraging him.

Khen Rinpoche: In such a situation, in the first place, why do  we  want  to
justify ourselves? Because the mind is not happy and is  already  disturbed.
That is why we need to justify ourselves. We  are  thinking,  “I  didn’t  do
anything wrong. I am correct.”

Because the mind is already  disturbed  that  is  why  we  need  to  justify
ourselves and in due course, anger will arise. As I mentioned  earlier,  the
text is saying that when the mind is undisturbed, only then  is  there  room
for discussion and clarification.

We react because we are mentally  disturbed.  Whatever  we  say  to  justify
ourselves will be out of anger.  From  our  side,  we  will  definitely  say
something. In the first place, the  other  party  must  have  a  reason  for
saying what he  said  rightly  or  wrongly,  even  if  he  is  motivated  by
jealousy. When we try to justify ourselves, this person is not going to  sit
by and accept it quietly. He too will further justify his  accusations.  And
when he replies to our justification, then we get even more upset with  that
further justification. Then a heated exchange of words will ensue.

In the end, we do not benefit and neither does  the  other  party.  It  only
makes the situation more and more heated. This is what we  have  experienced
before. It is always like this. The exchange of “I didn’t do it”  and  “Yes,
you did it.” It doesn’t matter whether it is true or untrue.  It  will  only
make the problem bigger.

When someone insults or criticise us, we don’t like it. We then hold  on  to
that person’s behaviour and that becomes a cause for us  to  be  upset  with
that person. Her behaviour makes us feel justified  for  feeling  upset  and
because of that behaviour, we attack her.

In his  Four  Hundred  Stanzas,  Aryadeva  said  that  we  have  to  make  a
distinction between the actor and the action. He also pointed out  that  the
Buddha said that we should regard that person’s affliction as the enemy  and
not the person.

An example is a patient who is possessed by a spirit. When he is brought  to
a doctor who is aware that there is a  spirit  possessing  him,  it  doesn’t
matter what he may do to the doctor. The doctor will never  get  upset  with
him. This is because the doctor understands that it is not the  patient  but
rather, the spirit who is controlling him is making all the noises  and  the
disturbances. Likewise, the Buddha said that we should not view  the  person
as the enemy but rather, the enemy is the affliction of the person.

We must also distinguish between the actor and the action. We  should  never
be upset with  the  person  but  what  we  need  to  oppose  is  his  anger.
Accordingly, the person should never ever be an object of anger for us.  The
person should only be an object of patience and  an  object  of  compassion.
Then with an undisturbed mind and with sincere  affection  and  concern,  we
can address the problem itself,  not  the  person.  We  should  address  the
problem with the person by saying, “Perhaps it is this  and  not  that.”  As
such, the person is only an object of patience, an object of compassion  and
not our opponent. Therefore, that person  becomes  the  object  to  whom  we
offer the victory.

Essentially, Verse 5 is the advice on the practice of patience. For  someone
who considers herself to be a practitioner, then this  is  what  she  should
do. Such a practice goes against what is normally accepted in the world.  In
the world, the norm is that when we are criticised or insulted, we must  not
keep quiet. We are supposed to retaliate and  fight  back.  In  conventional
terms, it is completely justifiable that when we know we are not  wrong,  we
are compelled to fight back to redress the wrong.

We see this in the world today. There is always fighting  and  the  problems
become bigger and bigger. When we meet with  such  situations,  it  is  very
difficult for us to accept and practise what is advised in  this  verse.  It
is very difficult to put up with the situation  described.  However,  if  we
are able  to  practise  according  to  this  verse,  then  it  becomes  very
beneficial.

Verse 6: Seeing the harm-doer as the holy guru
Verse 6 also talks about the practice of  patience.  What  is  mentioned  in
this verse is even more difficult to practise than Verse 5!

      Verse 6
      When someone whom I have benefited and in  whom  I  have  great  hopes
      gives me terrible harm, I shall regard that person as my holy Guru.

The approach is similar to what  was  discussed  earlier.  If  we  are  real
practitioners,    then we have to remember the workings  of  karma  and  its
effects. When we experience the situations mentioned in this verse, we  have
to remember that we are  experiencing  the  effect  of  an  action  that  we
ourselves have done, if not in this life then  definitely  sometime  in  the
past. If we can view those unpleasant experiences  as  the  purification  of
our  negativities,  perhaps  we  may  even  be  able  to  experience   those
situations joyfully.

Instead of being patient, if we retaliate, we will cause the other party  to
accumulate more negativities as a result of which he may  go  to  the  lower
realms. If that happens, it is as if we are the ones who  are  sending  that
person to the lower realms. So we can practise  patience  here  by  thinking
about karma and its effects and by thinking of the qualities  of  the  other
party  by  recalling  how  cherishing  others  is  the  basis  of  all  good
qualities.

When we experience  or  encounter  difficulties  with  others,  it  is  very
helpful to make a distinction between the person, his  afflictions  and  his
self-cherishing, just as we make a distinction  between  ourselves  and  our
afflictions, “I am me. My afflictions are not me. I am not my  afflictions.”
In reality, we are not our self-grasping. Indeed we are different.  We  talk
about, “me and my self-grasping.”

When someone criticises, scolds us or does something that we don’t like,  we
can see those actions as attacks  on  our  self-grasping  and  not  directed
against us personally. The person is criticising our self-grasping, not  us.
We need to think in this way, “That person is  attacking  my  self-grasping.
He is harming my self-grasping, not me.”

When  we  really  understand  this  point,  then  when  we  experience   the
difficulties directed at us—whether  it  is  criticism,  an  attack  and  so
forth—we will see them as attacks  on  our  afflictions,  our  ego  and  not
ourselves. We will be able to see that the  other  party  is  attacking  our
real enemy. When we realise this, we would even want to  say,  “Thank  you!”
to the other person because he  is  really  doing  us  a  great  service  in
attacking our real enemy, our afflictions.

The real enemy that we need to oppose  is  our  self-cherishing.  Therefore,
the person who opposes and attacks our self-cherishing is not our enemy.

As I mentioned in the first class, all of these points are  straightforward.
They are evidently common sense, sensible and  very  easily  to  understand.
Yet they are very difficult to practise so we have  to  strive  to  work  at
them.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] “Thus, since patience is produced/ In dependence  upon  a  very  hateful
mind/ He is a cause of patience/ Whereby he  is  worth  of  veneration  just
like the sacred Dharma.” (Verse 111, Chapter 6, Page  43,  Engaging  in  the
Deeds of a Bodhisattva, translated by  Toh  Sze  Gee.  ©Toh  Sze  Gee  2006,
Revised 2014).


