Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L19final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:48.006011
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 19                                                 24 September 2015


Meaning of blessings. Self-grasping and self-cherishing. The root text:
Verses 79—86. Verse 79: Contrary behaviour. Verse 80: Being difficult to be
with. Verse 81: Enmity towards holy beings & having great lust. Verse 82:
Casting aside close friends & pursuing new ones. Verse 83: Faking
clairvoyance. Verse 84: Lacking in Dharma scholarship. Verse 85: Habituated
to attachment, aversion & envy. Verse 86: Putting down the Dharma.


MEANING OF BLESSINGS

Question: In lesson 17, it was mentioned that  when  we  feel  uncomfortable
listening to the teachings on Mahayana mind training  about  the  faults  of
our self-cherishing, it is a sign  that  the  blessings  of  the  lama  have
entered our hearts.

The qualm is that when we are driven by our ego  and  when  somebody  points
out our faults and mistakes, there is a feeling of emotional discomfort  and
mental unhappiness. That is just a sign that we have a big ego!  It  is  not
really a sign that the blessings of the lama have entered our hearts.

Can Khen Rinpoche please clarify the meaning of having received  the  lama’s
blessings? I take that definition to be when  the  state  of  our  mind  has
improved and when the frequency, intensity and duration of  our  afflictions
are reduced.

Answer: In Tibetan, blessings is jin lab.  This word has the connotation  of
change. Hence, to receive blessings means that you have made  some  progress
internally and your mind has  transformed  for  the  better.  That  positive
transformation is a blessing.

One of the factors that makes this positive transformation possible  is  the
very nature of the mind itself. You have heard many times how  our  mind  is
in the nature of clear light. That is a fact and a reality.  The  nature  of
our mind being clear light is the basis for  change.  It  allows  change  to
happen.

Having said that, having buddha nature alone is not  sufficient  for  change
to happen.  It doesn’t necessarily mean that the mind will  change  for  the
better. We must meet with the different conditions for change to happen.

In the study of the workings of the consciousness or  the  mind,  we  learnt
that for the generation of a particular  mind,  there  must  be  the  coming
together of:
 • the objective condition
 • the empowering condition
 • the immediately preceding condition.

In the presentation of mind and  awareness,[1]  it  was  explained  how  the
production  of  a  particular  consciousness  is  dependent  on  the  coming
together  of  a  few  conditions.  For  example,  in  order   for   an   eye
consciousness apprehending an object, e.g., blue, to  arise,  you  need  the
immediately preceding condition, the objective condition and the  empowering
condition. In this case, you need the empowering condition,  the  particular
sense power, and you also need  a  previous  moment  of  consciousness,  the
immediately preceding condition.

My point is that in order for a particular mental event  to  manifest,  many
conditions must come together. As such, in order  for  a  virtuous  mind  to
arise, the conditions that are  necessary  for  the  manifestation  of  that
virtuous state of mind must come together without which that virtuous  state
of mind will not arise.

It is said that every single virtuous thought that arises  in  the  continua
of sentient beings is the enlightened activity of  the  wisdom  truth  body.
Whenever we generate a virtuous thought, that means we have been engaged  by
the enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body.   We  have  received  the
blessings of the enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body.

If all the virtuous thoughts in the continua  of  sentient  beings  are  the
blessings of the wisdom truth body, then whenever a virtuous thought  arises
in us, among the conditions for the arising of that virtuous  thought,  what
is the empowering  condition  for  that  virtuous  thought?  The  empowering
condition is the wisdom truth body.

To answer your question, what I said before was never  meant  to  mean  that
you receive blessings when your mind is disturbed  by  others  pointing  out
your faults. That disturbance is not a blessing. That is not what I meant.

We usually get upset when someone criticises us or points  out  our  faults.
The more they do it, the angrier  and  more  upset  we  become.  If  we  get
angrier and angrier, that is not receiving blessings. Otherwise, every  day,
we will be receiving blessings! So that is not the meaning.

However, if as a result of someone pointing out our faults—even if  we  feel
very uncomfortable, unhappy  and  upset—we  are  able  to  reflect  on  that
criticism and come to realise that the discomfort and  unhappiness  we  feel
are actually the manifestation of our self-cherishing, that  recognition  is
a blessing! That realisation and acknowledgement  that  our  self-cherishing
is the source of all our problems—that is the blessing!

It is impossible for us to receive criticism if we hadn’t created the  cause
some time in the past. It is not possible to meet  with  the  result  of  an
action that we  had  not  done.   That  is  impossible.  Then  when  someone
criticises us, we are cognisant of the main cause of that  criticism,  i.e.,
we must have done something in the past that created the cause,  the  karma,
therefore, we are being criticised now. As a result of knowing that, we  are
able to remain calm and relaxed and not be  so  affected  as  we  know  that
there is no one else to blame except ourselves. That calmness of  mind  that
enables us to stay composed and undisturbed is a blessing.

Thinking about this, we can see for ourselves from the bottom of our  hearts
that the main cause of all our unhappiness and problems lies within  us  and
not externally.  It is our self-cherishing attitude that  is  the  root  and
the source of all our problems and sufferings. The person who has that  kind
of understanding from the heart realises the main cause  of  suffering  does
not lie outside but within herself. As such, when she  encounters  criticism
by others, she would not blame someone outside  because  she  realises  that
ultimately the source lies within  herself.   She  won’t  see  the  need  to
retaliate and put the blame externally. She doesn’t feel  uncomfortable  and
upset with her critic because she recognises that it is her own fault.  That
is a blessing.

Therefore for the Mahayana  mind  training  here,  first,  it  is  extremely
important to realise that our self-cherishing is the source and the root  of
many problems. That is the very first essential step  to  be  realised.  The
discussions and all the verses that we have covered  so  far  are  basically
telling us the many faults of our self-cherishing attitude. Because  of  our
self-cherishing attitude, we experience this  problem,  that  problem,  this
unhappiness and that unhappiness.  Comes the day when we  can  really  feel,
from the depths of our heart, that indeed our self-cherishing  is  the  main
troublemaker and the real source of our unhappiness, I think that  would  be
the greatest blessing!

If we can realise from the depths of  our  heart  that  our  self-cherishing
attitude is indeed the source of many of our problems and difficulties,  and
if we are also cognisant of karma, then we will not meet  with  the  results
of actions that we did  not  do.  With  that  kind  of  understanding,  then
whatever difficulties or unpleasant experiences we may  encounter,  such  as
people criticising or scolding us, we would always  be  able  to  stay  very
peaceful and undisturbed. This is because  we  understand  and  accept  that
these difficulties are  due  to  our  own  fault  and  not  someone  else’s.
Furthermore, we may even be able to  think,  “This  is  wonderful!  This  is
purifying my negativities!” This happens when we are able to have that  kind
of understanding.

For people who have realised that their self-cherishing  is  the  source  of
all their problems, then no matter what befalls on  them,  their  experience
is as mentioned in Verse 96 of the Guru Puja:

      Even if the environment and beings  are  filled  with  the  fruits  of
      negativity,
      And unwished for sufferings pour down like rain,
      I seeks your blessings to take these miserable conditions as a path
      By seeing them as causes to exhaust the results of my negative  karma.



Such people will be able to live their lives with the kind of view  that  is
mentioned in this particular verse in the Guru Puja. For  every  undesirable
thing that happens to them, they are able to use  those  adverse  conditions
as  the  means  for  achieving  enlightenment.  In  fact,  for  them,   more
difficulties mean more blessings.

SELF-GRASPING AND SELF-CHERISHING

Student 2: To clear up this confusion about self-cherishing, can  I  confirm
that the emphasis in this text that we are studying  at  the  moment  is  to
stamp out our self-cherishing, not self-grasping? This is the first thing  I
want to clarify.

My next question is: Where does self-cherishing  come  from?  Does  it  come
from self-grasping  or  does  it  come  from  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection that perceives the individual self to be substantially  existent?
In one lesson, you mentioned that self-cherishing is the  master  and  self-
grasping is the slave but this is reversed in some texts.

Khen Rinpoche: I believe I have addressed this issue about the  relationship
between self-cherishing and self-grasping.

In the context of this particular text, the subject matter is  training  the
mind to generate bodhicitta, the mind of enlightenment, and, in  particular,
training the mind to develop bodhicitta through exchanging self and  others.


The greatest impediment or obstacle to the generation of bodhicitta is self-
cherishing.  Since  self-cherishing  is  the  greatest   obstacle   to   the
generation of bodhicitta, first we must understand all the faults  of  self-
cherishing. Therefore in this text, there is so much emphasis on  discussing
these various faults of the self-cherishing that bring on all our  problems.


As I said before, self-cherishing and self-grasping are not the  same.  They
are not the same mind. They are different minds.
 • How is self-cherishing overcome? It is overcome by generating bodhicitta.


 • How is self-grasping overcome? It is overcome  by  the  wisdom  realising
   selflessness.

In the commentaries, you will find the words,  the  master  and  the  slave,
being used. Of the two—self-cherishing and self-grasping—who is  the  master
and who  is  the  slave?  Sometimes,  self-cherishing  is  the  master,  and
sometimes, it is said that self-grasping is the master.

So far,  based  on  this  particular  commentary  that  I  am  using,  self-
cherishing is said to be the master and self-grasping  is  the  slave  doing
its bidding. But later on, you  will  notice  a  change  as  there  is  this
discussion of how self-grasping is the master  and  self-cherishing  is  the
slave.

When we think about this from our own experience, we will find that we  have
both possibilities. There are times when our  self-grasping  is  the  master
and self-cherishing just follows the orders of self-grasping. But there  are
also times when our self-cherishing is the master. So in our minds, we  have
both. We have everything!
Our self-cherishing and self-grasping take turns to be  the  prime  minister
depending on the election result! [2]

I did explain to you before that, in general, it is easier  for  us  to  say
that the master is self-grasping. It is said that every single problem  that
we  experience,  our  entire  samsara,  has  its  roots  in  our  ignorance.
Ignorance is self-grasping. Self-grasping is ignorance. As such, we can  say
that our self-cherishing  comes  into  being  in  dependence  on  our  self-
grasping.

Whether we say self-grasping, the  view  of  the  transitory  collection  or
ignorance, they come down to the same thing. They are not exactly the  same.
They are different but at the end of the day, their meanings  boil  down  to
the same thing.

What is the  view  of  the  transitory  collection?  It  is  the  mind  that
apprehends the ‘I’ in one’s own continuum, not the person in someone  else’s
continuum. It is the mind that apprehends the person in one’s  continuum  to
be existing by way of its own character or existing inherently. This is  the
view of the transitory collection. This is the  root  of  our  own  samsara.
This is self-grasping. If you want to talk about ignorance  being  the  root
of our own samara, this is called  ignorance.  The  meaning  comes  down  to
that.

We are not saying that ignorance is necessarily the view of  the  transitory
collection. If you want to talk about the root of cyclic  existence,  it  is
ignorance, in particular, it is self-grasping, and in particular, it is  the
view of the transitory  collection,  that  is,  the  mind  apprehending  the
person or the ‘I’ in one’s  own  continuum  to  exist  by  way  of  its  own
character.

Why do we say that they are not the same thing but their meanings come  down
to the same thing?

First, we must understand what the view of the transitory collection is.  It
is the mind that apprehends the person included in  one’s  continuum  to  be
existing  by  way  of  its  own  character,  existing  truly  and   existing
inherently. The view of  the  transitory  collection  is  necessarily  self-
grasping but self-grasping, i.e., grasping at the self, is  not  necessarily
the view of the transitory collection.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

CONTRARY BEHAVIOUR


      Verse 79
      When someone seeks my assistance, I ignore him and secretly cause him
      harm. When someone agrees with me, I won’t concur, but seek quarrels
      even at a distance. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer,
      false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the
      enemy, Ego!

There are times when people who we usually respect, such  as  our  teachers,
our parents and so forth, offer us good advice to help us but we  don’t  pay
attention to the advice. Not only do we not pay attention, we purposely  act
in an opposite way.

There are also times when people show us respect.  When  this  happens,  all
the more we should behave in an appropriate way towards those who accord  us
such respect. But sometimes we don’t do that at all.  Not  only  do  we  not
show respect in return, we may even criticise  the  person  and  expose  his
faults. Somehow we are  unable  to  show  respect  to  that  person,  mainly
because of our pride. If we analyse again, our pride comes  from  our  self-
cherishing. The point is that it all comes back to our self-cherishing.

BEING DIFFICULT TO BE WITH


      Verse 80
      I do not appreciate advice and I’m always difficult to be  with.  Many
      things offend me and my clinging is always strong. Roar and thunder on
      the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at  the
      heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

Whatever others may do to make us happy or to please us,  somehow  we  still
feel uncomfortable and don’t accept them. We may be easily offended. All  it
takes is for somebody to point out a small  fault  that  we  have.  Then  we
become very unhappy. There are also people who harbour grudges and a lot  of
resentment in  their  heart.  Again,  this  is  the  doing  of  their  self-
cherishing.

The stronger our self-cherishing, the more difficulties we  experience.  The
stronger our self-cherishing, the harder it becomes for us to  put  up  with
difficult situations.

Perhaps we may have felt offended when someone says that we have  a  lot  of
white hair or we have a lot of wrinkles. These are examples of when we  take
offense. We feel offended because we have self-cherishing. If we have  white
hair, we have white hair. If we have wrinkles, we have wrinkles.  These  are
facts. There is really nothing to be upset about. But we are like  that.  If
someone were to tell us, “You are fat!” we  will  be  so  offended.  But  if
someone says, “You are thin,” somehow we are not so offended.

Khen Rinpoche: I want to be fat. I tried so many methods but nothing  works!


Those who want to be fat remain thin, and  those  want  to  be  thin  always
remain fat! This happens to all of us. We are offended by different  things.
So we just have to be aware of this, try not  to  take  offence  easily  and
also not to hold grudges for a long time.

There are people who bear grudges in their hearts their entire life and  are
unwilling to let them go even at the time of death. They even pray, “When  I
die, I want to come back and get you!”  I  personally  have  seen  this  for
myself. Such things do happen. So, we have to  try  to  let  go  and  forget
about such grudges. There is no profit to  be  gained  from  holding  on  to
grudges because if we do, we only create  negativities  and  make  ourselves
unhappy.


ENMITY TOWARDS HOLY BEINGS & HAVING GREAT LUST


      Verse 81
      I exalt myself above the high and low  and  consider  holy  people  my
      enemies. Because my  lust  is  great,  I  energetically  pursue  young
      people.  Roar  and  thunder  on  the  head  of  the  destroyer,  false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!

When we see people who have studied the teachings well, who  are  practising
well and who are teaching the Dharma well, we should  feel  happy  for  them
and rejoice.  But  instead  of  rejoicing,  we  find  fault  with  them  and
criticise them. When this happens, this is definitely motivated by our self-
cherishing. We must show respect to holy beings instead  of  criticising  or
putting them down.

In this context, we can read, “Because my lust is great,” as  having  a  lot
of sexual desire. Paedophilia is due to having very  strong  sexual  desire.
People may have partners and be in  committed  relationships  but  they  may
still have sexual relationships with people other than their  partners.  All
these are the results of following self-cherishing.

CASTING ASIDE CLOSE FRIENDS & PURSUING NEW ONES


      Verse 82
      Because my friendships are of short  duration,  I  cast  aside  former
      acquaintances. Because my new friends are  many,  I  lay  before  them
      empty promises of enjoyment. Roar and  thunder  on  the  head  of  the
      destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at  the  heart  of  the
      butcher, the enemy, Ego!

One may have strong friendships with certain people and consider them to  be
close friends. But let’s say misfortune befalls a  close  friend.  Maybe  he
becomes very sick, suddenly has many problems in his life  or  becomes  very
poor. When a close friend becomes like  that,  then  one  distances  oneself
from him. Some people purposely avoid their friends when they  become  poor,
sick or have lots of problems.

There are also people who are very fond  of  cultivating  new  relationships
and want to make lots of friends. So they put on a show by behaving  nicely,
talking nicely and putting on their  best  behaviour.  In  particular,  when
they find out that a particular person is very rich or has a lot  of  power,
they will put in extra effort to be close to that person.  In  order  to  be
close to that person, then they have to do lots of things like  talking  and
behaving nicely. As before, all of this is just due to self-cherishing.

FAKING CLAIRVOYANCE


      Verse 83
      Having no precognition, I eagerly resort  to  lying  and  deprecation.
      Having no compassion,  I  snatch  away  the  confidence  from  others’
      hearts.  Roar  and  thunder  on  the  head  of  the  destroyer,  false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!

“Precognition” means clairvoyance.  Some people give others  the  impression
that they have clairvoyance and welcome people to  seek  advice  from  them.
Actually they don’t have clairvoyance but  they  give  the  impression  that
they do. Then people will come seeking advice about various things.  As  one
has no clairvoyance, one is basically lying in whatever  advice  one  gives.
Of course, some of the things that this person says is bound  to  be  proved
wrong. When he proves to be wrong, people will  come  back  and  say,  “Last
time you said this but it is not correct.” Since that person  has  to  cover
himself, then he has to tell more lies by saying,  “That  didn’t  happen  to
you because of this and that.” There are such people.

Khen Rinpoche: One person (A) went to consult  someone  (B).  I  think  that
person (A) was sick or something like that.  The  person  he  consulted  (B)
said, “Your sickness comes from  eating  too  much  meat”  but  this  person
himself (A) had been a life-long vegetarian. Of course, the person  (B)  had
to say something immediately. So he said, “Oh, I am not talking  about  this
life. You ate too much meat in your past life.”  This  person  (A)  told  me
this story. I didn’t make it up.

In short, there are people who lie about having clairvoyance and  they  tell
lie after lie in order to cover up. These are all the results  of  following
self-cherishing.

LACKING IN DHARMA SCHOLARSHIP

      Verse 84
      Having studied little, I  wildly  guess  about  everything.  Since  my
      religious education is slight, I have wrong  views  about  everything.
      Roar and thunder on the head of  the  destroyer,  false  construction!
      Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

Because of having heard very little of the teachings and  having  done  very
little reflection, one is unable to take a firm stand or  a  decisive  point
when one engages in Dharma discussions with others or when one  is  teaching
the Dharma. One always says, “Maybe it  is  like  this.  Maybe  it  is  like
that.” One is just making wild guesses.

If one does not have deep knowledge of the teachings, if one hasn’t  studied
and reflected much, then one will not have a wealth  of  scriptural  sources
and understanding that is backed up by many different  lines  of  reasoning.
One may deny what others say.  For  example,  during  a  Dharma  discussion,
someone might say, “It is not like this but it is like that because of  this
and that reason. It is mentioned in the texts.”  Because  of  one’s  limited
understanding and knowledge, one can only say,  “No,  it  is  not  true.  It
cannot be like that.”

This is one of the many reasons behind the need for studying and  reflecting
extensively on the teachings. When one’s knowledge is very limited  and  one
hasn’t thought  much  about  the  teachings,  backed  up  by  reasoning  and
scriptural sources, then there is a greater possibility of one  accumulating
the extremely heavy negative karma of abandoning the Dharma.
Because one doesn’t have  a  broad  overview  of  understanding  the  entire
Buddhadharma backed up by  scriptural  sources  and  especially,  reasoning,
then when one hears something that doesn’t fit with one’s  mind,  one  would
think, “How can it be like that?” Even worse, one may declare, “No  way!  It
cannot be like that. The Buddha didn’t say this. This is definitely not  the
scriptures of the Buddha!”

So a person of little  learning  and  reflection  has  a  higher  chance  of
creating the negative karma of abandoning the  Dharma  and  also  generating
wrong views. Wrong views means actively denying the Dharma.

On  the  other  hand,  people  who  have  studied   extensively   and   have
contemplated the teachings well are very  unlikely  to  have  this  kind  of
wrong view and accumulate the karma of abandoning the Dharma. Therefore,  it
is extremely important to have a good understanding of the entire  teachings
of the Buddha, both sutra and tantra. Within sutra, there are  the  Hinayana
and the Mahayana and on top of that is tantra.

There are people who know just one vehicle  and  say  that  tantra  and  the
Mahayana teachings are false and are not the teachings  of  the  Buddha.  In
particular,  if  one  doesn’t  study   tantra,   especially   its   defining
characteristics and special features, then one can  have  many  wrong  views
and negative views about Buddhist tantra.

There are many people  who  only  know  the  Hinayana  teachings  about  the
hearers and solitary realisers. They  think  only  those  are  the  Buddha’s
teachings and nothing else. That is why they say that the  Mahayana  is  not
the teachings of the Buddha and they put down the Mahayana.

Likewise, there are people who only know about Hinayana and Mahayana  sutras
but don’t understand what Buddhist tantra is.  Without  investigating,  they
say, “How can this be taught by the  Buddha?”  and  they  criticise  tantric
teachings. There are many such people.

If we can gain an understanding of all the Buddha’s teachings and  at  least
have an overview of them, studying as much as we  can,  the  chances  of  us
having wrong  views  about  the  Buddha’s  teachings  and  accumulating  the
extremely heavy negative karma of abandoning the  Dharma  is  much  slimmer.
Again, this is one of the many reasons for studying the Dharma extensively.

HABITUATED TO ATTACHMENT, AVERSION AND ENVY

      Verse 85
      Habituated to attachment and aversion, I revile  everyone  opposed  to
      me. Habituated to envy, I  slander  and  deprecate  others.  Roar  and
      thunder on the head of the  destroyer,  false  construction!  Mortally
      strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

PUTTING DOWN THE DHARMA


      Verse 86
      Never studying, I despise the vast teaching. Never relying on a  guru,
      I revile religious instruction. Roar and thunder on the  head  of  the
      destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at  the  heart  of  the
      butcher, the enemy, Ego!

“I revile  religious  instruction”  can  be  understood  to  mean  that  one
criticises and puts down the Dharma.

Some people cling to a very small teaching of  the  Buddha  and  think  that
that is the main thing. By practising this small  little  instruction,  they
think they can achieve realisations and enlightenment.  So  they  say,  “You
don’t need anything else. Why do you need to  study  all  these  complicated
subjects? There is no need to  study  them.  This  one  teaching  is  enough
already.”  These people then disregard  their  Dharma  studies,  not  seeing
learning as an important and necessary thing.

There are some smart,  quick  and  intelligent  people  who  can  understand
things fairly quickly and easily.  Because  they  can  do  this,  they  say,
“There is no need to receive all these oral transmission or the  lineage  of
the  commentaries.  Why  do  you  need  to  go   and   receive   all   these
transmissions?” They look down on such things and disregard  receiving  such
transmissions.

It is extremely important to receive the blessings of the  lineage,  whether
it is  the  lineage  of  the  oral  transmissions  or  the  lineage  of  the
commentaries, because these lineages have come down to the present  time  in
an unbroken line from the time of the Buddha. There is the blessing of  this
continuation of the lineage.

When we receive the lineage of oral transmissions and  the  lineage  of  the
commentaries, because of the blessings imbued in these lineages, it makes  a
big difference to our actualising the path and attaining realisations.  This
is considered to be very important.

The Mahayana path of accumulation is divided into  three  levels.  When  one
reaches the level of the Mahayana great path of accumulation,  one  achieves
the meditative stabilisation called the stream of the doctrine. It  is  said
that  when  one  achieves  that  level,  one  will  remember  all  the  oral
transmissions, the lineage of commentaries and all the  teachings  that  one
has heard for many lifetimes.

I wonder whether there is a connection  between  remembering  all  the  oral
transmissions and commentaries that one has received in the  past  when  one
achieves the meditative stabilisation of the stream of the doctrine  on  the
Mahayana  great  path  of  accumulation.  I  wonder  whether  there  is  any
connection with the blessings of these lineages.

It is important to receive these lineages whether it is the lineage  of  the
oral transmissions or the lineage of the various types of  commentaries  and
so forth.  There are  blessings  imbued  in  these  lineages  because  these
lineages come as a continuation in an unbroken line from  the  time  of  the
Buddha.

Personally I wonder whether one actually remembers anything at that time  if
one has not received the blessings of the lineages. The point  is  that  you
can remember because you have received them but is it possible  to  remember
anything if one hasn’t received them before?

I think that there must be some significance or importance in receiving  the
lineages whether it is the lineage of the oral transmissions or the  lineage
of the commentaries. You do hear of people saying, “Why do you  want  to  go
and listen and receive all these transmissions?” I also heard people  saying
this, “Why do you go to these things? What is the point?” Perhaps,  I  think
there must be some significance. I  guess  maybe  it  has  to  do  with  the
blessings of the lineage.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong
-----------------------
[1] Second Basic Program, Module 2: The Study of Mind and its Functions.
[2] Singapore had just held its general election on 11 September.

