Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L20final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.698154
================================================================================



1 Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
     Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training


Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 20                                                 29 September 2015


Ultimate bodhicitta. The root text: Verses 86—91. Verse 86: Putting down
the Dharma. Verse 87: Setting up one’s own system. Verse 88: Engaging in
non-virtues & non-Dharmic activities. Verse 89: Lacking shame. Verse 90:
Summary: Not creating perfect virtue. Verse 91: The ultimate body of the
Sugata.


ULTIMATE BODHICITTA

Question: A few weeks ago, we talked about  someone  who  has  achieved  the
middle path of accumulation and has already realised  emptiness.  Therefore,
his bodhicitta is very stable.

According to chart of the Mahayana paths and  grounds,  when  a  bodhisattva
has directly realised emptiness, he  is  said  to  have  generated  ultimate
bodhicitta.  Yet  you  mentioned  that  up  to  the  seventh   ground,   the
bodhisattva still has self-grasping. I would like  to  request  for  a  more
detailed explanation of what is a fully qualified  ultimate  bodhicitta  and
the difference if any between the ultimate bodhicitta that is  generated  in
the mind of the bodhisattva  who  has  just  attained  the  path  of  seeing
compared to that in the mind of the bodhisattva on the seventh ground?

[pic]
Answer: Bodhicitta, the mind of enlightenment is usually divided into two:
1. conventional bodhicitta
2. ultimate bodhicitta
Conventional bodhicitta
Having said that, when the word bodhicitta is used,  it  usually  refers  to
conventional bodhicitta. Bodhicitta has two divisions:
1. aspirational bodhicitta
2. engaged bodhicitta
Those two are divisions of conventional bodhicitta or just bodhicitta.

When we talk about the method and wisdom aspects of the  path,  conventional
bodhicitta is the method aspect.

Ultimate bodhicitta
In the great treatises, the definition of ultimate bodhicitta is: A mind  in
which all dualistic appearances with regard to the final mode of abiding  of
full enlightenment have subsided and which is included in  the  category  of
special wisdom in the continuum of a Mahayana superior. Essentially,  it  is
an exalted knower in the continuum of  a  Mahayana  superior  in  which  all
dualistic appearances with regard to the  final  mode  of  abiding  of  full
enlightenment have subsided and it is included in the category of a  special
wisdom realiser.

The definition is long but essentially, ultimate bodhicitta  is  an  exalted
knower in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.

 • What does it realise? It realises emptiness directly.
 • Is it included in the class of method realiser or wisdom realiser? It  is
   included in the class of wisdom realiser.

I don’t remember where I read this expression, but I remember  reading  that
the reason why the bodhisattva superiors are called the ultimate  Sangha  is
because they have this ultimate bodhicitta. I seem to  remember  this  being
mentioned in some of the Middle Way texts.  Therefore,  ultimate  bodhicitta
is not attained until one achieves the Mahayana path of seeing.

As to what I said about the bodhisattva necessarily realising  emptiness  by
the middle path of accumulation, that was just my personal opinion.

The bodhisattva on the middle path of  accumulation  will  never  degenerate
henceforth, i.e., he would never lose his bodhicitta as his  bodhicitta  has
become very stable. I think perhaps this may be due to his bodhicitta  being
conjoined with the realisation of emptiness. As such, I said  that  perhaps,
by the middle path of accumulation, the bodhisattva  would  definitely  have
realised emptiness. But that was a personal opinion.

According to the Consequence Middle Way School  (CMWS),  whether  it  is  an
apprehension of  a  self  of  persons  or  an  apprehension  of  a  self  of
phenomena, they are all necessarily afflictive obscurations, of which  there
are two kinds:
1. intellectually acquired (or artificial) afflictive obscurations
2. innate afflictive obscurations


The intellectually acquired afflictive obscurations  are  abandoned  on  the
path of seeing.

After  these  afflictive  obscurations  are  abandoned,   the   process   of
abandoning the innate afflictive obscurations occurs from  the  end  of  the
first ground till the seventh ground.  The  innate  afflictive  obscurations
are completely abandoned on the eighth ground.

According to the CMWS, whether it is an apprehension of a  self  of  persons
or the apprehension of a self of phenomena, they have  the  same  object  of
negation. These two apprehensions are not differentiated by  the  object  of
negation but rather by the basis of emptiness.

According  to  the  CMWS,  the  innate  afflictive   obscurations   or   the
apprehension of true existence has two forms:
1. the apprehension of the self of persons,  i.e.,  the  apprehension  of  a
   person as truly existent
2. the apprehension of the self of phenomena, i.e., the apprehension of  the
   aggregates as truly existent
These two are not abandoned until the eighth ground. This means  that  there
are instances of them all the way up to the seventh ground.

We have gone through all  this  when  we  were  looking  at  the  paths  and
grounds.[1]

The process of abandoning the different  levels  of  the  innate  afflictive
obscurations happens over a period of time, starting from  the  end  of  the
first ground up to the seventh ground. There are  different  levels  of  the
innate afflictive obscurations, some coarser than others.

Whether it is the apprehension of a self of persons or the  apprehension  of
a self of phenomena, the subtlest forms of both apprehensions are  abandoned
by the uninterrupted path of the last moment of the seventh ground.  So  the
uninterrupted path during the last moment  of  the  seventh  ground  is  the
direct antidote to the subtlest forms of  the  apprehension  of  a  self  of
persons and the apprehension of a self of  phenomena.  When  these  two  are
abandoned, one achieves the path of release on the eighth ground.
                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

PUTTING DOWN THE DHARMA

      Verse 86
      Never studying, I despise the vast teaching. Never relying on a  guru,
      I revile religious instruction. Roar and thunder on the  head  of  the
      destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at  the  heart  of  the
      butcher, the enemy, Ego!

I had mentioned with relation to Verse 86 why  it  is  often  said  that  we
should engage in extensive  learning.  Often  people  accumulate  the  heavy
karma of abandoning the Dharma because they haven’t studied extensively  the
Buddha’s teachings.

There is a text that summarises Lama Tsongkhapa’s life story. In that  text,
he said

      First, I sought out often extensive learning,
      Then all teachings dawned as trainings,
      Finally, I practised all day and all night,
      Completely dedicated to spread the Teaching![2]

This encapsulates Lama Tsongkhapa’s practice and his whole life story.

The lam-rim talks about the four greatnesses of the lam-rim itself.
1. The greatness of enabling one to know that all the teachings are free  of
   contradictions.
2. The greatness of enabling one to understand that all  of  the  scriptures
   are instructions for practice.
3. The greatness of enabling one to find easily the Conqueror’s intent.
4. The greatness  of  enabling  one  to  refrain  automatically  from  great
   wrongdoing.

One of these greatnesses is that when you understand the lam-rim, the  whole
structure of the path, you would realise that all the  teachings  of  Buddha
are not contradictory. That is one of the great advantages  of  knowing  the
lam-rim.

The fourth greatness is that one will automatically refrain from  the  great
misdeed, which refers to the very heavy negative  karma  of  abandoning  the
teachings. So when one has learnt the entire teachings of the  Buddha  well,
one will be  protected  automatically  from  this  heavy  great  misdeed  of
abandoning the Buddha’s teachings.

Even these days, there are people who still hold the view  that  some  parts
of the teachings of the Buddha are good while other parts are not  so  good.
In fact, there are some who believe that  the  Mahayana  teachings  are  not
good and that the real teachings of the  Buddha  are  the  Pali  canon,  the
Hinayana teachings.

Then there are others who say, “The Mahayana teachings are the best. If  you
practise the Mahayana, then you don’t have to bother with the  teachings  of
the Pali canon, the Hinayana teachings.”

People make such statements out of a lack  of  understanding.  They  do  not
understand the teachings. They are saying that there are some  teachings  of
the Buddha that are no good. This is the extremely heavy negative  karma  of
abandoning the teachings of the Buddha.

Verse 86 states,  “Never  studying,  I  despise  the  vast  teaching.”  This
negative karma of abandoning the Buddha’s teachings happens due to  lack  of
learning and lack of understanding. Therefore, we  should  try  as  much  as
possible to follow the example of Lama  Tsongkhapa,  “First,  I  sought  out
often extensive learning.”

SETTING UP ONE’S OWN SYSTEM


      Verse 87
      Instead of explaining the scriptures, I falsely set up my own  system.
      Not having mastered pure vision, I curse and yell. Roar and thunder on
      the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at  the
      heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

“Instead of explaining the scriptures, I falsely  set  up  my  own  system.”
Whenever we explain or teach the teachings of the Buddha,  whatever  we  say
must accord with the intent of the three scriptural collections.

This verse is saying that there are people who wants to teach,  but  because
of not having extensive learning and not knowing what to say—yet  they  have
to say something—they sometimes make up things based on  their  own  limited
experiences or what they saw in  their  meditations  and  dreams.  Basically
they are making up things as they go along. This happens  because  of  self-
cherishing.

In the beginning of his  Great  Treatise  on  the  Stages  of  the  Path  to
Enlightenment,  the  Lam-rim  Chen-mo,  Lama  Tsongkhapa  talked  about  the
qualifications of someone who wants to be a guru to others. The  purpose  of
being a guru is to subdue, pacify and discipline the minds  of  others.  But
before one  can  be  a  guru  to  others,  first  one’s  own  mind  must  be
disciplined and subdued.

Lama Tsongkhapa said this very clearly in the Lam-rim Chen-mo.

          It is said that those who have not disciplined themselves have  no
      basis  for  disciplining  others.  Therefore,  gurus  who  intent   to
      discipline others’ minds must first have disciplined  their  own.  How
      should they have been disciplined? It is not helpful for them to  have
      done just any practice, and then have the result designated as a  good
      quality of knowledge. They need a way  to  discipline  the  mind  that
      accords with  the  general  teachings  of  the  Conqueror.  The  three
      precious trainings are definitely such a way. [3]

Lama Tsongkhapa stated this very clearly at the  beginning  of  the  Lam-rim
Chen-mo. The method of subduing and disciplining the mind must  accord  with
the general procedure of the buddhadharma. What exactly does that  mean?  It
means that one’s mind must be subdued through  the  practice  of  the  three
higher trainings:
1. the higher trainings in ethics
2. the higher training in concentration
3. the higher training in wisdom
This is the answer. Lama Tsongkhapa packed some very important  points  into
these few sentences.

Verse 87 is saying that, in reality, if one is teaching  or  explaining  the
buddhadharma, that explanation  must  accord  with  what  is  in  the  three
scriptural collections, the Three Pitakas.

“Not having mastered pure vision.” The whole point of the  teachings  is  to
help the listeners gain an understanding of the  Dharma.  Instead  of  doing
that, one may use the Dharma teachings  as  an  indirect  way  to  scold  or
criticise people, i.e., as a means to hurt people. This also happens due  to
self-cherishing.

ENGAGING IN NON-VIRTUES & NON-DHARMIC ACTIVITIES

      Verse 88
      Without  condemning  sacrilegious  activities,   I   launch   numerous
      criticisms against all the Buddha’s words. Roar  and  thunder  on  the
      head of the destroyer, false  construction!  Mortally  strike  at  the
      heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

“Sacrilegious  activities”  means  non-Dharmic  activities  that  we  should
condemn along with non-virtues. That is what we should do. But we  don’t  do
that.  In  fact,  we  voluntarily  engage  in  non-virtues  and  non-Dharmic
activities. This is due to our self-cherishing.

There are many excellent explanations of the Buddha’s teachings that  accord
with the  Buddha’s  intent.  We  should  study  and  learn  such  teachings.
Instead, we end up criticising these excellent  teachings  or  explanations.
Again, this happens due to our self-cherishing.

LACKING SHAME

      Verse 89
      Having no shame about things I should be ashamed of, I  am  perversely
      ashamed of the Dharma, which  is  not  something  shameful.  Roar  and
      thunder on the head of the  destroyer,  false  construction!  Mortally
      strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

In reality, we should be ashamed of engaging  in  non-virtues.  However,  we
are not ashamed. Instead, we voluntarily and happily engage in  non-virtues.
People choose to live a simple and contented  life  through  practising  the
Dharma. In reality, these are real occasions for rejoicing. But  instead  of
rejoicing, we feel sorry for such people and think that this is not  a  good
thing. We regard them  as  failures  of  society,  of  being  incapable  and
thinking that is the reason for their predicament.

SUMMARY: NOT CREATING PERFECT VIRTUE


      Verse 90
      No matter what I do, it is  never  done  right;  everything  I  do  is
      inappropriate. Roar and thunder on the head of  the  destroyer,  false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!

The first line states that we do not do all the things that are  appropriate
to be done. Instead, we do everything that is inappropriate. This  verse  is
a concluding summary of what has been said so  far.  We  don’t  do  all  the
things that are appropriate. We do all the  things  that  are  inappropriate
and shouldn’t be done at all.

What we want is real, permanent, everlasting happiness. Its cause has to  be
virtue. However, we have never done even a single virtue.  Such  everlasting
happiness is only possible if  we  achieve  either  liberation  from  cyclic
existence or full enlightenment. There is no everlasting  happiness  without
them.

 • In order to achieve liberation, whatever actions we do must be  conjoined
   with renunciation before it becomes a cause for liberation, one  form  of
   everlasting happiness.
 • In order for our actions and virtue to  be  causes  for  the  everlasting
   happiness of full enlightenment, our actions must  be  motivated  by  the
   mind of enlightenment, bodhicitta.

But if we take a good hard look at our own minds, to be honest,  so  far  we
have not accumulated  a  single  virtue  that  will  enable  us  to  achieve
liberation or enlightenment.

In the beginning of the class, we always recite this verse, “Do  not  commit
any non-virtuous actions,/ Perform only perfect virtuous actions.” In  order
to qualify as a perfect virtue, all our actions must not be motivated by  an
attachment to this life’s happiness,  nor  should  it  be  motivated  by  an
attachment to the happiness of future lives. The minimum  qualification  for
virtue to be perfect is that it must be  motivated  by  the  realisation  of
renunciation.  As such, we don’t have any perfect virtue.

If we are honest with ourselves, there is nothing we can point to  where  we
can say, “This is a perfect virtue that is a  cause  for  my  liberation  or
enlightenment.” Why are we in such a state? Again,  it  is  because  of  our
self-cherishing.

We have to check for ourselves  whether  we  have  accumulated  any  perfect
virtues, the causes for liberation. In order for an action  to  be  a  cause
for liberation, it must not be influenced  or  motivated  by  attachment  to
this life’s happiness or even the happiness of future lives. When we  engage
in virtue looking for the happiness of future lives, that virtue  is  not  a
perfect virtue and it does not become a cause for our liberation.

Even if we were to achieve rebirth as a human or a  celestial  being,  these
rebirths have not transcended the nature of suffering, samsara.  From  this,
we can establish that the cause of a rebirth as a human or  celestial  being
cannot be a perfect virtue.

What we do not want are problems and suffering. The cause  of  the  problems
and suffering that we experience is none  other  than  non-virtue.  Although
non-virtue is the  cause  of  suffering,  instinctively  and  naturally,  we
engage in non-virtue. Day and night, we follow non-virtue effortlessly

As such, this verse is a summary of what all the previous verses have  said.
What we want is happiness. What we don’t  want  is  suffering.  However,  we
have never  accumulated  any  perfect  or  pure  virtue.  Although  we  want
happiness, we don’t create the causes for happiness. Although we don’t  want
suffering, we are always engaging in non-virtue, the cause of suffering.  We
do this  naturally  and  effortlessly.  We  are  the  creators  of  our  own
suffering.

Why are we in such a situation? Why do we live our lives in  this  way?  The
conclusion is the same. It is due to our self-cherishing.  If  that  is  the
case, then  the  conclusion  must  be  that  we  should  destroy  our  self-
cherishing!

THE ULTIMATE BODY OF THE SUGATA

      Verse 91
      Aha! You whose strength is that of the ultimate body of the Sugata who
      conquers the demon of the egotistic view, you wielder  of  the  staff,
      the weapon of the wisdom of selflessness, turn it over your head three
      times, without hesitation!

“The ultimate body” refers to the dharmakaya of the Sugatas.

“Aha!” is an expression of amazement. Why are we  amazed?  Because  finally,
we have come to realise the faults, disadvantages and mistakes of our  self-
cherishing attitude. In that sense, for the first time,  we  are  happy  and
amazed. Here the author Dharmarakshita who  passed  on  these  teachings  to
Lama Atisha, both of them can say “Aha!” But whether we have any  reason  to
express such amazement remains to be seen.

In the commentary I am using, “the demon of the  egoistic  view”  refers  to
self-grasping,  the  apprehension  of  a  self  from  which  self-cherishing
arises. It is the wrathful Yamantaka who  possesses  the  power  to  destroy
this demon of self-grasping.

I think I had explained the meaning  of  Sugata  at  the  beginning  of  the
module on Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds.[4]

Sugata means “The one gone to bliss.” There is the  abandonment  Sugata  and
the realisational Sugata.  Of the two, Sugata here refers primarily  to  the
abandonment Sugata.

Abandonment Sugata
The abandonment Sugata possesses three features:
1. abandonment or good abandonment
2. well-abandoned or irreversible abandonment
3. thorough or complete abandonment

In the context of the tathagata essence, what  is  this  abandonment  Sugata
that possesses these three features?  There  is  the  nature  body  that  is
natural purity and  nature  body  that  is  adventitious  purity.  Here  the
abandonment Sugata possessing the three features is referring to the  nature
body that is adventitious purity.
1) Abandonment or good abandonment
The true cessation  in  the  continuum  of  a  buddha  superior  is  a  good
abandonment. How can we understand this statement?  The  true  cessation  in
the continuum of a buddha superior is a good abandonment because  it  is  an
abandonment that surpasses  the  abandonment  of  the  afflictions  by  non-
Buddhists up to the nothingness level of the formless  realm.  In  a  sense,
this is the meaning of abandonment.

The non-Buddhists are able to  suppress  the  afflictions  even  up  to  the
afflictions included in the realm of nothingness,  the  third  of  the  four
levels of  the  formless  realms.  (See  chart  below).[5]  The  quality  of
abandonment in the continuum of  a  buddha  superior  is  superior  to  that
abandonment. This particular feature of the  Buddha  demonstrates  that  our
founder, Buddha, is superior as a teacher to the  teacher  of  non-Buddhists
because the Buddha has already abandoned every single affliction,  even  the
afflictions of the level of the peak of cyclic existence level, the  highest
state of existence in cyclic existence. From  this,  we  can  see  that  the
Buddha is a far  superior  teacher  to  the  founders  of  the  non-Buddhist
traditions.

There are non-Buddhists who  cultivate  and  achieve  calm-abiding.  On  the
basis of that, they achieve a mundane special insight. They can abandon  all
the afflictions up to the afflictions  of  the  realm  of  nothingness,  the
third of the four formless realms. But in order to abandon  the  afflictions
of the peak of cyclic existence, they would have to generate a  supramundane
path, which these non-Buddhists are unable to do.

I wonder whether this discussion is necessary and whether  you  need  it  or
not?

2) Well-abandoned or irreversible abandonment
The second  feature  is  well-abandoned  or  irreversible  abandonment.  For
example, the abandonment achieved by stream-enterers is an abandonment,  but
it is not irreversible abandonment. Although stream-enterers  have  achieved
a  superior  path,  the  path  of  seeing,  and  they  have  achieved   some
abandonments,  but  their  abandonment  is  not  irreversible.  The  stream-
enterers will still have to take rebirth in cyclic existence  due  to  their
karma and afflictions. As such, the  abandonment  achieved  by  the  stream-
enterers is not an irreversible abandonment.

Just as the first feature, good abandonment distinguishes the  Buddha  as  a
teacher who is superior to non-Buddhist teachers,  this  second  feature  of
irreversible abandonment distinguishes the Buddha as vastly superior to  the
stream-enterers.

3) Thorough or complete abandonment
The third feature, complete abandonment, shows that the Buddha  is  superior
to the hearers and  solitary  realiser  arhats.  Although  the  hearers  and
solitary  realiser  arhats  have  abandoned  the  afflictive   obscurations,
however, they have not abandoned the knowledge obscurations. The Buddha  has
already abandoned the knowledge obscurations. As such,  the  abandonment  in
the continuum of a buddha superior is a complete abandonment.

So the abandonment in the continuum of a buddha superior—the true  cessation
in the continuum of a buddha superior—possesses these three features:
1. good abandonment
2. irreversible abandonment
3. thorough or complete abandonment
From  this,  one  can  see  the  qualities  of  the  Buddha.  As  such,  the
abandonment in the continuum of a buddha superior is a perfect abandonment.

Realisational Sugata
The realizational Sugata has three features as well. If  you  remember  from
your study  of  the  tathagata  essence,  Verse  5  talks  about  the  eight
qualities of the Buddha Jewel:

      Buddhahood has the [eight qualities of] being uncompounded,
      Spontaneous, not being realised through the cause of others,
      Knowledge, mercy, and power,
      As well as being [the fulfilment of] the  two  aims  [of  oneself  and
      others].

So the eight qualities of the Buddha are:
1. the quality of being uncompounded
2. the quality of spontaneity
3. the quality of not being realised through the cause of others
4. the quality of knowledge
5. the quality of mercy (or compassion)
6. the quality of power
7. the quality of fulfilling the purpose of oneself
8. the quality of fulfilling the purpose of others

The quality of knowledge or being a knower refers to the  knowledge  of  the
mode of phenomena. This knowledge or knower of the mode of phenomena is  the
realisational Sugata that has three features:
1. exalted knower knowing thusness (suchness)
2. stable exalted knower
3. thorough exalted knower

1) Exalted knower knowing thusness
The first feature refers to the exalted knower  in  the  Buddha’s  continuum
that directly realises emptiness. This  shows  that  the  Buddha  is  a  far
superior teacher than others.

2) Stable exalted knower
The second feature of  being  a  stable  exalted  knower  distinguishes  the
Buddha’s knowledge as being superior to that of  the  stream-enterers.  This
means to say that the wisdom directly realising emptiness in  the  continuum
of a stream-enterer is not a stable knower. Why is this so? I think this  is
because they  have  yet  to  abandon  the  innate  view  of  the  transitory
collections.

When we say that the  wisdom  directly  realising  emptiness  is  stable  or
unstable, we are not saying that the realisation of  emptiness  will  change
into something else. That is not what is meant.

3) Thorough exalted knower
The third feature, the thorough exalted knower with its  complete  knowledge
in the Buddha’s continuum, is a superior or more  exalted  knower  than  the
knower in the continuum of a hearer arhat or a solitary realiser arhat.

The hearer arhat and solitary realiser arhat do  not  realise  or  know  the
paths  of  all  three  vehicles  because  they  have  not  internalised  and
generated them whereas the Buddha has complete knowledge  of  the  paths  of
the three vehicles. As such, the Buddha is able  to  be  a  teacher  to  the
trainees of all three vehicles in that the Buddha can show these  paths  and
guide  the  respective  trainees  to  the  attainments  of  the   respective
vehicles.

Definitive and interpretative Yamantaka
We talked before about the two divisions of Yamantaka:
1. the definitive Yamantaka
2. the interpretive Yamantaka

The definitive Yamantaka is the realisational Sugata that  can  act  as  the
direct antidote to “the demon of the egoistic  view,”  the  demon  of  self-
grasping.

This particular realisational Sugata appears  in  the  form  of  the  deity,
Yamantaka, who is the interpretive Yamantaka.
 • In this case, the realisational Sugata is the  direct  antidote  to  this
   demon of self-grasping.
 • The one who possesses this ability is the interpretive Yamantaka.

Yamantaka’s wisdom directly realising selflessness is likened to  the  skull
staff that is used to destroy the  enemy.  Likewise,  this  wisdom  directly
realising selflessness is that which overcomes self-grasping.  This  weapon,
the skull staff, is swung over his head three times and thrown at the  enemy
to destroy him.

Likewise, by  wielding  the  wisdom  directly  realising  selflessness,  one
destroys:
1) self-grasping
2) the self-cherishing that arises from self-grasping
3) the appropriated contaminated aggregates that arise from  self-cherishing


This is the meaning of “three times,” in the line, “turn it over  your  head
three times.”



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong

                                    [pic]
                                    [pic]
                           -----------------------
[1] Lessons 1—4, Second Basic Program, Module 4: The Heart Sutra & the Six
Perfections
[2] Destiny Fulfilled: Tsong Khapa’s Education as a Song of Realisation,
Life & Teachings of Tsong Khapa. Edited by Prof. R. Thurman, © Library of
Tibetan Works and Archives, Dharamsala, 1982. Page 40.
[3] The Great Treatise of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment by Tsong-
kha-pa. Volume One. Snow Lion Publications. Page 71.
[4] Lesson 2, Second Basic Program, Module 5: Engaging in the Bodhisattva
Deeds. Page 2—6.
[5] From FPMT Masters Program, 2008 at Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa.

