Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L07final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.637359
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove: Two Buddhist Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for use in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 7                                                          28 July
2015


Reviewing Verse 6. Verse 7: The real enemy—the self-cherishing attitude.
Two essential reflections. Verse 8: The difference between ourselves and
our afflictions. Verse 9: If selfishness should arise. Results of our self-
cherishing. Verses 10—15: The practice of tonglen.


REVIEWING VERSE 6

      Verse 6
      Thus the bodhisattva roams like the peacock in the  forest  of  cyclic
      existence, converting the afflictions, which  are  like  a  jungle  of
      virulent poisons, into an elixir. Willingly embracing the afflictions,
      the hero shall conquer the poison.

The  bodhisattvas,  in  particular,  the  bodhisattva  superiors,   do   not
primarily focus on abandoning the afflictions such  as  desire  though  they
regard all afflictions as faults. Bodhisattva superiors can  utilise  desire
as an aid to benefit sentient beings.

You must understand that there are  some  bodhisattva  superiors  who  still
have to take rebirth in cyclic existence. They do  so  willingly  and  their
rebirths in cyclic existence happen due to the power of their prayers.  They
do not take rebirth in cyclic existence  due  to  the  force  of  karma  and
afflictions.

You must not understand this to mean  that  the  bodhisattva  superiors  are
happy to take rebirth in cyclic existence because of  a  liking  for  cyclic
existence. Nor does it mean that they take rebirth in cyclic  existence  due
to the force of karma and afflictions.  In  fact,  bodhisattvas  have  great
disenchantment with cyclic existence.  The  renunciation  possessed  by  the
bodhisattvas is said  to  be  much  stronger  than  that  possessed  by  the
Hinayanists.

The statement  that  the  bodhisattvas  take  rebirth  in  cyclic  existence
happily means that they do so willingly due to the power  of  their  prayers
in order to benefit sentient beings. That is how you  must  understand  this
statement.

Bodhisattva superiors know fully and  see  all  the  faults  of  desire  and
attachment. But nevertheless these bodhisattvas are beings  who  only  focus
on helping others. Their only goal and only interest are to benefit  others.
For the bodhisattva superiors, their  desire  and  attachment  do  not  harm
them. In fact, they are able to utilise their desire and  attachment  as  an
aid to benefit sentient beings.

In the Hinayana, there are no exceptions when it  comes  to  abandoning  the
ten non- virtues. The focus is on abandoning the ten non-virtues and  it  is
absolutely not permitted to engage in non-virtues of the body and speech.

In the Mahayana teachings however, the Buddha made certain  exceptions  with
regard to the three non-virtues of the body  and  the  four  non-virtues  of
speech. There are situations in which the three non-virtues of the body  and
the four of speech are permitted for certain qualified individuals.

In the context of the Mahayana sutra teachings, no exceptions are given  for
generating  the  three  non-virtues  of  the  mind.  I  don’t  remember  the
particular text from where I got this information but  I  seem  to  remember
that this was mentioned in a text.

As long as one still possesses the self-cherishing attitude,  no  exceptions
are made that permit one to engage  in  the  non-virtues  of  the  body  and
speech. How could these actions be beneficial? These actions will harm  even
oneself so one can forget about benefitting others.

However, in the case of someone  who  has  completely  abandoned  the  self-
cherishing attitude—whose focus is on benefitting others—then  an  exception
is made to engage in some of the bodily and verbal non-virtues if  there  is
benefit to others. It seems that the exception  is  made  or  permission  is
granted on the basis of whether one has self-cherishing or not.

There is an account in the teachings of how the Buddha in one  of  his  past
lives killed a person on a ship. At that time,  the  Buddha-to-be  saw  that
this person was going to kill everyone,  about  500  people,  on  board  the
ship. Motivated by  great  compassion  for  that  person,  the  Buddha-to-be
decided to kill that person before he could commit the murder. He  saw  that
if that person were to commit the murder, he would have to be reborn in  the
lower realms and suffer for a very long time.

The Buddha-to-be thought, “If I have to bear the negative result of  killing
that  person,  so  be  it.”  He  sacrificed  himself.  Motivated  by   great
compassion, he decided to kill that person.  Of  course,  he  has  no  self-
cherishing. He killed that person, completely motivated by his  concern  for
that person. It is said in the teachings that that act in fact helped  speed
up his accumulation of merit.  He  was  liberated  from  samsara  even  more
quickly than if he hadn’t killed that person.

The point to understand is that if a person  has  completely  abandoned  and
does not have any self-cherishing at all and his focus is  only  on  working
for the benefit of others, this special people has the permission to  commit
some of physical and  verbal  non-virtues.  But  for  people  who  have  not
abandoned their self-cherishing, then no such permission is granted.

The last line of Verse 6 says, “Willingly  embracing  the  afflictions,  the
hero shall conquer the poison.” These  bodhisattva  superiors  are  able  to
utilise the objects of enjoyment because they are not  harmed  by  them.  If
fact, by utilising the objects of enjoyment, the bodhisattva  superiors  are
able to finish their accumulation of merit. They are  able  to  utilise  the
objects of enjoyment because  they  are  not  influenced  or  controlled  by
desire as they are always aware of the faults of desire and  attachment.  As
such, they are able to use the objects of enjoyment to  benefit  others  and
to finish their accumulation of merit.

THE REAL ENEMY—THE SELF-CHERISHING ATTITUDE


      Verse 7
      The ego-clinging of the helpless wanderer in cyclic existence  is  the
      messenger  of  the  devil.  Distance  yourself  from  the   savor   of
      selfishness and hedonism, and willingly embrace hardship for the  sake
      of others.

In this context, “the ego-clinging” refers to the  self-cherishing  attitude
that causes one to circle in cyclic existence.

In general, the apprehension  of  the  self  is  the  root  of  circling  in
samsara. Even the  hearers  and  solitary  realisers  have  to  abandon  the
apprehension of a self.

In the phrase, “the messenger of the devil,” the  commentary  explains  that
“the devil” is self-cherishing and “the messenger” is self-grasping  or  the
apprehension of  a  self.   So  we  should  distance  ourselves  from  self-
cherishing and self-grasping that make us look  for  happiness  in  samsara,
and instead work for  the  welfare  of  others.  In  particular,  we  should
voluntarily embrace the hardships that come along in the process of  working
for others.

The essential point to  understand  and  realise  is  the  disadvantages  of
following our self-cherishing attitude. In other words, what do we stand  to
lose if we were to follow our self-cherishing attitude?

It is said in the mind training teachings that the self-cherishing  attitude
is the source of  all  our  problems.  For  example,  the  seven-point  mind
training starts with the statement, “Put all the blame on  one.”  The  “one”
is basically the self-cherishing attitude.

The teachings tell us that if we analyse carefully, we will be able  to  see
that it is our self-cherishing attitude that is  behind  all  the  suffering
that we have experienced since beginningless time up to the present  moment.
We  regard  cherishing  others  as  the  enemy  or  something  that  is  not
beneficial whereas we regard our selfishness, our  self-cherishing,  as  our
loved one.

The teachings tell us that  since  beginningless  lifetimes,  we  have  been
regarding sentient beings that are actually the source of happiness  as  the
enemy. We have been regarding our self-cherishing attitude that is the  real
enemy to be the most important thing in  our  life,  like  a  loved  one  or
someone precious to us.
Even in the context of this life, it is quite  clear  that  our  unhappiness
and our problems come from our self-cherishing attitude. Let’s say  somebody
criticises us or says something unpleasant about us.  Of  course,  we  don’t
like it and we suffer. When we hear those words, we are  so  disturbed.  But
why are we disturbed in the  first  place  when  we  hear  such  remarks  or
criticism?  It  is  clear  that  we  are  disturbed  because  of  our  self-
cherishing.

Whether it is some sickness, pain or even spirit harm,  if  we  analyse  and
think about it, the root cause of these undesirable experiences is  our  own
selfishness, our own self-cherishing.

It is very clear that even as a Buddhist, with respect to whatever  vows  or
commitments we have taken—whether it is the vows of  a  lay  person  or  the
bodhisattva vows—the reason we are not able to keep them  properly  and  our
actions do not become Dharma is due again to our self-cherishing.

So our self-cherishing leads to all our problems in this life.  If  we  were
to analyse and think beyond this life, the reason we end  up  in  the  lower
realms or, even if we don’t go there,  the  reason  we  remain  in  samsara,
experiencing all the  different  samsaric  problems  and  difficulties,  all
originate from our own selfishness.

If we think about all the problems that we had experienced as human  beings—
disharmony between people, fighting, quarrelling and disagreements—they  can
all be attributed to our selfishness.

It is also very clear that  because  of  our  self-cherishing  attitude,  it
makes us regard ourselves to be more important than others. In fact, we  see
ourselves as the most important person of all. Because of that, we  work  so
hard for the most important person on  earth,  i.e.,  ourselves.  With  that
attitude, we strive to make money for this  most  important  person—“I  want
this. I want that. I want to be famous. I want to have a  good  reputation.”
In order to achieve all these things, there is nothing  we  will  not  do—we
cheat, we compete with others in a negative way, we disregard others and  we
look down on them. Our self-cherishing attitude is responsible  for  all  of
this.

Sometimes, we are jealous of others who are materially better off  than  us,
i.e., they have more of the good things in life. We  envy  them  and  become
jealous. Why? Again, it is because of our self-cherishing!

If our self-cherishing is very strong, all  it  takes  is  for  somebody  to
point out a small  fault  in  us  or  for  someone  to  say  something  very
insignificant but unpleasant for us to get very upset. Again,  this  is  due
to our self-cherishing!

From our own experience, it is very clear that the stronger our ego and  our
selfishness, the more difficult it is for us to get along with others be  it
in an  organisation,  a  community,  among  friends,  relatives  or  family.
Because we hold ourselves to be the most important person, all it  takes  is
something  quite  insignificant  but  nevertheless  unpleasant   to   occur.
Instantly, we don’t like it because the ‘I’ is  so  strong.  Everybody  will
appear as our enemy and we will find fault  with  everybody.  Then  we  will
have difficulties living with anybody. This is very clear.
All the disharmony, unhappiness and  difficulties  in  relationships—between
parents and their children, partners, friends, people  within  a  community,
even  between  a  guru  and  his  disciples—ultimately  comes   from   self-
cherishing.

In the sayings of the Kadampa masters, it is  mentioned,  “…  until  we  see
ourselves as the enemy.” What this means is that until we see our own  self-
cherishing as the enemy, no matter who we take  as  our  guru,  even  though
conventionally speaking, they are very good teachers, they will not be  able
to benefit us. The point is to recognise our self-cherishing  as  the  enemy
for when we can recognise this, the  possibility  for  positive  change  can
arise.

Just as the seven-point mind training instructions say, “Put all  the  blame
on one.” We should put all the blame on  to  our  self-cherishing  attitude.
The teachings tell us that the self-cherishing  attitude,  our  selfishness,
is responsible for all the problems we have in this life. It will also  send
us to the hell realms, the realms of  the  hungry  ghosts  and  animals  and
cause us problems in all our future lives.

This is what the teachings say but we have  to  see  for  ourselves  whether
this is true or not. We have to think about this and analyse further. So  to
think about this for ourselves is a very important step.

TWO ESSENTIAL REFLECTIONS

If our self-cherishing attitude has  all  these  faults  and  disadvantages,
then cherishing others must have an opposite result. Even in this  life,  if
we were to have the thought of benefitting and cherishing others,  we  would
have less problems and more happiness. Likewise, that must be the  case  for
our future lives where we will also have less problems and  more  happiness.
A good rebirth in the future as a human or a celestial being will come  from
cherishing  others.  Likewise,  the  happiness  of   liberation   and   full
enlightenment come from cherishing others.

It is mentioned in the mind training teachings and also in the lam-rim  that
we have to consider the faults and  disadvantages  of  self-cherishing  from
various angles. We also have to consider the profit to be  gained  from  and
the advantages of cherishing others from all angles. These  two  reflections
are essential. We must think deeply about them. It is only on the  basis  of
seeing the faults of self-cherishing and the benefits of  cherishing  others
that the practice of tonglen—giving  others  our  happiness  and  taking  on
their suffering—make sense.

The rest of this text is basically talking about  this  practice  of  giving
our happiness to others and taking on their suffering. This  will  not  make
any sense at all if we have not sorted out for  ourselves  the  problems  we
will face if we were to disagree that self-cherishing is harmful and  if  we
were to believe that cherishing others does not make sense  and  is  not  so
important.

The first verse of the Eight Verses  of  Thought  Transformation  says  that
sentient beings are  more  precious  than  wish-fulfilling  jewels,  and  by
recognising that, may we always hold them as supreme at all times.

Lama Atisha said that we regard the object of refuge to  be  very  important
and precious. When we think of the Buddha, we say  that  the  Buddha  is  so
precious. We also think of our meditational deities as  very  precious.  But
as Lama Atisha points out, in fact, sentient beings are  more  precious.  At
the very least, sentient beings are definitely equally precious because  our
meditational deities and the buddhas that we take refuge in  all  come  from
sentient beings.

The teachings point out to us that we take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma  and
Sangha, we make requests to the meditational deities  and  we  rely  on  the
gurus. All these are done for the purpose  of  achieving  enlightenment  for
sentient beings. Therefore, the teachings tell us that if we can  take  care
of others and cherish them, then the attainment of enlightenment  will  also
be granted to us. The teachings say that if we cherish others, we will  also
accomplish all the aims of this life, as well as  all  the  aims  of  future
lives. In other words, everything can be achieved.

The teachings state that if we generate love  and  compassion  for  sentient
beings, the merit of such an attitude surpasses  the  merit  generated  from
making the usual  offerings  to  the  buddhas  and  bodhisattvas.  In  fact,
generating love and compassion  for  sentient  beings  is  said  to  be  the
supreme offering.

In essence, we  must  think  deeply  over  and  over  again  until  we  have
ascertained that our  self-cherishing  is  indeed  the  source  of  all  our
problems. Likewise, we also have to think very deeply over  and  over  again
until we are utterly convinced that the mind that cherishes  others  is  the
main cause of every success and happiness.

THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN OUR AFFLICTIONS AND US


      Verse 8
      May the suffering of all beings, who, like myself, are driven by their
      karma and their habituation to the afflictions, be heaped upon me, the
      hedonist.

We circle in cyclic existence mainly due to  our  self-cherishing.  We  also
accumulate karma  because  of  our  self-cherishing.  We  circle  in  cyclic
existence due to our karma and  our  habituation  or  familiarity  with  our
afflictions.

The verse is exhorting us to take on  “the  suffering  of  all  beings”  and
direct them at our self-cherishing rendering it powerless, i.e., to  destroy
our self-cherishing.

Here we should understand the discussion we  had  in  the  previous  lesson.
There  is  a  difference  between  our  afflictions  and  us.  There  is   a
distinction between our self-cherishing and us. The target here is our self-
cherishing so we are not destroying ourselves. We are destroying  our  self-
cherishing. That is the first thing that we need to understand.

But in order to even entertain the thought of taking  on  the  suffering  of
others and  directing  them  at  our  self-cherishing,  first,  we  must  be
convinced that our self-cherishing is a problem.

When we have these two  understandings,  then  the  verse  urges,  “May  the
suffering of all beings, … be heaped upon me,” i.e., may it be  directed  at
our self-cherishing.

We must understand the distinction between our faults, our afflictions,  our
self-cherishing and us. Sometimes we regard  these  two  as  an  inseparable
whole, which is not the case. Our purpose is not to  destroy  ourselves  but
rather to destroy our self-cherishing. If we  were  to  think  that  we  are
inseparable from our afflictions and that our  self-cherishing  and  we  are
the same thing, then we are going to meet with a lot of problems.

Since we have studied the Tathagata Essence, we know that the nature of  the
mind is clear light and that our defilements are adventitious. We should  be
able to see the distinction between our self-cherishing and  us.  Since  the
nature of the mind is clear light and the  afflictions  have  never  resided
within the nature of the mind, as such, we are not our afflictions.

If we think about the ‘I’, what is the ‘I’ imputed in dependence on?  It  is
the mind’s factor of luminosity and awareness. We do not impute the  ‘I’  in
dependence on the afflictions but rather we impute  the  ‘I’  in  dependence
upon the mind’s factor of luminosity  and  awareness.  Probing  further,  in
essence, the ‘I’ is imputed in dependence upon our mind’s emptiness of  true
existence.

From the sutric point of view, when we talk about the objective  great  seal
or objective Mahamudra, that is none other  than  the  mind’s  emptiness  of
true existence.
 • This objective Mahamudra—the mind’s emptiness of true  existence—is  also
   the Mahamudra of the basis.
 • The Mahamudra of the path is the mind that realises the mind’s  emptiness
   of true existence.
 • The resultant Mahamudra is the resultant wisdom,  the  dharmakaya,  i.e.,
   the  resultant  wisdom  that  realises  the  mind’s  emptiness  of   true
   existence.
      o From the objective point of view, the resultant  Mahamudra  is  the
        natural purity that is the nature body.
      o From the subjective point of view, i.e., from  the  perspective  of
        the mind realising it, that would be the wisdom truth body.

IF SELFISHNESS SHOULD ARISE


      Verse 9a
      When I become enmeshed in selfishness, I will offer my  own  happiness
      to living beings so as to counteract it.

It is quite impossible for bodhisattvas to be selfish, i.e., to  have  self-
cherishing. The bodhisattvas always think about the  faults  of  selfishness
and they understand them fully.

Even if we were to allow for that possibility, what do the  bodhisattvas  do
when that happens? The bodhisattvas would offer all his happiness to  others
in order to  counteract  their  selfishness.  The  practice  of  tonglen  is
described  as  the  practice  whereby  the  bodhisattvas  take  on  all  the
suffering and problems of sentient beings onto  themselves.  To  weaken  and
destroy their own self-cherishing attitude, they  give  and  dedicate  their
happiness to others.

RESULTS OF OUR SELF-CHERISHING


      Verse 9b
      In the same way, should a companion be ungrateful to  me,  I  will  be
      content in knowing that this is in retribution for my own inconstancy.

This situation mentioned in Verse 9 is similar  to  the  one  in  the  Eight
Verses of Thought Transformation. When  somebody  that  we  have  benefitted
harms us in return, the teachings tell us that we should feel happy  because
this is the result of our own self-cherishing. Because of that,  it  is  now
coming back to us. With that  recognition,  we  should  feel  happy  and  be
satisfied with the harm we are experiencing.

Usually, we feel good when we see our enemies  suffer.  When  something  bad
happens to the people we dislike, we feel we  have  achieved  something  and
are satisfied. It is similar here but the difference is that it is  our  own
self-cherishing attitude that is harmed.  If  we  have  already  ascertained
that our self-cherishing attitude is indeed  the  source  of  our  problems,
when we  see  our  self-cherishing  attitude  being  harmed,  we  should  be
satisfied and happy.

In this example, when somebody is ungrateful despite our  having  benefitted
or helped him in some way, if we can acknowledge that that is the result  of
our own doing due to  our  self-cherishing,  then  we  can  use  that  as  a
reminder  to  ourselves,  “In  the  future,  I  will  not  follow  my  self-
cherishing.  I’m in this situation now because of my own  doing  due  to  my
self-cherishing. As such, I will not follow after  my  self-cherishing  from
now on.” We need to understand that  the  harm  and  the  problems  that  we
experience are the results of our own self-cherishing.

      Verse 10
      When my body falls prey to terrible sickness, it is the weapon  of  my
      own evil deeds turned upon  me  for  injuring  the  bodies  of  living
      beings. From now on, I shall take all sickness upon myself.

When our body “falls prey to terrible sickness” or some  physical  pain,  we
have to remind ourselves that this is the result  of  having  harmed  others
physically, imprisoning them, putting them in captivity  and  so  forth.  We
have to remind ourselves that  this  is  the  ripening  result  of  our  own
negative karma.

THE PRACTICE OF TONGLEN

In the practice of giving and taking, when something like  this  happens  to
us—such as falling very sick physically—we make requests to the buddhas  and
the meditational deities for them to grant their  blessings  for  us  to  be
able to take on the similar suffering of others, their  sicknesses  and  all
their problems and for us to experience  them  ourselves.  Taking  on  their
sufferings, we direct them at  the  suffering  we,  ourselves,  are  already
experiencing.
One must not forget the purpose behind such visualisations. As we have  seen
earlier, all our problems, including sicknesses, are the results of our  own
self-cherishing attitude. First, we have to  acknowledge  and  accept  that.
Once we see that, the practice of  giving  and  taking  is  an  exercise  to
develop the courage to destroy our self-cherishing. That is why  we  request
such blessings from the buddhas and meditational deities.  The  whole  point
is to destroy our self-cherishing.

The practice of tonglen, giving and taking, is as follows:
 • as we breathe out, we visualise dedicating all our happiness, virtue  and
   all positive things to sentient beings in the form of white light.
 • as we breathe in, we breathe in all their suffering, problems and  causes
   of their problems and so forth in the form of black smoke and direct that
   at our self-cherishing attitude.
This practice is also  related  to  the  practice  of  exchanging  self  and
others.

Ripening of our negative karma
Let’s say this practice is not possible for us at the present time. What  we
can think is this, “Whatever problems and sicknesses  I’m  experiencing  are
the results of my negative karma. It is the wheel of  sharp  weapons  of  my
negative karma returning to haunt me.” By accepting that this is the  result
of our own negative karma, at least we try to remain undisturbed and not  to
be so affected by the problems. When people fall sick, often they will  say,
“Why me? Why do I get sick? I am so careful and I take such good care of  my
health. I do this and I do that. How come I still get sick?” So that is  the
answer.

If we have the faith of conviction in karma, when a  problem  like  sickness
arises, we can see it is the ripening effect  of  our  own  negative  karma.
Then the mind doesn’t get so disturbed. This is the difference  of  being  a
real Buddhist. At the very least, we have some faith in karma. If we  think,
“This is my negative karma ripening.  I am purifying  my  negativities.  One
negativity down, so to speak,” then at least we won’t get so disturbed.

If we don’t think of karma and we don’t have  faith  in  karma,  it  doesn’t
matter whether we call ourselves Buddhist or not, there  is  no  difference.
Even if we call ourselves Buddhist but if we don’t think of  karma,  we  are
still disturbed and upset.

Whether it is a sickness or a particular suffering or problem, once  it  has
happened, it is done. There is nothing much we can do about it. The  problem
will not go away since it has happened.

But there is a huge difference in having a positive mind-set in that  if  we
can think that it is the ripening result of our negative  karma,  at  least,
we will not feel so disturbed and give ourselves more problems,  or  we  may
not even be disturbed at all.   There is some mental peace.

On top of that, if we can do what this text says—“May I use this  experience
to experience all the  sufferings  of  sentient  beings.  May  this  be  the
substitute for the suffering of sentient beings”—that is even better and  we
can achieve much more happiness.
      Verse 11
      When my mind falls prey to suffering, it is surely the  weapon  of  my
      own evil deeds turned upon me for troubling the minds of others.  From
      now on, I shall willingly take all suffering upon myself.

When our mind “falls prey to suffering”—somebody  is  disturbing  us  or  we
simply feel uncomfortable or mentally  upset  for  no  good  reason—we  must
think that this is the ripening result of having disturbed the minds of  our
gurus in the past, having disturbed the minds  of  our  parents  and  having
disturbed the minds of our friends.

Whatever the case may be, we use the experience to take on the suffering  of
others.

There  are  many  verses  here.  Essentially,  they  are  all  designed  for
meditation on giving and taking. With each verse, one makes request  to  the
guru-deity to be able to take on the sufferings of others and  dedicate  our
happiness to them. We think about the meaning of the verse.  Then  with  the
visualisation of giving and taking, we engage in the practice.

      Verse 12
      When I am tormented by extreme hunger and thirst, it is the weapon  of
      my own evil deeds turned upon me for swindling, stealing,  and  acting
      miserly. From now on, I shall willingly take  all  hunger  and  thirst
      upon myself.

      Verse13
      When I am powerless and suffer enslavement, it is the weapon of my own
      evil deeds turned upon me for despising  my  inferiors  and  enslaving
      them. From now on I shall make slaves of my body and my life  for  the
      sake of others.

      Verse 14
      When insulting remarks assault my ears, it is the  weapon  of  my  own
      evil deeds turned upon me for my verbal offenses  of  slander  and  so
      forth. From now on I shall condemn my own verbal faults.

      Verse 15
      When I am reborn into an impure land, it is the weapon of my own  evil
      deeds turned upon me for always cultivating impure  vision.  From  now
      on, I shall cultivate only pure vision.

The meaning of these  verses  is  not  difficult  to  understand.  The  most
important thing is to think over and over again about the  faults  of  self-
cherishing and how our self-cherishing is the source of  all  our  problems.
We have to accept in our heart that this is so. Likewise, we have  to  think
about the gain, profit and benefit of cherishing others from all angles  and
to really see how that is so. This is the most important thing.

All the verses here talk about specific sufferings and the causes for  those
sufferings. Of course they are all negative karmas  but  they  are  specific
negative karmas. We see what their causes are, we accept them for what  they
are and if we do not want to experience them again in the  future,  we  just
have to make a promise to ourselves not to do those  actions  again  in  the
future. This is essentially what all these verses are about.

Since we don’t have much time, we will just read and  go  through  the  text
quickly. Do your own reading  and  if  you  have  any  questions  from  your
reading, you can bring them up in class.

Question: Last  week,  you  mentioned  that  bodhisattva  superiors  utilise
attachment and take  rebirth  as  universal  monarchs.  Some  of  them  have
fathered many children to  benefit  sentient  beings.  How  do  having  many
children benefit sentient beings?  I  was  thinking  that  if  some  of  the
children turn out to be bad children, that would do more  harm  to  sentient
beings.

Answer: If you can’t produce a thousand children, then maybe  ten  would  be
fantastic!

Do you know the story of Asanga  and  Vasubhandu?  They  were  brothers  and
their mother was a nun. Of course, she didn’t give birth to them as  a  nun.
She gave back her vows.

Children don’t turn out well because, in  the  first  place,  their  parents
made them because of their self-cherishing.

For those bodhisattvas who don’t have  self-cherishing,  I  guess  it  is  a
different case. Great beings  like  the  bodhisattvas  have  very  expansive
minds to benefit sentient beings. Also they can make very  powerful  prayers
so that in a way the  conditions  for  them  to  produce  children  will  be
beneficial. They probably have some control over  such  conditions  and  can
make them happen.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia
Ng & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

