Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L15final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.686921
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove: Two Buddhist Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for use in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 15                                                 10 September 2015


Discussing disintegratedness. The root text: Verses 49—53. Verse 49:
Removing all doubts as to the faults of self-cherishing. Verse 50:
Supplicating Yamantaka. Verse 51: Self-cherishing enslaves us in samsara.
Self-cherishing and self-grasping. Verses 52 & 53: Destroying our self-
cherishing and self-grasping.


DISCUSSING DISINTEGRATEDNESS

Related to our previous discussion  on  disintegratedness,  if  we  were  to
compare these two  phenomena,  illumination  and  darkness,  when  there  is
strong illumination, darkness is dispelled right away.  When  that  darkness
is dispelled by illumination, is there a continuum of that darkness?

Khen Rinpoche: Any scientist here?

I think that when there is strong illumination, the darkness  is  dispelled.
It ceases and there is no continuum of that darkness.

But when you turn off the  light,  the  darkness  returns.  Is  that  a  new
darkness or the continuum of the previous darkness? What do you think?

I tend to believe that when  darkness  ceases,  the  continuum  of  darkness
ceases.  Likewise,  I  think  similar  to  this  example   of   illumination
dispelling darkness is when the  wisdom  directly  perceiving  emptiness  is
generated with the attainment of the path of seeing.  That  particular  mind
on the uninterrupted path becomes the final antidote to the path  of  seeing
abandonments.  It  is  a  forceful  antidote.  Through  the  force  of  that
uninterrupted path, the  path  of  seeing  abandonments  together  with  its
continuum cease.

I have not seen this mentioned clearly in the treatises but this is  what  I
think.

So back to the qualm from the collection of qualms from  the  exam.  One  of
the questions was on the defilements:  Does  the  disintegratedness  of  the
defilements exist?

When the defilements cease, I think perhaps it is better  to  say  that  the
disintegratedness of the defilements does not  exist  when  the  defilements
are removed through the force of their respective antidotes.

Do you see any fallacies to this position?

Student 1: It is said that when we  do  Vajrasattva  purification,  we  will
purify our negativities and that karma is  weakened.  Instead  of  going  to
hell, we may suffer a slight headache. If the karma is  completely  purified
and since there is no disintegratedness, then it should be completely  gone.
But why is there still this residual effect?

That is why I am saying that maybe there is some kind  of  disintegratedness
of the defilements left behind. That is why we suffer a slight effect  after
that.

Khen Rinpoche:  That experience is  a  very  clear  sign  that  you  haven’t
purified fully  that  negativity.  That  is  why  your  answer  is  in  your
question.

Student 1: So there is the disintegratedness of the defilement and  that  is
why you suffer a side effect such as a small headache.

Khen Rinpoche: You can say that.

Student 1: So the disintegratedness of the defilement exists?

Khen Rinpoche: That is why you get a headache.

Student 1: So in the previous example, you  cannot  say  that  there  is  no
disintegratedness, i.e., when the light comes on,  the  darkness  completely
disappears. In this case, it does not disappear completely.

Khen Rinpoche: There is  no  correlation  to  the  analogy  of  illumination
versus darkness to your example of purification of  a  specific  negativity.
The analogy works for my position when one generates the uninterrupted  path
of  seeing  that  acts  as  the  final  antidote  to  the  path  of   seeing
abandonments. They cease completely.

Student 1: I see what you mean. Because the antidote is not  strong  enough,
so there is actually still a side effect and the  disintegratedness  of  the
defilement exists.

Khen Rinpoche: It is still there.

What about if you have purified the negative karma completely? Is there  any
disintegratedness then?

Student 1: No there isn’t.

You talked about the disintegratedness of  karma  and  how  the  Middle  Way
School posited that the experience of the effect of negative  karma  is  due
to its disintegratedness after we have committed the action.

Is it the case that because of this action, the karma grows over  time?  For
example, when you kill a mosquito today,  10  days  later,  it  becomes  the
effect of killing a man. Because of this disintegratedness, it  produces  an
effect that continuously grows more and more.

However, if you follow the lower schools,  the  karmic  effect  is  actually
deposited on the continuum. So in that case, it can’t grow over time.

Based on the assertions of  the  lower  schools,  you  cannot  explain  that
increase whereas you can explain that increase based on the position of  the
Middle Way School. Because it is a composite phenomena, it can grow.

Khen Rinpoche: When an action ceases, it  produces  disintegratedness.  Then
there is a continuum of the disintegratedness. Of  course  we  accept  that.
But how can you claim  that  just  because  it  continues,  it  will  become
stronger and stronger, from moment to moment? How do you  account  for  that
increase?

Student 1: The way to explain it is like this. There are two kinds of  cause
and effect. One is, for example, a seed growing into a sprout. In that  kind
of cause and effect, the seed must cease. Then the sprout is produced.  Once
the sprout is produced, its cause ceases.

But there is another kind of cause and  effect.  For  example,  a  child  is
produced from its mother. Even though the mother is said to be the cause  of
the son, after she gives birth to the son, she does not die.  The  cause  is
still there as she continues to produce other sons. This is the other  cause
and effect, meaning that the cause doesn’t cease but it continues.

So with respect to the negative karma, based on its  disintegratedness,  the
functioning thing actually continues to produce an effect as long as  it  is
not purified completely  and  over  time  it  will  produce  more  and  more
effects. That is why after the killing of a mosquito,  it  can  produce  the
effect of killing a man after some time.

Anyway, this example of mother and son doesn’t come from me. I  read  it  in
lesson 19 of the last module and it came from Khen Rinpoche. I just read  it
so it crossed my mind that maybe this is why the effect gets more  and  more
serious after some time.

Khen Rinpoche: I mentioned the mother and son?

Student 1: Yes, in lesson 19 where we were talking about different kinds  of
cause and effect. One is that the cause ceases and the other  kind  is  that
the cause doesn’t cease.

Question: For those superior bodhisattvas who  have  completely  ceased  all
the afflictive obscurations, i.e., the pure ground bodhisattvas,  how  would
they be able to use  the  afflictions  that  they  have  already  completely
abandoned to benefit sentient beings like the  impure  ground  bodhisattvas?
Also, when they enter the tantric path, how would they be  able  to  utilise
afflictions like desire on the  path  to  enlightenment  since  they  cannot
generate those afflictions anymore?

Answer: It is said that the bodhisattvas who are of definite lineage do  not
purposely  focus  on  abandoning  the  afflictions,   partly   because   the
afflictions cannot harm them and also partly because they can  use  some  of
the afflictions as an aid to benefit others. Having said  that,  it  is  not
necessarily the case that all bodhisattvas use  afflictions  as  an  aid  to
benefit sentient beings.

That is why it comes back to the question: What about  the  bodhisattvas  on
the pure grounds?
The bodhisattvas on the pure grounds don’t use  afflictions  as  an  aid  to
benefit others because they don’t have any afflictions  that  they  can  use
since they have already abandoned them.

Student 2: Perhaps this question is not so pertinent to this current  module
on the sutra path. We  understand  that  eventually  all  bodhisattvas  must
enter the  tantric  path.  As  far  as  utilising  desire  on  the  path  to
enlightenment, every sentient being needs that to attain  enlightenment.  So
if the superior bodhisattvas have already  abandoned  that  on  the  eighth,
ninth and tenth grounds and eventually enters the tantric  path,  how  would
they be able to utilise desire?

Khen Rinpoche: There are qualms on this point so we will  look  at  this  in
the future. Perhaps in the tantric module, we will look at  the  meaning  of
taking afflictions as the path.

Student 3: In general, the entire spectrum of phenomena is divided into  two
classes, impermanent phenomena and permanent phenomena. It is  not  possible
for an impermanent  phenomenon  to  become  a  permanent  phenomenon  and  a
permanent phenomenon to become an impermanent phenomenon.

So when it comes to the disintegratedness of a mental  obscuration,  if  you
say that the continuum of the disintegratedness stops, it is  equivalent  to
saying that a functioning thing has stopped functioning and becomes  a  non-
functioning thing, a permanent phenomenon. So  this  is  where  the  fallacy
could arise if you were to posit that  the  disintegratedness  of  a  mental
obscuration stops, its continuum is stopped when the antidote is applied.

Khen Rinpoche: When you think of the example of illumination, when there  is
very strong illumination, there is no darkness  at  all.  The  darkness  has
ceased to exist.

Student 3: Yes, the darkness has ceased to exist.

Khen Rinpoche: So  where  is  the  function  of  the  darkness?  It  is  not
functioning.

Student 3: Because the Prasangikas posit the disintegratedness of  an  event
that happened in the past, so the function of that disintegratedness  is  to
produce the next moment of disintegratedness in  the  context  of  something
that has happened in the past. The continuum of the past cannot become  non-
existent. It is like that. That is one theory.

Any   functioning   thing   necessarily   produces   a   result   so    this
disintegratedness is used to explain the continuum  of  something  that  has
already happened in the past. It is used in the context of  the  explanation
of time but not so much the normal concept of linear time.

The  disintegratedness  of  a  mental  obscuration  is  different  from  the
disintegratedness of the cessation of a mental obscuration.  The  words  are
different. Are  the  disintegratedness  of  a  mental  obscuration  and  the
disintegratedness of the cessation of a mental obscuration the same thing?

Answer: If you think of a butter lamp or a flame that burns for an hour,  up
to the last moment before  the  hour  ends,  every  moment  is  basically  a
continuum of disintegratedness.  But in the last moment of  the  flame,  the
flame ceases to exist and it does not continue on after that.

Student 3: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: So the continuum of the flame is severed.

Student 3: The moment of disintegratedness continues after the cessation  of
whatever phenomena we are talking about. If it is  a  flame,  then  we  talk
about the cessation of the flame. If it is a  mental  obscuration,  then  we
talk about the cessation of the mental obscuration.

I’m talking about the disintegratedness that is not the literal  translation
of the cessation of the flame. I take the  definition  of  disintegratedness
to be a functioning thing that has the ability to produce  the  next  moment
of its disintegratedness,  not  that  meaning  of  disintegratedness  as  in
something that has ceased. That is at a coarse level.

If you look at impermanent phenomena at a deeper level, with respect to  the
continuum of an impermanent phenomenon, there is no beginning and  there  is
no end. I mean if there’s an end to an  impermanent  phenomena,  that  would
imply that an  impermanent  phenomena,  a  functioning  thing,  has  stopped
functioning and therefore it has become a permanent phenomenon. So  I  would
like to find out from Khen Rinpoche how I can reconcile this qualm.
Khen Rinpoche: When we talk about functioning things,  there  are  basically
two kinds:
1. There is a functioning thing whereby there is a continuum of that  thing.


2. There is  also  a  functioning  thing  whereby  its  continuum  is  being
   severed.
When a functioning thing exists, it exists in a  continuum.  But  there  are
also functioning things whose continua cease. The question here is: For  the
functioning  thing   whose   continuum   is   severed,   does   it   produce
disintegratedness in the next moment? This is what we need to think about.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

REMOVING DOUBTS AS TO THE FAULTS OF SELF-CHERISHING


      Verse 49
      Since that’s the way it is, I seize the enemy! I seize the  thief  who
      ambushed and deceived me, the hypocrite who deceived me  disguised  as
      myself. Aha! It is ego-clinging, without a doubt. [1]

Prior to  this,  there  was  much  discussion  about  the  faults  of  self-
cherishing.  The  first   part   of   this   verse   is   expressing   one’s
acknowledgement, understanding and recognition, “This  is  really  true.  My
self-cherishing has all these faults. I now recognise them as such.”

Just as a robber, bandit or thief takes  away  our  possessions  without  us
even being aware of it, likewise, our self-cherishing  destroys  us,  taking
away all our good qualities  and  so  forth.  The  author  is  saying,  “Now
finally, I see self-cherishing for what it is.”

When we talk about robbers or people who plunder our  wealth,  we  can  talk
about it as being an outside job or an inside job. It is more  difficult  to
recognise an inside job. If your loved ones, family members  or  people  you
trust are stealing from you secretly,  it  is  more  difficult  to  discover
this. Likewise, this inner robber is like our self-cherishing attitude  that
takes away our virtuous thoughts.

The author is saying that prior to this, he thought of self-cherishing as  a
loved one, making friends with and believing in  it.  It  is  just  like  an
insider job that we do not recognise.  We actually  think  that  the  person
who is stealing from us is so good!  Likewise,  with  regard  to  our  self-
cherishing attitude, we think of our self-cherishing attitude as  a  friend,
someone who is close to us. The author is saying, “Now  I  finally  see  the
truth!”

Most of the time, many of us do not regard our self-cherishing as an  enemy.
Even when we have some inkling of the faults of  self-cherishing,  that  our
self-cherishing may be bad, we still have very strong doubts as  to  whether
our self-cherishing is really that bad. How can self-cherishing be  so  bad?
That is why we have doubts. But here, the author is proclaiming  this  sense
of wonder and feeling happy, “Finally, due to the kindness of the  guru  and
the Dharma, I have removed all doubts as to whether  my  self-cherishing  is
the enemy or not.”

SUPPLICATING YAMANTAKA


      Verse 50
      Now, O Yamantaka, raise the weapon of action  and  spin  it  furiously
      over your head three times. Spread apart your feet, which are the  two
      truths, open wide your eyes of method and wisdom, and bare your  fangs
      of the four powers and pierce the enemy!
Here, one is making a request to  the  deity,  the  wrathful  Yamantaka,  to
destroy our self-cherishing completely.  The main object of  fury  or  wrath
is the real enemy, our self-cherishing. We  are  supplicating  the  wrathful
deity, Yamantaka, to wield his weapon over the head of this enemy.

“Now, O Yamantaka, raise the weapon of action and  spin  it  furiously  over
your head three times.” The head of the enemy is  the  self-cherishing.  Why
three times? The “three times” here symbolise:
1. conventional bodhicitta
2. ultimate bodhicitta
3. the practice combining  the  conventional  bodhicitta  and  the  ultimate
   bodhicitta

Yamantaka, the wrathful deity, stands with his legs spread apart,  with  his
right leg bent and left leg extended:
 • The right bent leg symbolises conventional bodhicitta.
 • His out-stretched left leg symbolises the ultimate bodhicitta.
 • His two legs represent the two truths, i.e., in  this  context,  the  two
   bodhicittas.

Both his “eyes of method and wisdom” are  wide  open.  That  symbolises  the
practice of method and wisdom—the practice of  conventional  bodhicitta  and
ultimate bodhicitta—in equal measure.

“Bare your fangs of the four powers”: There are four  fangs  that  symbolise
the four powers[2] that pierce the enemy of self-cherishing.

SELF-CHERISHING ENSLAVES US IN SAMSARA

      Verse 51
      O King of Spells who torments the enemy, summon that  vow-breaker  who
      is destroying me and others, that  savage  called  “Ego-Clinging,  the
      Enchanter,” who, brandishing the weapon of action, runs uncontrollably
      through the jungle of cyclic existence.

“O King of Spells who torments the enemy”: “O King of Spells”  can  also  be
translated as “King of Mantras.”  The  enemy  here  is  the  self-cherishing
attitude while the King of Spells refers to  the  attitude  of  disregarding
oneself and cherishing others, prioritising others above oneself.

Many mantras can be recited including  some  supposedly  very  wrathful  and
powerful ones. However, no matter what the mantras may be and  the  quantity
we recite, the recitation of mantras can  never  harm  our  self-cherishing.
The only solution to our  self-cherishing  is  the  attitude  of  cherishing
others. So reciting all these powerful and wrathful mantras,  putting  aside
harming  the  self-cherishing  attitudes,  may  even  increase   our   self-
cherishing.

Our enemy, the self-cherishing attitude, has bound us  to  cyclic  existence
making us wander there without choice just like a slave  under  the  control
of his master. It is saying that our self-cherishing attitude  has  made  us
circle in cyclic existence from the lowest of the lowest  hells,  Avici,  up
to the peak of cyclic existence. It is  our  self-cherishing  attitude  that
has kept us circling over and over again in cyclic existence.

Self-cherishing and self-grasping
We have self-grasping, the apprehension of a self  and  we  have  the  self-
cherishing attitude. There is  a  discussion  of  the  relationship  between
these two—which is the master and which is  the  slave.  According  to  this
particular commentary, self-cherishing is the master  and  self-grasping  is
the slave.

In the earlier part of this text, it states how self-grasping is the  master
and self-cherishing follows the self-grasping. But here in  the  commentary,
the status of the two roles are reversed. Here, self-cherishing is  said  to
be the master and self-grasping is the slave to the self-cherishing.

Illustrations
Self-grasping and self-cherishing are different and are not  the  same.  For
us, we have not abandoned either of them and at  all  times,  these  two  go
hand-in-hand.

For someone who enters the hearers path and progresses along it towards  the
hearers  path  of  no-more-learning,  when  he  becomes  an  arhat  (or  foe
destroyer), that hearer abandons self-grasping but self-cherishing is  still
in his  mental  continuum.  In  order  for  that  hearer  arhat  to  achieve
buddhahood, he needs to enter the Mahayana path.

Of course, he needs to generate bodhicitta, the mind  of  enlightenment,  in
order to enter the Mahayana  path.  So  when  that  hearer  arhat  generates
bodhicitta, he enters the Mahayana path. With the generation of  bodhicitta,
we can then say that the self-cherishing in his mind is destroyed.  Such  an
individual who enters the Mahayana path after becoming an arhat  is  someone
who does not have self-cherishing and self-grasping.

For someone who enters the Mahayana  path  from  the  onset,  i.e.,  without
traversing the Hinayana  path,  by  generating  bodhicitta,  he  enters  the
Mahayana path and achieves the small Mahayana path  of  accumulation.  Self-
grasping is still there but the self-cherishing is very weak.

Then this bodhisattva moves on to the middle path of accumulation.  I  think
that by the middle path of accumulation, definitely  the  bodhisattva  would
have realised emptiness.  Because  of  his  realization  of  emptiness,  his
bodhicitta  is  accompanied  by  this  wisdom  and  as  his  bodhicitta   is
accompanied by the wisdom realising  emptiness,  his  bodhicitta  henceforth
will not degenerate. It is said that from the middle path  of  accumulation,
the bodhisattva’s bodhicitta will never degenerate.

What I am saying is that for someone of  definite  lineage  who  enters  the
Mahayana path from the onset, there is self-grasping even upon entering  the
path. In fact, from entering the  Mahayana  path  all  the  way  up  to  the
seventh ground, the bodhisattva is not able to abandon self-grasping.

The point is that self-cherishing and self-grasping are not the  same.  This
is according to what is presented  in  the  great  treatises.  Maybe  it  is
better or easier to assert  that  self-grasping  is  the  master  and  self-
cherishing is the slave. The very root is the apprehension of the  self.  It
is something to  think  about  because  sometimes,  the  roles  seem  to  be
reversed. Sometimes, in the  text,  you  see  that  self-cherishing  is  the
master and self-grasping is the slave.

“Summon that vow-breaker who is destroying  me  and  others.”  It  is  self-
cherishing and self-grasping that destroy ourselves and destroy  others.  It
is very rare for people who have self-cherishing  to  benefit  others.  Even
when try to benefit others, when you look at it, the benefit offered is  not
really perfect and ideal so when we have self-cherishing, we cannot  benefit
ourselves and we cannot benefit others. Here we  are  asking  this  wrathful
deity to summon the vow-breaker who is destroying others and us.


DESTROYING OUR SELF-CHERISHING AND SELF-GRASPING


      Verse 52
      Call him, call him, wrathful Yamantaka! Beat him, beat him, pierce the
      heart of the  enemy,  Ego!  Roar  and  thunder  on  the  head  of  the
      destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at  the  heart  of  the
      butcher, the enemy, Ego!

“Call him, call him” can also be translated as  “summon  him,  summon  him.”
“False construction” can be understood to refer to the discursive  and  evil
thoughts.

We summon the enemy two times. This means applying the  two  bodhicittas—the
conventional and the ultimate—to overcome the enemy of  self-cherishing.  We
are  imploring  the  wrathful  Yamantaka  to  summon  the  enemy  of   self-
cherishing. We are also asking the deity to pierce the heart  of  the  enemy
with the  two  bodhicittas  and  “roar  and  thunder  on  the  head  of  the
destroyer,” the one who brings about our downfall, the evil thought of self-
cherishing.

“Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher,  the  enemy,  Ego!”  “Mortally
strike” means to kill. “The enemy” is self-grasping  and  “the  butcher”  is
the self-cherishing attitude. In order to kill someone and to make sure  the
job is done, one either stabs or shoots the person in the  heart.  Then  the
person will definitely be killed. That is the analogy  but  the  meaning  is
this—with the conventional and ultimate bodhicitta, we strike at  the  heart
of self-grasping and self-cherishing.

What does striking at the heart of self-cherishing and  self-grasping  mean?
It is to know exactly their own uncommon modes of  apprehension,  i.e.,  how
do these two minds operate? What is their view of the world?

So with conventional and ultimate bodhicitta, we  strike  at  the  modes  of
apprehension of the self-cherishing attitude and self-grasping.

When we see words such as to kill, pierce the  heart  of  the  enemy,  smash
them and so forth in the Buddha’s teachings, we have to be  careful  not  to
misinterpret them or to take them literally. The target is never someone  on
the outside. It is not the external enemy but always the  inner  enemy,  the
afflictions and in this case,  the  self-cherishing  and  the  self-grasping
that are being attacked.

 • How do you overcome afflictions and this wrong conception?  You  have  to
   target their mode of apprehension.
 • How do you overcome a particular affliction or a  wrong  concept?  It  is
   through getting rid of the conceived object of the wrong concept.
So this is how you overcome a wrong concept, a particular affliction,  self-
cherishing and self-grasping.

      Verse 53
      Hum! Hum! O great tutelary deity, produce your miraculous apparitions!
      Dza! Dza! Bind the enemy tightly! Phat! Phat! I beseech you to release
      me from all fetters! Shig! Shig! I beseech you  to  cut  the  knot  of
      clinging!

This verse is similar to the previous verse.

“Shig! Shig!” represents the  conventional  and  ultimate  bodhicitta.  With
that, “I beseech you to cut  the  knot  of  clinging.”  Here  “the  knot  of
clinging” refers to self-grasping and self-cherishing. So  how  do  you  cut
the knot of clinging? As mentioned earlier, you  have  to  get  rid  of  the
conceived object of the particular affliction or wrong conception.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Just now you said it is better to say that  self-grasping  is  the
boss.  If we were to say that up to  the  seventh  ground,  the  bodhisattva
superiors still have self-grasping, isn’t it implied that if the  master  is
around, the slave will still be around?

Answer:  The boss can be alone!

Do you understand what she asked? She was asking about  the  bodhisattva  up
to the seventh ground. He has self-grasping  but  not  self-cherishing.  She
thinks that if you have self-grasping, you must have self-cherishing.  So  I
said, “Not necessarily so as the boss can be alone.”

Question: I would like to ask about Verse 50.

      Now, O Yamantaka, raise the weapon of action  and  spin  it  furiously
      over your head three times. Spread apart your feet, which are the  two
      truths, open wide your eyes of method and wisdom, and bare your  fangs
      of the four powers and pierce the enemy!

Why is it called “the weapon of karma”? How is self-cherishing the  boss  of
self-grasping? As you mentioned earlier, the role can be changed.

Answer: Many a time, it is from an attitude of  self-cherishing  that  self-
grasping comes. When we cherish the ‘I’  strongly  in  a  negative  way,  we
prioritise the ‘I’ over others and then  self-grasping  comes.  For  us,  we
experience these two minds in  both  roles.  Sometimes  the  self-cherishing
acting as the boss induces self-grasping, but at other times,  self-grasping
is like  the  boss  who  then  brings  about  self-cherishing.  For  us,  we
experience both.

Question: Does an arhat have a mental body?

Khen Rinpoche: I wonder if arhats who achieve  the  nirvana  with  remainder
has mental bodies? Which tenets are you taking?

Student 6: With remainder means with this body?

Khen Rinpoche: I forgot what we said in the Tathagata Essence.

Student 6: The reason why I asked is that if they have a mental body,  won’t
that mean there is no true suffering for a mental body?

It is possible to have self-cherishing yet not have a  suffering  body.  Can
it be that the body is not true suffering because of being  a  mental  body?
Does self-cherishing give rise  to  suffering?  If  the  bodhisattva  has  a
mental body, self-cherishing would not necessarily give rise to suffering.

Answer: An arhat has no suffering. That is why he is an arhat  but  does  an
arhat have self-cherishing? You have to say yes. It  follows  then  that  if
one has self-cherishing, one doesn’t necessarily have  suffering,  so  self-
cherishing doesn’t necessarily lead to suffering.

Although the arhats are the same as us in having  self-cherishing  but  that
is about it. We have  self-cherishing  and  encounter  many  problems  as  a
result. The arhats have self-cherishing but they  don’t  have  any  problems
primarily because due to their direct perception  of  emptiness,  they  have
abandoned the afflictions. Their wisdom is very powerful.

Although like us, the arhats have self-cherishing but this  is  not  to  say
that their self-cherishing is like our self-cherishing. Our  self-cherishing
is very strong but the arhat’s self-cherishing is much weaker.

Although  the  arhats  don’t  have  great  compassion  but  they   do   have
immeasurable compassion. However there is some  debate  as  to  whether  the
arhats have great compassion or not.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] “Seize the enemy” can be translated also as “recognize the enemy” and
“ego-clinging” is another translation for self-cherishing.
[2] The “four powers” refer to the four opponent powers of purification
practice.

