Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L05final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.876004
================================================================================


Transcript  of  the  oral  commentary  by  Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson  5                                                           16  July
2015


The practice of refuge.  Explaining the title  of  the  text.  Definitive  &
interpretative Yamantaka.


There  are  two  systems  for  cultivating  the   mind   of   enlightenment,
bodhicitta:
1.  the  sevenfold  cause  and  effect  instructions  for  those  of  duller
   faculties
2. exchanging self and others for those of sharp faculties

The text that we are going to look at  is  the  Wheel-Weapon  Mind  Training
that comes under the system of exchanging self and others. The  lineage  for
this tradition comes through Lama  Serlingpa  who  transmitted  it  to  Lama
Atisha.

Khen Rinpoche: You have the text with you?  Where?  In  your  iPad?  Wow!  I
think I need to put my texts in the iPad too. But I cannot  imagine  reading
my texts on the iPad. It is really complicated. I tried to read some  of  my
texts there but this going back and forth (gestures by swiping finger) …  My
own texts are much easier for me. Anyway, maybe you are used to it so it  is
easier for you too.

      Homage to the Three Jewels.

The text starts by paying homage to the Three Jewels. This is  the  practice
of going  for  refuge  to  the  Three  Jewels.  It  is  said  that  whatever
activities we undertake, we should start that activity with the practice  of
refuge. Therefore, it becomes very important to know what refuge is

THE PRACTICE OF REFUGE

What exactly is refuge? In order to have refuge, in  order  to  be  able  to
entrust ourselves to the Three Jewels, first we  must  have  a  very  strong
fear of suffering. For  instance,  it  could  be  the  strong  fear  of  the
suffering that we will experience in the lower realms. Then we also  need  a
very strong conviction that the  Three  Jewels  can  protect  us  from  that
suffering. The faith  that  is  engendered  through  these  two  factors  is
refuge.

Essentially this is a faith that is engendered by knowledge,  a  faith  that
arises through knowing. In order to have refuge, on the one hand, we need  a
real fear of suffering, be it the suffering  of  the  lower  realms  or  the
suffering of cyclic existence (samsara). We also need  the  conviction  that
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha have the capacity  and  power  to  protect  us
from the suffering of the lower realms and cyclic existence.

In order to produce that kind of conviction, that definite knowledge  within
ourselves, we must know what are the Three Jewels and  their  qualities.  As
such, in the previous module (on the Tathagata Essence) we  have  looked  at
what are the three objects of refuge, the  qualities  they  possess  and  so
forth.  In order for real refuge to arise in our heart, there must  be  this
conviction and certainty that the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha have  the  power
to protect us from the suffering of the lower realms and cyclic existence.

As I have often mentioned, one of the  reasons  for  studying  and  learning
about these different aspects of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha  is  to  help
us develop refuge in our heart. For example,  one  of  the  reasons  why  we
study the Tathagata Essence in the previous module is to get a  better  idea
of what the Three Jewels, our objects of refuge, are.

The topic of the tathagata essence is very important. Even  if  the  Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha possess the  power  and  capacity  to  free  us  from  our
suffering, if from our side, we do not possess what it takes to be  able  to
actualise the Three Jewels, i.e., we lack the crucial ingredients that  make
it possible for us to become the Three Jewels ourselves,  then  the  Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha are simply  that.  That  is  why  understanding  what  the
tathagata essence is is very important. On the basis of understanding  that,
we can see for ourselves that we  can  actualise  the  state  of  the  Three
Jewels. Then the aspiration to actualise the Three Jewels can arise in us.

The refuge of the person of small capacity
What is posited as the entity of refuge? It is the faith  of  conviction  in
the Three Jewels’ capacity and power to protect us  from  the  suffering  of
the lower realms and cyclic existence. When  we  reflect  on  the  suffering
that we ourselves will have to endure in the hell realms, as a hungry  ghost
or as an animal, we will develop fear. If we are convinced that the  Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha can protect us from that  fear,  then  we  will  have  the
refuge of a person of small capacity.

We must know this. If somebody were to ask you, “What is the refuge  of  the
person of small capacity?” you must be able to answer this question. In  the
case of the refuge of a person of small capacity, the object of refuge  that
he entrusts himself to is the  same—the  Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sangha.  What
qualifies that person’s refuge as a refuge of a  person  of  small  capacity
comes from his own side. The difference doesn’t come from the  side  of  the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. In this  case,  the  difference  comes  from  the
practitioner’s type of fear.

Let’s say we come down with a very serious  illness.  Usually,  we  will  be
quite frightened by this.  Motivated  by  that  fear,  if  we  then  entrust
ourselves to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, does that become refuge?

Let’s say we are very confident that the Buddha can  definitely  protect  us
from this terrible sickness in this life. Is that refuge  or  not?  Is  that
virtue?

Isn’t this our kind of refuge, our kind of practice? We  are  practical  and
realistic people and for us, it is difficult for us to  conceive  of  future
suffering. “I have a problem now. Buddha, please protect me.” When  we  seek
Buddha’s protection for such  things,  is  that  not  refuge?  Is  that  not
virtue?

Sometime people are so stressed when they cannot find a job. Then they  take
refuge so that they can find a job. Is that refuge? Is that not virtue?

Can you all answer the second question: Is it virtue? Is it Dharma? Is  this
kind of refuge a cause of suffering or a cause of happiness?

Student: Yes and no. It is refuge but it can be  non-virtuous  depending  on
the motivation. For instance, I can ask Buddha for a good job and I  find  a
good job. But I can use that extra  money  to  sell  drugs,  a  non-virtuous
action. So for me there is this non-virtuous refuge.

I have this mental hurdle I cannot  cross.  To  me  asking  the  Buddha  for
something with a contaminated  motivation  is  non-virtue  although  I  know
refuge is supposed to be a virtuous action. So to me, if I  want  something,
I work for it rather than ask the Buddha for it.

For refuge to be virtuous, the motivation  must  be  correct.  For  example,
with the salary I get from the job Buddha gave me, I can study and  practise
the Dharma and do  a  lot  of  good  works,  e.g.,  offering  to  the  Kopan
earthquake fund.

Khen Rinpoche: We can see that we really need to sit down  and  think  about
what exactly refuge is. We also have to look within  ourselves  and  examine
whether we have refuge or not. We have to really think about this.

We are not obliged to take refuge. The  question  then  is,  “Why  should  I
entrust myself to the care of the Three Jewels? What’s the purpose of  doing
this? What’s in it for me?” We really need to ask  ourselves  the  question,
“What if I don’t entrust myself to the  Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sangha  and  I
don’t take refuge in them. What will happen then?”

There must be a reason for going for refuge. There must  be  a  purpose  for
entrusting ourselves to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha and taking  refuge  in
them. Otherwise, if we say we go  for  refuge,  yet  we  cannot  account  to
others or ourselves why we are doing so, then our  refuge  is  only  at  the
level of mere words.

We say that we believe in the Buddha. We  take  refuge  in  the  Buddha.  We
entrust ourselves to the Buddha. We take refuge in  the  Buddha  because  we
want to be free of sicknesses and we want to have a  smooth  and  successful
life. If we were to say that, then this question arises, “Why  do  you  need
the Buddha to do that for you? You can pray to the worldly gods.” There  are
so many worldly gods out there  such  as  nagas,  landlord  spirits  and  so
forth. They have the power to grant us some of our wishes and solve some  of
our problems. So if they can help us, then that is enough. Why  do  we  want
to choose the Buddha? Is it because we  think  that  he  is  more  powerful?
Isn’t this what we think?
If we say that we take refuge in the Buddha because we want to be free of  a
certain sickness, won’t it be better if we direct our  single-pointed  faith
towards the doctor and take refuge in him  instead?  This  is  what  we  are
supposed to do. By believing in the doctor and following his advice, we  can
also recover. So there is no need to take refuge in the Buddha.

Do you see what I’m driving at?

These reasons alone are not sufficient to explain why we choose the  Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha as our objects of refuge. We really  have  to  think  hard
about this. At the very least, the reason for  us  to  take  refuge  in  the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha must be a real fear of the suffering that we  will
experience in the lower realms when we are reborn there.

In order for that fear to arise, first, we must  have  an  understanding  of
and some conviction in the workings of karma and its  effects.  We  must  be
convinced that definitely we will experience  the  results  of  the  actions
that we have done. Only on the basis of that conviction will we think  about
all the negativities we have accumulated in this  and  past  lives  and  how
they are certain to ripen as experiences in  the  lower  realms.  Only  then
will real fear arise. So there are many things to sort out from our side.

We must also have the conviction that the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha  possess
the power to protect us from the fear of the suffering in the lower  realms.
In order to have that conviction, again, we must think  about  many  things.
How do we come to such a conclusion? Why can we  believe  that  the  Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha actually possess  the  power  to  protect  us  from  those
sufferings? So these are the minimum  requirements  to  qualify  as  refuge.
This is the refuge of a person of small capacity.

The refuge of the person of medium capacity
For a person of medium capacity, that person’s  fear  is  the  fear  of  the
suffering of cyclic existence. He has  the  faith  of  conviction  that  the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha can protect  him  from  that  fear.  This  is  the
refuge of a person of middling capacity.
In order for such refuge to arise, one must have a very  good  understanding
of the four noble truths.

The refuge of the person of great capacity
The refuge of a person of great capacity is a mind that:
 • is unable to bear the suffering that sentient beings are experiencing  in
   samsara
 • wishes to free all sentient beings from that suffering
Motivated  by  that,  this  person  entrusts  himself  with  the  faith   of
conviction to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.

In order to have the refuge  of  a  person  of  medium  capacity,  one  must
definitely have renunciation, the determination to be free or  the  mind  of
definite emergence.  Such an attitude is indispensable.

It is also necessary in  the  practice  of  refuge  of  a  person  of  great
capacity. In fact, the renunciation of the person of great capacity must  be
even stronger than the renunciation  of  a  person  of  medium  capacity.  A
person of great capacity  is  not  only  determined  to  free  himself  from
suffering but he truly wants all sentient beings to be free  from  suffering
too. In  that  sense,  for  the  sake  of  sentient  beings,  that  person’s
renunciation or attitude of definite  emergence  is  even  stronger  than  a
person of medium capacity.

The quality of refuge is determined by the quality of the mind
The Mahayana (the Great Vehicle) is divided into two:
1. the Paramitayana (Perfection Vehicle)
2. the Mantrayana (Mantra Vehicle)
Practitioners of Mahayana Paramitayana or Mantrayana are the same in  having
the mind that is unable to bear the suffering of all sentient  beings.  Both
practitioners go for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha with that  kind
of mind.

While both are the same in not being able  to  bear  the  suffering  of  all
sentient beings, the practitioner of Mantrayana has  greater  compassion  in
that he is unable to bear that sentient beings have to wait so long for  her
to achieve  enlightenment.  She  cannot  bear  the  fact  that  she  has  to
accumulate the collections (of merit and wisdom) over such a long period  of
time, i.e., three countless great eons.

The practitioners of Mantrayana cannot bear  to  take  so  long  to  achieve
enlightenment. They want to achieve enlightenment more  quickly  and  faster
than that. In fact, some of them think, “I want to achieve enlightenment  in
one lifetime in this particular body.” It is  with  that  kind  of  attitude
that they go for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.

So now we can see that the refuge of  the  person  of  small  capacity,  the
person of medium capacity and the person of great capacity—and within  that,
the practitioner of the Perfection  Vehicle  and  the  practitioner  of  the
Mantra Vehicle—are the same in entrusting themselves to the  Buddha,  Dharma
and Sangha. But their mind of refuge is  different.  That  difference  comes
from their own side and their reasons for taking refuge. The quality of  the
refuge of these practitioners becomes increasingly profound as they move  up
the hierarchy. Their attitude of renunciation and their  inability  to  bear
the particular suffering explained above become increasingly more  powerful.


We can see from this explanation that whether enlightenment is fast  or  not
depends primarily on the level of the practitioner’s mind. If  the  mind  is
more  powerful,  stronger,  more   courageous,   with   a   more   expansive
perspective, then that person can achieve enlightenment more  quickly.  This
is why the mantra path is so much quicker. But that speed doesn’t come  from
the outside. It comes from the level of the person’s mind.

Within Mantrayana, there  are  four  classes  of  tantra.  The  three  lower
classes of tantra do talk about achieving enlightenment in one  life  within
one body but that necessitates the practice and achievement of  immortality.
With that realisation, one is then able to extend one’s lifespan for a  long
time. Then during that long life, one achieves enlightenment.

Highest yoga tantra also talks about achieving  enlightenment  in  one  life
within  one  body.  What  it  refers  to  is  the   potential   to   achieve
enlightenment in one lifetime during this degenerate age in this  one  body.
So it is more profound and an even quicker path. Again,  the  difference  in
the  speed  of  achieving  enlightenment  is  due  to  the  level   of   the
practitioner’s mind. The more developed and  more  advanced  the  mind,  the
quicker will be the result.

SUMMARY

You need to take note of the different levels of refuge:
1. the refuge of the person of small capacity
2. the refuge of the person of medium capacity
3. the refuge of the person of great capacity
Then within the refuge of the person of great capacity, there  is  also  the
refuge of the person of the Mantra Vehicle, the Mantrayana.

These different levels  of  refuge  come  about  primarily  because  of  the
differences in the level of the mind of the person who is going for refuge.

Another factor to take  note  of  is  the  importance  of  the  attitude  of
renunciation, i.e., the determination to be free or  the  mind  of  definite
emergence. That is needed for the refuge of the person of  medium  capacity,
the person of great capacity and even for the person of the Mantrayana.  One
should know that although the attitude of renunciation is needed  for  those
three levels of refuge, the strength and the  quality  of  the  renunciation
also differ.

If we understand that there are  these  different  levels  of  refuge,  then
whatever we do, when we take refuge right from the beginning, we  have  some
idea of where we stand and where we are heading.

In the first place, do we have refuge? If we do have refuge, what  level  of
refuge do we have? From there, we will know  that  in  order  to  reach  our
desired destination, what kind of causes we need to create based on what  we
have discussed briefly so far.

Whatever practice we do, especially prayers and rituals, they  always  start
with refuge. We have to keep this in mind as it  is  very  important.  Every
time we do something, we should go for refuge. We must bring to mind why  we
are doing so.

Sometimes when we are asked, “What is the refuge  of  the  person  of  small
capacity, the person of medium capacity and the person of  great  capacity?”
we get stuck and are not able to give an immediate answer. You  must  ensure
that you can answer if you are asked such a question.

EXPLAINING THE TITLE OF THE TEXT

The full title of this text is The Wheel-Weapon That Strikes at the  Enemy’s
Vital Spot.
In the ordinary sense, the word “enemy” refers to the  external  enemy,  the
one who is causing us problems. However, the “enemy” that  is  mentioned  in
this title is our own self-cherishing attitude. It is said  that  our  self-
cherishing attitude has been our enemy in  the  past,  causing  us  all  the
problems and suffering. It is also causing us  problems  and  suffering  now
and it will also cause us problems and suffering in  the  future.  So  right
from the beginning, we have to delineate carefully and accurately  what  the
enemy is. It is our self-cherishing attitude.

Let’s say we want to annihilate this enemy. We need  a  reasonably  powerful
weapon. All the verses that make up the rest of this  text  are  likened  to
the wheel of sharp weapon that is used to  annihilate  this  self-cherishing
attitude.

In the case of a skilled  professional,  for  example,  someone  skilled  in
repairing machinery, he knows very well how a particular machine  works  and
functions. When that machine has problems,  because  of  his  expertise  and
knowledge, this skilled professional is able to pinpoint  the  problem  very
quickly and fix it right away.

Likewise, all the verses that  make  up  this  text  correctly  and  quickly
identify how our self-cherishing attitude is the source of our problems  and
how it is of no benefit to us. In this way, it  helps  the  practitioner  to
uproot the self-cherishing attitude.

The text says that in order to defeat the enemy, we have to know  the  enemy
well. If we know our enemy well, we will know  exactly  how  to  defeat  the
enemy.

DEFINITIVE & INTERPRETATIVE YAMANTAKA

      I bow down to the Great Wrathful One, Yamantaka.

This is related to tantra.  Yamantaka is the opponent  or  the  antidote  to
Yama. This is what Yamantaka means. There are the definitive  Yamantaka  and
the interpretive Yamantaka:
 • The definitive Yamantaka is the non-dual wisdom of bliss and emptiness.
 • This non-dual bliss and emptiness that takes on the aspect of a  peaceful
   or wrathful deity is the interpretative Yamantaka.

You will find a similar explanation in sutra. In the  sutric  tradition,  we
talk about the inner guru or virtuous friend and the outer guru:
 • The inner guru is our own positive mental qualities such as having a good
   heart or a positive virtuous mind.
 • The outer guru is the person who shows us the way to actualise our  inner
   qualities.

In the same way, we can talk about an inner refuge and outer refuge.
 • The inner refuge (or  inner  protection)  is  our  virtuous  thoughts  or
   virtuous state of mind.
 • The outer refuge (or outer protection) is the  usual  objects  of  refuge
   that are external.

Yamantaka  displays  a  very  wrathful  aspect  and  his  wrath  is   always
continually directed at the self-cherishing attitude  in  the  continuum  of
all sentient beings.
If we were asked, “Why is there a buddha in this wrathful aspect?” the  only
answer must be this: His  wrath  is  directed  at  the  afflictions  of  all
sentient beings, in particular, the self-cherishing in the continua  of  all
sentient beings.

 • The wrathful one, Yamantaka, can refer to the ordinary  bodhisattvas  who
   are wrathful towards the self-cherishing attitude.
 • “The Great Wrathful One” can refer to the bodhisattva superiors.
 • The ultimate (or final) “Great Wrathful One” can only exist on the buddha
   ground. In the  context  here,  the  ultimate  “Great  Wrathful  One”  is
   Yamantaka in both his definitive and interpretive  aspects.  It  is  this
   Yamantaka to whom we pay homage.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: It is mentioned that  in  the  Mantrayana  path  one  is  able  to
achieve enlightenment within one lifetime in  a  single  body  during  these
degenerate times. We are always told the story of Milarepa, of  how  he  met
his guru and how hard he practised.

When they say this in the tantric tradition, are they talking about  someone
who starts from  ground  zero  and  achieves  enlightenment  in  one  single
lifetime? To me, I suspect that Milarepa must have tremendous imprints  from
the past to be able to generate that level of guru devotion and  the  mental
determination to endure all that he had  to  put  up  with.  So  to  me,  it
doesn’t seem that he achieved enlightenment in a single lifetime.

There will  always  be  a  lifetime  during  which  one  will  achieve  full
enlightenment. But I don’t think  Milarepa  achieved  enlightenment  in  the
duration of a single lifetime.

Khen Rinpoche: Let us set that aside for the time being.  First,  you  think
about this.

From the first  day  you  met  your  guru,  if  you  had  practised  exactly
according to his advice, i.e., you practiced  every  single  thing  that  he
told you to, do you think you can achieve enlightenment in this lifetime?

OK. I will make the question easier. From the first day  you  had  met  your
virtuous friend, if you practised exactly as he had advised,  do  you  think
you can perceive emptiness directly in this lifetime?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: If you say yes, does that not mean  that  in  this  lifetime,
you will definitely achieve the  path  of  seeing?  From  the  viewpoint  of
highest yoga tantra, if you had practised exactly according  to  the  guru’s
advice, is it not the case that definitely, you  can  achieve  the  illusory
body in this lifetime?

If you say that you can achieve the illusory body, it is confirmed that  you
will achieve enlightenment in this very lifetime. So  have  I  not  answered
your question?
Student: Yes, I completely agree had I practiced exactly according  to  what
my guru advises. But the issue is that, for me, even to be able to meet  the
guru, even to be able to have the  ability  and  determination  to  practise
exactly according to his advice, those conditions  do  not  come  from  this
lifetime.

My connection with my guru does not come from this lifetime alone.  In  that
sense, the ability to achieve enlightenment does  not  happen  in  a  single
lifetime but obviously, there must be a lifetime in  which  I  will  achieve
enlightenment.

Khen  Rinpoche:  The  question  here  is  do  you  think  you  can   achieve
enlightenment? I am asking you.

Student: Khen Rinpoche, it is too late  for  me.  I  can’t  do  it  but  for
someone else, it is possible. Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: You said yes so then that is it.

Student: But my point is that it did not happen in one lifetime?

Khen Rinpoche: You are referring to all the good karma  you  have  from  the
past, right?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Is it not the case that you yourself  have  tremendous  karma
like Milarepa? If you say yes, that means you have so much good  karma  from
your past. So, in that  sense,  there  is  no  difference  between  you  and
Milarepa!

Student: The tantric position is that one can achieve enlightenment  in  one
lifetime during this degenerate age. This gives a  beginner  the  impression
that someone  from  ground  zero—someone  with  no  imprints,  nothing,  you
know—can achieve enlightenment in a single  lifetime.  The  example  we  are
often given is the experience of Milarepa, but he was not enlightened  in  a
single lifetime in that sense because he must have tremendous imprints  from
the past.

Khen Rinpoche: My point here is this—if  you  practised,  you  will  achieve
enlightenment in one lifetime, right?

Student: Yes, but not me personally. Unless a miracle happens.

Khen Rinpoche: You say that you can achieve enlightenment in  one  lifetime.
But it follows that  you  do  not  achieve  enlightenment  in  one  lifetime
because you asserted that you had worked very hard in all your  past  lives.
So, it does not come from this lifetime. So, you are not  going  to  achieve
enlightenment in one lifetime. So, it is the same as Milarepa.

Student: Yes, not achieving enlightenment in one lifetime.

Khen Rinpoche: You already accepted you can do it. Then why do you say…..?

Student: Maybe I am not communicating my idea correctly.  Can  someone  help
me? Hey guys, do you know what I am talking about? OK. Everyone  is  nodding
his or her  head!

Khen Rinpoche: OK. You go and sit down.

In  order  to  practise  the  path,  first,  we  must  have  some  level  of
intelligence and wisdom as the necessary basis for  practice  without  which
there is no way  to  achieve  any  realisations.  But  having  something  or
lacking something in the first place is the result of what we  had  done  or
not done in the past. It is always related to the past.

But we all possess the human life of the eight freedoms and ten  endowments.
This is necessarily the result of much hard work on our part  in  the  past.
In order to gain a human life of freedoms and endowments, the foundation  is
pure ethical discipline complemented by the practice of  the  perfection  of
generosity and stainless prayers. So we  must  have  accumulated  a  lot  of
merit in the past and that is why we have this human life  of  freedoms  and
endowments. Doesn’t it mean that we worked very hard in the past?

Khen Rinpoche: This means that there is no difference. We are  the  same  as
Milarepa. Do you agree?

You have everything that Milarepa had. You have some level  of  intelligence
and wisdom, this human body and you  have  the  external  condition  of  the
virtuous friend.

Khen Rinpoche: Maybe you haven’t met Marpa. I think only that is missing.  I
am joking.

You have everything you need to achieve enlightenment in one lifetime.  What
is better than a human life of freedoms and endowments?  The  lam-rim  never
mentions anything that is better than that. Is it not the best condition?

In the first place, there is no reason to ask the  question  of  whether  we
can or cannot achieve enlightenment in one lifetime. Everything  is  set  up
for us. If we practise, we can definitely see  emptiness  directly  in  this
life. We can definitely generate bodhicitta. We can definitely  achieve  the
generation stage and the completion stage of highest yoga  tantra  and  then
achieve unification, full enlightenment, in one lifetime.

There is no problem as everything is already set up.  It  is  not  difficult
and we can definitely achieve enlightenment in one lifetime. Why not?

Are you saying that there is  something  more  precious  than  the  precious
human rebirth? Why can you not achieve enlightenment in one  lifetime?  What
is missing?

Khen Rinpoche: What are you missing? Effort? Can you make it?  You  are  too
tired?

If one practises with joyous perseverance, there  is  nothing  to  stop  the
achievement of enlightenment.  There are  different  levels  of  refuge.  So
there is nothing to stop one from developing the  mind  that  is  unable  to
bear  the  suffering  of  all  sentient  beings   and   wants   to   achieve
enlightenment quickly. With that mind,  one  enters  the  tantric  path.  So
there is nothing to stop the achievement of enlightenment.

We need to have that determination. With that determination, nothing  blocks
the attainment of full enlightenment. Do you see the point, where  the  crux
of the matter lies? It is relatively much easier to defeat the  inner  enemy
than defeating the outer enemy if you know where  the  crux  of  the  matter
lies and you know exactly what to do.

When we talk about Milarepa, we don’t have to worry about  what  he  did  in
the past. In the same way, we do not have to worry about what we did in  the
past. The point is that if everything is complete  and  all  the  conditions
are set up in this  life,  there  is  nothing  to  stop  the  attainment  of
enlightenment.

If we  were  asked,  “If  you  work  hard,  will  you  be  able  to  develop
bodhicitta?” we will really have nothing to say except yes.

If we work hard enough, can we achieve calm-abiding? We have to say yes.

There is no valid reason for saying, “I cannot do it”  or  “I  will  not  be
able to achieve it.”
Therefore if one is asked, “Is enlightenment achievable in one  lifetime  in
one body?” then the answer has to be yes.

What if we shorten the time frame to one day. Can enlightenment be  achieved
in one day?

Khen Rinpoche: You know what I am talking about.

By having the eight freedoms and ten endowments that characterise our  human
life, if we practised correctly, then the answer has to be yes,  it  can  be
achieved in one day.

There is no need to mention how hard we had already worked in  the  past  or
how much merit we had already accumulated in past lives to get to  where  we
are now. There is no need to talk about all of that. It is a given.

We all have the good fortune to have access to Dharma teachings.  We  always
have that freedom and opportunity to listen to the teachings  and  to  learn
the Dharma. These are the ripening results of the hard work that we had  put
in in our past lives. We are experiencing the fruits of the ripening of  our
merit.

Even if we were to compare ourselves with Milarepa, whatever we have now  is
the same as what Milarepa had. He  was  a  human  being  and  we  are  human
beings. The conditions are  there.  He  achieved  enlightenment  because  he
worked hard. So if we work hard, then there is no valid reason to  say  that
we will not achieve enlightenment. All of us are still stuck  here  and  not
getting anywhere because we always think that  practitioners  like  Milarepa
were better than us or that he did this and that in his past lives!

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~
REQUIREMENTS FOR BASIC PROGRAM FINAL EXAM

Khen Rinpoche: At the very beginning of this cycle  of  BP  classes,  I  had
mentioned that those who want to take the final exam must take each  of  the
module exams. Also, I did mention that  you  must  attend  at  least  eighty
percent of the classes. These are the  requirements  for  taking  the  final
exam.

I mentioned all this at the very beginning of these classes.  I  think  this
is the third time that I am telling you all this. That is why  I  need  your
exam papers back for my records.

The exam for this module is challenging in terms of giving marks. There  are
some people who wrote a lot. Some people wrote less. But even if  you  wrote
only two lines, pass your exam paper back. I  need  to  keep  a  record  for
those who wish to take the final exam.

If you really do not want to take the final exam, then whether you  sit  for
each module exam is up to you. Whether you hand up your exam  paper  or  not
is up to you.  Coming to classes is up to you also. If you  want  to  learn,
you can come and listen. You don’t have to feel stressed.

But according to the FPMT, the rules for the final exam are  that  you  must
complete all the module exams and you must also  attend  eighty  percent  of
the classes. After that, you must do a three-year  retreat!  No,  not  three
years. Three months. I think the requirement  for  the  Master  Program  was
supposed to be a three-year retreat. Then it was shortened to one year.  For
the Basic Program, it is three months.

So I am reminding you again. If you really want to participate in the  final
exam, then you must fulfil these requirements. Otherwise,  never  mind.  You
can come and listen in class. You can give your answers  during  the  exams.
If you don’t want to sit for exams, also never mind.  So  you  can  take  it
easy.

But as I mentioned before, sometimes you need to push  yourself.  Otherwise,
you never get anywhere. Sometimes, sitting  for  exams  is  important.  Only
then do you push yourself a little bit.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

