Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L21final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.710392
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 21                                                          1
October 2015


Generating bodhicitta—the more powerful method? Perfect virtue. The root
text: Verses 92—103. Verse 92: Request to Yamanataka. Verse 93: Practice of
tonglen. Verse 94: Identi-fying the roots of evil. Verse 95: Only one thing
to blame. Verse 96: Taking on the negativities & afflictions of others.
Verse 97: Giving one’s roots of virtue to others. Verse 98: Mutual support.
Verse 99: Going to the lower realms with enthusiasm. Verses 100 & 102: May
peace flourish unharmed. Verse 103: Practising ultimate bodhicitta.


GENERATING BODHICITTA—THE MORE POWERFUL METHOD?

Question: This text is talking about all the faults  of  self-cherishing.  I
was thinking about the two methods of achieving  bodhicitta,  the  sevenfold
cause and effect and exchanging self and others. It is generally  said  that
exchanging self and others is the more profound practice and  is  meant  for
sharper-facultied students whereas  the  other  method  is  for  less  sharp
practitioners.

To me, exchanging self and others  seems  to  be  based  on  thinking  about
oneself wanting to be  happy.  One  is  not  happy  because  of  one’s  self
cherishing. So it entails the reflection on thinking  of  the  disadvantages
of self-cherishing and the benefits of cherishing others. But to me, at  the
end of the day, we are really thinking of our  own  happiness,  whereas  the
sevenfold cause and effect that entails thinking of the kindness  of  mother
sentient beings …

Khen Rinpoche: What did you say just before that?

Student 1: Exchanging self and others?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes. Say that again.

Ven Gyurme: Khen Rinpoche  is  referring  to  the  last  part  of  what  you
said—despite thinking about the disadvantages and advantages, at the end  of
the day, we are still thinking about oneself.

Student 1: Yes, that is my  personal  feeling.  I  feel  it  is  still  ego-
centric. I can say, “I’m going to practise for the  benefit  of  all  living
beings” but at the end of the day, I’m thinking  of  my  happiness.  Whereas
the other method—where we talk about remembering that  all  sentient  beings
have been my mothers and have been kind to me  in  countless  lifetimes—that
to me seems like a much  more  powerful  basis  for  generating  bodhicitta.
Because when we actually think about the kindness of  others,  and  thinking
of them as having been our mothers, without even being Buddhists, even as  a
decent human being, we should think  about  repaying  the  kindness  of  our
parents. I think that goes beyond any sense of obligation or  anything  like
that.

I just feel that the foundation for thinking of the kindness of others is  a
stronger basis for developing bodhicitta whereas  the  other  method  to  me
still seems a bit selfish. I wanted to clarify  with  Khen  Rinpoche.  Maybe
something has gone wrong in my reasoning.

Khen Rinpoche: Basically the conclusion of your question is that the  seven-
point mind training is better than exchanging self and others.

Student 1: To me, I think the basis of that practice is  more  powerful.  In
essence, to me it may be better, but traditionally we have always been  told
that exchanging self and others is a more powerful method.

Khen Rinpoche: The short answer is this. If the  seven-point  mind  training
suits you better, starting with recognising that all  sentient  beings  have
been your mothers, then you proceed with that. If meditating  on  exchanging
self and others will cause your self-cherishing to increase, then  don’t  do
it.

It all depends on where we are individually and what level  of  practice  we
are at. Whatever practice we do have to accord with our capacity.  For  some
people, the meditation on impermanence is stronger than  the  meditation  on
emptiness, because their meditation on impermanence  helps  them  to  reduce
their attachment. Essentially, whatever practice we do, we have  to  do  the
one that is appropriate for our own level of mind. It also depends on  where
we are at. It is a very personal thing.

For example, as said in the teachings, in order to help a person to  recover
from his sickness, we cannot give that person just  any  medicine.  Even  if
that medicine is said to be the best, the most famous or the most  powerful,
it doesn’t mean that  that  medicine  is  necessarily  effective  for  every
individual. In order to cure a person of his sickness, appropriate  medicine
has to be given. It is the same thing here  with  practice.  It  depends  on
where we are in our practice and it also depends on our level of mind.

One of the verses mentions how due to our self-cherishing, we run after  the
high practices that are way beyond our ability. For example, we always  talk
about the greatness of the Mahayana teachings, how  wonderful  training  the
mind in bodhicitta is, and how wonderful love and compassion are.  But  that
is from the perspective of the Mahayana and for a person who  is  ready  for
such practice. In general, it is true.

But there is no way to even start to train the mind in the Mahayana  without
having laid the proper foundations. Without having  trained  and  actualised
the path of a person of small capacity, one has no basis whatsoever to  even
begin to train in the Mahayana.

If one starts to train in the Mahayana without such a  basis,  although  one
may say the Mahayana in general is the best and most wonderful thing,  until
one has laid down the proper foundations, it will not be the best thing  for
oneself at that point in time.

It is called the sevenfold cause and effect instructions because  there  are
seven elements that make up the instructions starting from  recognising  all
sentient beings as having been our mothers and remembering  their  kindness,
then developing the wish to repay their  kindness,  developing  affectionate
love, compassion and so forth. One has to train the mind gradually in  these
stages.

In the practice of exchanging self  and  others,  the  very  first  step  is
equalising self and  others.  In  order  to  develop  a  deep  and  profound
understanding of this practice of equalising  self  and  others,  one  would
probably need to think about and reflect on emptiness, the  ultimate  nature
of reality.

When those of  sharp  faculties  train  their  mind  to  develop  bodhicitta
through  exchanging  self  and  others,  because  they  are  sharp-facultied
trainees, they have a lot of knowledge  and  understanding.  Naturally  they
will understand that no phenomena exist  inherently.  They  also  understand
that samsara has no beginning because the mind has no beginning.  Since  the
mind has no beginning, definitely it is the case that  all  sentient  beings
have been one’s mothers. All these understandings come naturally.
For the sharp-facultied trainee who  is  training  in  exchanging  self  and
others, the understanding and realisation  that  all  sentient  beings  have
been their mothers, remembering  their  kindness,  developing  the  wish  to
repay their kindness and generating the  affectionate  love  that  considers
all sentient beings as  very  precious—because  of  their  reflections,  all
these realisations will come naturally.

I  have  mentioned  recently  these   sharp-facultied   trainees   have   an
understanding of the ultimate nature of reality. That understanding  affects
them in a very positive  way  in  their  practice  of  equalising  self  and
others. Because of their understanding of the ultimate  nature  of  reality,
emptiness, they come to understand the  clear  light  nature  of  the  mind,
buddhanature. They also understand how  the  defilements  are  adventitious.
That forms the basis  for  them  to  generate  very  strong  compassion  for
sentient beings.

For those who have an understanding of emptiness,  the  ultimate  nature  of
reality, they realise that the  minds  of  all  sentient  beings,  including
their own mind, are actually pure by nature and has never been afflicted  by
the delusions. The delusions are there  but  they  are  adventitious.  These
adventitious defilements can be removed but because they  are  still  there,
others and one have been suffering  since  beginningless  lifetimes  without
reason.

So when they contemplate how others are in this position due to  this  small
little mistake, the  love  and  compassion  they  develop  is  very  strong.
Probably the strength of that love and compassion is  not  induced  by  just
the reflection on how sentient beings have been their  mothers,  remembering
their kindness and wanting to repay their kindness.


Those who have realised emptiness see that all the sufferings  and  all  the
problems arise from ignorance,  the  belief  in  something  that  has  never
existed. The whole problem just comes from this one  mistake  in  the  mind,
this erroneous conception,  this  fundamental  misapprehension  of  reality.
That is why I think that when those individuals who have this  understanding
of emptiness put their mind to developing compassion,  the  compassion  that
they develop is very strong.

These individuals who have the  understanding  of  the  ultimate  nature  of
reality, emptiness, when they focus their  mind  on  the  suffering  of  all
sentient beings, not only do they see the suffering, they also see that  all
the suffering that everyone has been experiencing since  beginningless  time
has no basis whatsoever; that just due to this  small  fundamental  mistake,
ignorance, others and one have  been  suffering  since  beginningless  time.
This induces a very strong compassion in their minds when they are  training
their minds in compassion.

With that very strong compassion, this induces the wholehearted resolve,  “I
must do something to help others.” That wholehearted  resolve  then  induces
them to develop  bodhicitta.  They  then  conclude,  “I  must  achieve  full
enlightenment to help others.”

So if we were to compare the strength of  the  compassion  that  is  induced
through training the mind in the first four steps  of  the  sevenfold  cause
and effect instructions versus the compassion that arises from training  the
mind in exchanging self and others, I think we will be  able  to  see  which
one is stronger.

The first four steps of the sevenfold cause and effect instructions are:
1. recognising all sentient beings as one’s mother
2. remembering their kindness
3. generating the wish to repay their kindness
4. generating the love that sees all sentient beings  to  be  very  precious
   and pleasant

Prior to training the mind in the sevenfold cause and  effect  instructions,
one must meditate on equanimity. In that context, it is to remove any  bias,
feeling close to some and distant from others. That is necessary.

PERFECT VIRTUE

Question: In the last class, Khen Rinpoche differentiated between a  perfect
virtue that involves renunciation and a non-perfect  virtue  that  does  not
have renunciation. What is the difference between a non–virtue and a  virtue
without renunciation and their impact on karma?

Answer: In general, what is virtue and what is non-virtue?
 • Virtue is that which gives rise to a pleasant result.
 • Non-virtue is that which gives rise to an unpleasant result.

We could engage in different kinds  of  virtue  such  as  the  practices  of
giving and so forth in order to achieve a good rebirth in the  future  as  a
human or a celestial being. Those practices  are  virtue.  It  is  not  non-
virtue but the question is, is this  particular  virtue  a  perfect  virtue?
What makes a virtue a perfect virtue?
A perfect virtue is a cause for liberation from cyclic existence.  In  order
for it to be a cause for liberation from cyclic existence, that  cause  must
be conjoined with the determination to be  free  or  renunciation.  This  is
what I think.

In the prayers that we recite before class begins,  the  verse  that  starts
with,  “Do  not  commit  any  non-virtuous  actions,”   is   essentially   a
presentation on virtue. Not committing non-virtuous actions is the  practice
of virtue. I guess you can relate that to the practice of a person of  small
capacity, i.e., not to engage in negative actions, to do only good things.

“Perform only perfect virtuous actions.” This line is saying that it is  not
sufficient just to engage in virtue as implied by the first line.  One  must
engage in perfect virtue. Without engaging in perfect virtue, one  will  not
be able to achieve liberation from cyclic existence. So virtue alone is  not
sufficient to be the cause for liberation from cyclic existence. It  has  to
be perfect virtue, i.e., a virtue that is conjoined with  the  determination
to be free from cyclic existence. As such, I think  the  second  line  could
indicate the practice of a person of medium capacity.

The third line of that verse is  “Subdue  your  mind  thoroughly,”  which  I
think perhaps may indicate the practice of the person of great capacity.  In
order to achieve full enlightenment, one must subdue one’s mind  completely.
Perhaps this can mean that  one  must  vanquish  and  overcome  one’s  self-
cherishing.

Just to achieve mere liberation is not sufficient. In  order  to  accomplish
the perfect fulfilment of one’s goal and in  particular  to  accomplish  the
perfect fulfilment of the goal of  others,  one  must  achieve  omniscience,
full enlightenment. In  order  to  do  that,  one  must  subdue  one’s  mind
thoroughly in that one must first overcome one’s self-cherishing.

We can also understand the third line of the verse to  mean  overcoming  the
two obscurations,  i.e.,  not  just  the  afflictive  obscurations  but  the
knowledge obscurations as well.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~
REQUEST TO YAMANTAKA


      Verse 92
      I pray you, kill the enemy with your fierce wrath! I pray you,  subdue
      my evil thinking with your great wisdom![1] I  pray  you,  protect  me
      from my evil actions with your great compassion! I pray  you,  destroy
      this Ego once and for all!

This is a verse of request to Yamantaka to destroy  without  any  hesitation
our self-cherishing and self-grasping.

PRACTICE OF TONGLEN


      Verse 93
      However much suffering those in cyclic existence may endure, I pray
      you, heap it surely upon ego-clinging! However many of the five
      poisonous afflictions anyone may experience, I pray you, heap them
      surely upon this ego-clinging, which richly deserves them!

This verse shows the practice of taking on the suffering of others.  One  is
making a request to the deity Yamantaka to bring on all  the  sufferings  of
all sentient beings and direct  them  at  our  “ego-clinging,”  i.e.,  self-
grasping.

As I have said before, before one can do any practice of  tonglen—taking  on
the suffering of others and giving  our  happiness  to  them—one  must  have
reflected well on the faults of self-cherishing. Until we have  developed  a
firm heartfelt conviction from the depths  of  our  hearts  that  our  self-
cherishing is our real enemy and is  the  cause  of  all  our  problems  and
sufferings of this life and since our  beginningless  lifetimes,  only  then
does one do the practice of tonglen. Otherwise, it is not going to work.  So
we need to have the realisation of how terrible our self-cherishing is,  how
it is our real enemy and how it has  been  harming  us  since  beginningless
time. It is only with that heartfelt realisation that one proceeds with  the
practice of taking on the suffering and  causes  of  suffering  of  sentient
beings. We take on their suffering in the form of weapons,  poisons  and  so
forth and heap it onto our self-cherishing.

A person generates the realisation  of  the  faults  of  self-cherishing  by
having thought about them from every angle. Then on this basis, this  person
does the practice of tonglen, taking on the suffering of others.  When  they
meet with problems in life or they fall sick,  instead  of  suffering,  they
feel very happy because they think, “My wish has come true! My prayers  have
come true!” They don’t feel depressed or upset.  In  fact,  they  feel  even
happier with a ‘bring it on’ attitude.

When such people do the visualisation of taking on the suffering of  others,
it is not just talk. They really mean it and wish for this from  the  depths
of their  heart.  Because  they  want  it  so  much,  when  they  meet  with
obstacles, they feel happy as this is what they want.

Of course we are not like that at all. Even  when  we  are  asked  to  think
about or meditate on tonglen, we are already afraid, thinking “If I were  to
meditate on tonglen, what will happen to me? This bad thing will  happen  to
me! ” Without even starting the practice, we already have all these  worries
and fears.

While this is really one of the  best  methods  for  training  the  mind  to
overcome self-cherishing, whether such a practitioner can actually  take  on
the suffering of others is another question. If you think about  it,  it  is
quite difficult to prove that a sincere practice of taking on the  suffering
of others actually results in one experiencing those sufferings in  reality.
What do you think?

Do you think a person who is able to  do  the  practice  of  taking  on  the
suffering of others sincerely is actually able to take on those  sufferings?
Is it possible for him to free someone from  cancer  or  free  someone  from
spirit harms? Yes or no?

Anyway, this visualisation of taking on the suffering of others and  heaping
it on the self-cherishing is a method for reducing the strength of our self-
cherishing to the point of eventually overcoming it.

The practice of taking on the suffering of others is a  method  to  increase
our compassion. For the person  who  has  trained  the  mind  in  developing
bodhicitta and has developed some compassion would actually mean it.  It  is
not  just  talk.  He  really  wants  to  free  sentient  beings  from  their
suffering. Because that is his goal and is what is really  driving  him,  he
means it when he does the practice of taking on the sufferings of others  in
this visualisation. He has no  qualms  about  taking  on  the  suffering  of
others as this is what he is looking for.

“However many of the five poisonous afflictions  anyone  may  experience,  I
pray you, heap them surely upon this  ego-clinging,  which  richly  deserves
them!” The visualisation is the same. Earlier on, there  was  a  description
of taking on the sufferings of all sentient beings. Now  we  are  taking  on
the afflictions of  all  sentient  beings  that  are  the  causes  of  their
suffering. One is taking on their ignorance,  anger,  attachment,  jealousy,
pride and all their karma, throwing them onto our self-grasping.

IDENTIFYING THE ROOTS OF EVIL


      Verse 94
      Although through reasoning I have identified without a doubt  all  the
      roots of evil, if you judge that I am still abetting them, I pray  you
      to destroy the holder himself!

“The roots of evil” refer to the roots of our faults.

This verse is saying: “Even though I recognise and  acknowledge  the  faults
of self-cherishing, I still follow my old ways and still give  in  to  them.
So please destroy me.” How should we understand this verse? “I pray  you  to
destroy the holder himself.” Is it all right for us  to  destroy  ourselves?
What do you think? I am not exactly very  clear  about  the  last  sentence.
Maybe you can think about it. What  does  it  mean  when  it  says,  “Please
destroy me”?  Here “the holder” means the person who has  self-grasping  and
self-cherishing. What do you think is the meaning of that request?

It is clear in the teachings in Aryadeva’s Four Hundreds Stanzas that  says,
“One should not put the blame on sentient beings.  Rather,  one  should  put
the blame on the afflictions.” We should view the afflictions as  the  enemy
but  with  regard  to  sentient  beings,  we  must  always  view  them  with
compassion. So we shouldn’t be destroying anyone including ourselves.

ONLY ONE THING TO BLAME


      Verse 95
      Now, drive all blame onto  one  thing!  I  shall  cultivate  gratitude
      toward all beings, take into my mind what others abhor, and turn  over
      the roots of my virtue to all beings.

“Drive all the blame onto one thing” is like a  summary.  Whatever  problems
or suffering we experience, who should we attribute  the  blame  to?  If  we
want to find someone to blame for all  our  problems,  there  is  only  “one
thing” to blame, that is, our self-cherishing and nothing else.

“I shall cultivate gratitude toward all  beings.”  Always  meditate  on  the
great kindness of all sentient beings. The teachings  are  telling  us  that
every single happiness that we experience arises in dependence  on  sentient
beings. In that sense, all sentient beings are kind so  we  should  meditate
on their great kindness.

When we meet with problems, difficulties  and  suffering,  we  always  blame
someone else other than ourselves. All of us are like  that.  When  anything
goes wrong, it is always someone else  who  is  at  fault  or  the  external
situation that is the cause. This is what we believe.

The teachings  here  are  telling  us  to  reconsider  that  carefully.  The
teachings are telling us, “Don’t do that. The  fault  is  not  outside.  The
fault is inside. If we want to blame  something,  then  there  is  only  one
thing to blame—our self-cherishing!”

For someone who has reflected on the faults  of  self-cherishing  from  many
different angles and who has  reflected  on  the  advantages  of  cherishing
others from many different angles, that person would  be  able  to  take  on
what others do not desire, i.e.,  to take on  all  the  problems,  suffering
and the causes of suffering of  others  on  to  himself.  That  person  will
always be dedicating his roots of virtue for the happiness of others.

TAKING ON THE NEGATIVITIES & AFFLICTIONS OF OTHERS


      Verse 96
      Just as the pattern of colors in a peacock’s feather is due to poison,
      may the afflictions be transformed into the aids to  enlightenment  by
      my taking on the physical, verbal, and mental deeds  of  other  living
      beings, past, present, and future.

The verse here is talking about taking  on  all  the  physical,  verbal  and
mental karma of sentient  beings  together  with  their  afflictions  on  to
oneself. The colours of the feathers of  the  peacock  become  more  vibrant
from ingesting poison. Likewise, here one makes  prayers  that  through  the
practice of taking on  the  physical,  verbal  and  mental  karma,  and  the
afflictions of all sentient beings of the  past,  present  and  future,  may
these not be obstacles for oneself but rather only  be  causes  for  one  to
achieve enlightenment quickly.

Here, one is making a prayer generating the aspiration to be  able  to  take
on the negativities and afflictions of sentient beings. May  that  become  a
cause for one to quickly achieve full enlightenment.


GIVING ONE’S ROOTS OF VIRTUE TO OTHERS

      Verse 97
      I give the roots of my virtue to living beings so they may  be  cured,
      as a poisoned crow is healed by medicine. I dedicate my  life  to  the
      liberation of all beings so they may quickly achieve the buddhahood of
      the Sugata!

This is a way of making the wish, “May those sentient beings whose roots  of
virtue are cut off and whose merit have been depleted, may  their  merit  be
increased because of the dedication of my merit to them.” The analogy is  of
a crow that has ingested poison and is on the verge of  dying.  We  save  it
from death by giving it medicine and helping it recover slowly.

Here, one makes the prayer that through the dedication  of  one’s  merit  to
all sentient beings, as a result of one’s merit, may they  quickly  generate
the conventional and ultimate bodhicitta and through that, may they  achieve
enlightenment quickly.

MUTUAL SUPPORT

      Verse 98
      Until I and those who have been my parents have attained enlightenment
      in the Highest Realm, may we support each other with a single thought,
      even when wandering about in the six states of existence owing to  our
      actions.

Here we are making a prayer that through the practice, may  all  father  and
mother sentient beings and one achieve enlightenment  together,  aiming  for
Akanishta. Until  enlightenment  is  achieved  in  Akanishta,  all  sentient
beings and we have to take numerous rebirths in cyclic existence.  As  such,
one makes the prayer in all those rebirths, “May others and one be  free  of
attachment and hatred. May others and one support one another and  be  close
to one another. May others and one become the mutual support for each  other
to quickly achieve bodhicitta.”

GOING TO THE LOWER REALMS WITH ENTHUSIASM


      Verse 99
      When I enter the three wretched states of existence for  the  sake  of
      even one living being, may I save him or her  from  the  suffering  of
      that wretched destiny without compromising  a  great  being’s  way  of
      life.

Here, one is making a prayer that while one is on the path to  enlightenment
practising the bodhisattvas’ deeds, even when there is a need to  enter  the
lower  realms  to  benefit  just  one  sentient  being,  may   one   do   so
enthusiastically, willingly and happily, just as one would readily go for  a
party or a picnic. This prayer says that when one is  in  the  lower  realms
benefitting  sentient  beings,  may  that  situation   never   cause   one’s
bodhicitta to degenerate. May one lead sentient  beings  out  of  the  lower
realms.
Individuals who have very strong  compassion  actually  make  such  prayers.
They mean  it  and  would  happily  go  to  the  lower  realms  if  it  were
beneficial. They will do so to save even just one being. Having  said  this,
if one really has this kind of aspiration, does one need to  be  fearful  of
the actual sufferings  of  the  lower  realms,  i.e.,  fearing  to  actually
experience them?  Will they actually happen  to  one?  The  commentary  here
says, “Don’t be afraid!”

If motivated by very strong compassion, one makes strong prayers and  aspire
to go to the lowest of the hells,  the  Avici  hells,  to  benefit  sentient
beings because one really means it, do  you  think  one’s  prayers  will  be
actualised?

The answer to this question is this: Instead of  going  to  the  hells,  one
will actually end up in the pure land.

Did you understand the answer?

Khen  Rinpoche:  If  you  understand,  then  that  is  good.  If  you  don’t
understand, ask questions.


MAY PEACE FLOURISH UNHARMED

      Verse 100
      At that very instant, the guards of hell will may realize that I am  a
      guru, and their weapons will turn into a rain of  flowers.  May  peace
      flourish unharmed!

Do you need an explanation of that verse? If not, I will move on.

      Verse 101
      Even those in wretched states of existence shall obtain superknowledge
      and  mantras,  assume  the  bodies  of  gods  and  men,  and  generate
      bodhicitta. In return for my kindness, may they repay me  with  Dharma
      practice! Taking me as their guru, may they properly attend me!


“Superknowledge and mantras” refer to clairvoyance and dharanis.

      Verse 102
      Then, may all the beings in higher  realms  also  deeply  meditate  on
      selflessness, just as I do, cultivating the non-conceptual  meditative
      absorption on the identity of existence and peace. May they  recognize
      this identity!

“The identity of  existence  and  peace”  is  the  aspects  of  samsara  and
nirvana.

PRACTISING ULTIMATE BODHICITTA

      Verse 103
      Having done so I will crush the enemy. Having done  so  I  will  crush
      conceptual construction. After cultivating selflessness  through  non-
      conceptual wisdom, how can I not obtain the causes and effects of  the
      form body?

All the verses up to Verse  102  are  an  explanation  of  the  practice  of
cultivating bodhicitta through overcoming self-cherishing by  means  of  the
method of exchanging self and others that is done on the basis of  realising
the faults of self-cherishing and the advantages of cherishing others.

From this verse onwards is the  explanation  of  the  practice  of  ultimate
bodhicitta. It is not possible to achieve enlightenment through  cultivating
conventional bodhicitta alone. One must also cultivate ultimate  bodhicitta.
In fact, one must practise the combination of these two in order to  achieve
enlightenment.

We will finish the section  of  cultivating  the  ultimate  bodhicitta  next
week.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: The clear nature of our mind is luminous and aware.  What  is  the
meaning of luminous?

Answer: The mind is defined  as  that  which  is  clear  (or  luminous)  and
knowing (aware). Perhaps we can think of the mind’s  clarity  or  luminosity
in terms of the clear light nature of the mind in that the afflictions  have
never abided in the nature of mind. It is easier when we  can  think  of  an
example or an analogy. Maybe water is a good example. The  nature  of  water
is that it is clear. If we think about the clear light nature  of  the  mind
from the perspective of tantra, the afflictions have  never  abided  in  the
nature of this extremely subtle mind.

This extremely subtle mind is covered by a coarser level  of  consciousness.
When the coarser levels  of  the  mind  dissolve,  they  dissolve  into  the
extremely subtle mind. When one arises from the extremely subtle mind,  then
there is the mind of black near-attainment of the reverse order followed  by
the mind of red increase of the reverse order. This is then followed by  the
mind of white appearance of the reverse order.  Basically,  everything  goes
back to the clear light and when one arises from the clear light,  then  the
coarser levels of consciousness come into being starting with  the  mind  of
black near-attainment, the mind of red increase and then the mind  of  white
appearance and so forth. The mind becomes increasingly coarser.

The extremely subtle mind has the power to cognise any object including  the
emptiness of inherent existence. According to the explanation in tantra,  it
is through cognising emptiness with this  extremely  subtle  mind  that  one
achieves enlightenment. Perhaps it is easier to understand the  clear  light
nature of the mind if we were to relate it  to  the  extremely  subtle  mind
according to the explanation of tantra.
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~



ANNOUNCEMENT OF EXAMINATION

Khen Rinpoche: There will be an examination for  this  module  but  I  don’t
know when the examination will be as of now. I am thinking of  how  to  make
it short and sweet. It will not be difficult.  Maybe something that you  can
complete in half an hour.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong

-----------------------
[1] “I pray you, subdue my evil thinking with your great  wisdom”  does  not
appear in Khen Rinpoche’s Tibetan text.


