Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L02final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.811266
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 2                                                             2 July
2015


Eight Verses of Thought Transformation (cont’d): Verse 1: Generating a mind
that cherishes all sentient beings. Verse 2: Considering oneself as the
lowest of all. Verse 3: Practising mindfulness and introspection to counter
our afflictions.


EIGHT VERSES OF THOUGHT TRANSFORMATION (CONT’D)

Verse 1: Generating a mind that cherishes all sentient beings
      Verse 1
      Determined to obtain the greatest possible benefit from  all  sentient
      beings, who are more precious than a wish-fulfilling  jewel,  I  shall
      hold them most dear at all times.

The first verse of the Eight Verses of Thought  Transformation  gets  us  to
widen our mental perspective, to generate a mind  that  takes  into  account
the welfare and happiness of all sentient beings and to  develop,  from  the
beginning, this very courageous thought of cherishing all sentient beings.

Of course that can only arise on the basis of seeing why we should do  this.
We must be able to justify to ourselves  the  reasons  for  developing  this
very expansive perspective.  The  reason  is  stated  in  the  first  verse,
“Determined to obtain the greatest possible benefit ….” When we see that  we
can achieve the highest goal by cherishing all  sentient  beings,  naturally
we will pledge to cherish them. Only then  will  we  generate  the  thought,
“I’m going to do this! I’m really going to develop this mind.”

It is said that ideally for someone who wants to put this into  practice  in
the form of a meditation, the meditation on these verses should be  preceded
by the following:
 • Visualise clearly the objects of refuge and one’s personal deity  who  is
   inseparable from one’s root guru.
 • Develop single-pointed devotion and faith in the guru-deity.
 • One performs the seven-limb practice.
 • Then one makes a wholehearted supplication by first visualising the  flow
   of nectar from the guru-deity entering into oneself through one’s  crown,
   pervading one’s entire  being.  This  purifies  all  the  obstacles  that
   prevent one from cherishing all sentient beings.
 • After that, still with the visualisation of the flow of  nectar  entering
   into one’s crown, one visualises that one receives the  blessings  to  be
   able to develop this wish to cherish all beings.
 • Then one recites the first verse slowly and contemplates its meaning.

This verse says that all sentient beings are more precious  than  the  wish-
fulfilling jewel. We are told that all  the  happiness  of  this  life,  the
happiness of all our future lives, the happiness of liberation from  samsara
and our achievement of full enlightenment are dependent on sentient  beings.
They are able to give us all these levels of happiness.

We have to check  for  ourselves  and  see  whether  this  is  the  case  by
ascertaining and being convinced of the truth of this statement. It is  only
with that conviction,  when  we  see  for  ourselves  that  this  is  really
true—indeed it is the case that sentient beings can bestow on us  all  these
different levels of happiness—that the  wish  wanting  to  cherish  sentient
beings from our own side will arise naturally. When we see the  purpose  and
the benefits of cherishing others from our own side, then  the  wholehearted
commitment to do so will arise. We will make  the  wholehearted  promise  to
ourselves, “I will hold them most dear and cherish them at all times.”

Verse 2: Considering oneself as the lowest of all
      Verse 2
      When in the company of others, I  shall  always  consider  myself  the
      lowest of all, and from the depths of my heart hold  others  dear  and
      supreme.

The next verse tells us that when we interact with others, we should  always
consider ourselves “the lowest of all, and from the depths of my heart  hold
others dear and supreme.”

After generating the expansive mind due to reflecting well on Verse  1,  how
can we translate that into practice in our lives?  Verse  2  tells  us  how.
“When in the company of others,” i.e., in our interactions with  others,  it
doesn’t matter who the other party may  be—it  could  be  our  own  virtuous
friend, the guru, or someone who is usually considered lower than  us,  like
destitute people,  beggars  and  so  forth—from  our  own  side,  we  should
consider that person to be superior to us; we should consider  ourselves  to
be lower than that person.

Verse 2 says that viewing and holding others as superior to  us  has  to  be
sincere and come from the depths of our heart. Then we view others  in  that
way with a respectful attitude. It is evident from our own  experience  that
in our interactions with others, from our own side, if we really think  that
we  are  lower  than  the  other  person,  probably  there  will  be   fewer
difficulties in our relationship with that person.

There are a few things to think about here. When we find  ourselves  feeling
egotistical or proud, at that moment, it is important to focus  on  our  own
mistakes and faults, and the shortcomings we  have.  For  example,  when  we
compare ourselves to a dog, we always think that the dog is lower  than  us.
We believe, “I’m a higher being and am better in every way compared to  that
dog.”
Perhaps we can think about it in this way. In Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  In  Praise
of Dependent Arising, he said that  there  were  people  who  out  of  their
ignorance criticised the Buddha. They cannot  tolerate  his  explanation  of
the emptiness of inherent existence. Due to  their  ignorance,  they  cannot
understand profound dependent arising.[1] Lama  Tsongkhapa  said  that  this
“comes as no surprise,” i.e., it is to be expected that people  who  do  not
have much faith in the Buddha will not accept what he taught.

But Lama Tsongkhapa found  it  very  surprising  that  people  who  admired,
respected and  believed  in  the  Buddha  and  who  accepted  his  teachings
including his teachings on dependent arising cannot accept the emptiness  of
inherent existence.[2]

It is not surprising when people who don’t have faith in  the  Buddhadharma,
who don’t practise or who do not accept the Dharma make mistakes and  commit
negativities. That is to be expected. We pride ourselves in being  Buddhists
with faith in the  Buddha  and  his  teachings.  We  practise  the  Mahayana
teachings. We may say all this yet we don’t have much faith and practice  to
show for it. This is really surprising. If we compare ourselves  to  someone
who is not a Buddhist, who does not have faith in the teachings and  who  is
not practising, in that sense, we are lower than those non-Buddhists.

Going back to the example of  a  dog.  Of  course,  a  dog  cannot  practise
Dharma. That is normal and to be expected. It is hardly surprising. But  for
those of us who claim to accept the Dharma, yet our  conduct  is  completely
contrary to our beliefs, then that is really surprising. In that  sense,  we
can establish that, indeed in many ways, we are lower than a dog.

There are many things that we can think  about.   We  may  have  heard  many
teachings and know the essential points of the  practice,  yet  our  conduct
does not accord with the teachings. Or we have studied a lot of Dharma,  yet
we continue to commit non-virtue and hardly create any virtue in our  entire
life. Then that is a real pity and a great waste. In  those  terms,  we  are
certainly worse than others. If we look at our own life history, having  met
and practised the Dharma for years but have nothing much to show for  it  in
terms of attainments, then we certainly have no valid basis  whatsoever  for
feeling superior to others.

These are the methods to see how we are not superior and  are  indeed  lower
than the other person by seeing all our mistakes, faults and shortcomings.

In order for us to respect the other party, we must see and acknowledge  the
other party’s qualities. A person may be  physically  more  attractive  than
us, wealthier than us and possess something desirable and  of  good  quality
that we do not have.  She may be experiencing some good event in  her  life.
Whatever good quality or good experience it may be, we should  see  that  it
is the result of that person’s  own  karma.  For  example,  that  person  is
richer than us because she is experiencing the result  of  having  practised
generosity in the past.

This is the training of the mind  that  we  can  do—focussing  on  the  good
qualities of others. When we see the good qualities that are evident to  us,
we have to realise that the person has them because they are the results  of
her own practice and good karma.

In the case of not seeing any good qualities from  our  side,  at  the  very
least, we can think that although the good qualities are not evident to  us,
it is possible that this person has some qualities that we  are  not  seeing
yet. This is the training of the mind.

Chandrakirti said in his Supplement to the Middle Way that for  someone  who
is actively engaged in the practice of the  perfection  of  generosity—i.e.,
someone who always wants to  enhance  his  practice  of  giving—it  is  very
possible  that  one  of  the  recipients  of  his  generosity  could  be   a
bodhisattva. If one of the recipients is really a bodhisattva, then he  will
accumulate much merit because of having given to a bodhisattva.  The  Buddha
said that it was very difficult to judge with certainty who the other  party
might be. We can’t  truly  tell  who  they  really  are,  whether  they  are
ordinary beings or not. It is not possible.

There are a number of historical accounts of  high  practitioners  who  have
chosen to keep a low profile. One such example was Dromtonpa, a disciple  of
Lama  Atisha,  who  was  a  practitioner  of  the  bodhicitta  practice   of
exchanging self and others. Dromtonpa himself had the aspect of a  lay,  not
an ordained, person.

When people looked at Dromtonpa, they would have assumed that he was a  very
ordinary, simple and  unassuming  person  who  doesn’t  know  anything.  But
Dromtonpa had many disciples. One of them was Geshe Chekawa.

There was a time when Dromtonpa was invited to teach at the place where  his
disciple, Geshe Chekawa, resided. In Tibet, when the lamas  moved  from  one
place to another, usually they  would  travel  with  a  huge  procession  of
horses, many attendants and helpers.

On his way to the teaching venue, Dromtonpa was walking  alone  without  any
attendants nor was he riding a horse. He was simply walking to the  teaching
venue. Geshe Chekawa’s monastery was situated on a high ground. In order  to
reach it, he had to cross a pass that was going uphill.

Along the way, he met a lay  tantric  practitioner  who  was  carrying  many
things. When the lay tantric practitioner saw Dromtonpa coming up, he  asked
Dromtonpa, “Can you help me to carry my things?”

Dromtonpa said, “Yes. Sure.”

After walking for a while, the lay tantric practitioner decided to take  off
his boots. He asked Dromtonpa to carry them. Dromtonpa did  so  happily  and
carried the boots over his shoulder.
They walked up the slope gradually. As they got  nearer  to  the  monastery,
the lay tantric practitioner saw monks lined up along the  path  leading  to
the monastery  as  if  they  were  waiting  for  someone.  The  lay  tantric
practitioner wondered and asked Dromtonpa, “What is happening here?”

Dromtonpa then said, “I assume they are waiting for me.”

The lay tantric practitioner was so ashamed,  he  took  all  his  belongings
back from Dromtonpa, quickly gathered them and fled.

Because Dromtonpa was someone  who  always  practised  the  instructions  of
exchanging self and others, he truly viewed himself  as  lower  than  others
and he applied that knowledge into practice.  As such, he was  really  happy
to carry whatever he was asked by this lay person, be it his  boots  or  his
luggage. Dromtonpa did not experience any  difficulties  because  he  really
saw himself to be lower than his travelling companion.

We study the three scriptural collections, the Tripitaka,  for  the  purpose
of subduing our pride. If we are  able  to  consider  ourselves  lower  than
others, we  stand  to  benefit  because  we  will  have  less  problems  and
difficulties and we will create the conditions for gaining good qualities.

It is very clear when we look at our own experience. This  is  exactly  what
has happened in our own life and in our relations with others.  We  consider
ourselves to be more important and we  prioritize  ourselves  above  others,
thinking, “I am better than him.” Then there are bound to  be  difficulties,
challenges and disharmony in the relationship. This is very clear  from  our
own experience.

This is the flavour of the teachings of  the  great  Kadampa  masters.  They
are, to use a modern expression, ‘in your face’, by showing us exactly  what
our problems are. They dig out all our faults and  list  them  one  by  one.
They show us, “This is the problem. This is the fault. You  will  experience
all these problems because of having these faults.”

It is quite obvious that egoistical people have lots  of  problems  in  this
life in their interactions with others. Those problems  will  extend  beyond
this life. The  great  Kadampa  masters  said  that  the  disadvantages  and
problems that we are experiencing because of our pride will  be  even  worse
in our future lives in that they  will  result  in  rebirths  in  the  lower
realms. Even if we were born as humans, we will be born in poverty or  in  a
lower caste and others will look down upon us.

Verse  3:  Practising  mindfulness  and   introspection   to   counter   our
afflictions
      Verse 3
      Vigilant, the moment a delusion appears in my mind, endangering myself
      and others, I shall confront and avert it without delay


We have to consider our shortcomings and faults from many  angles.  We  also
have to look at the positive qualities of others from  various  angles.  But
even when we succeed in doing this, we may still experience difficulties  in
our practice because our  afflictions—ignorance,  anger  and  attachment—are
still arising very strongly.

Verse 3 is telling us what we should do when the afflictions  arise  in  our
mind. If we consider ourselves lower than others and the afflictions do  not
arise, then that is well and good. But what if the afflictions  still  arise
even though we hold ourselves lower than others? What  we  should  do  then?
Verse 3 is the answer.

We must be vigilant, i.e., practise introspection, in our conduct and  check
our mind all the time. In general, there are four kinds of conduct:
1. when we are engaged in activities
2. when we are travelling
3. when we are seated
4. when we are lying down

This verse is saying that whatever activities one may be engaged  in—whether
one  is  walking,  sitting,  lying  down  and  so  forth—we  must  rely   on
mindfulness  and  introspection  (or  vigilance)  to   check   whether   the
afflictions are manifesting and whether we are following them.

When we talk about conduct, we are talking about the conduct  of  our  body,
speech and mind. Whatever may be happening with us physically,  verbally  or
mentally, we have to rely on mindfulness and introspection  to  see  whether
these  actions  are  due  to  the  manifestation  of  our  afflictions,  the
afflictions  being   the   three   mental   poisons—ignorance,   anger   and
attachment—jealousy, pride and  so  forth.  These  activities  will  include
studying the Dharma, listening to the Dharma, reciting  mantras,  doing  our
daily prayers, prostrations or circumambulations, when  we  are  in  retreat
and so forth.

The crucial point is that we have to be mindful and be  vigilant  always  to
check whether we are following our afflictions or  whether  our  afflictions
are manifesting. If we rely on mindfulness and introspection, we  should  be
able to recognise the afflictions when they arise, deal with  them  and  not
follow after them. The verse is saying that we should  rely  on  mindfulness
and introspection to check for the  arising  of  our  afflictions.  When  we
discover that our afflictions are manifesting, we should  not  wait  but  we
should “confront and avert it without delay.”

Our problem is that  we  don’t  even  recognise  when  the  afflictions  are
arising. In order to be aware that afflictions are arising in our  mind,  we
need to be accustomed to mindfulness and  introspection  for  without  them,
when afflictions arise, we do not even know they have arisen.  For  example,
we are usually not able  to  detect  desire  when  it  arises.  Our  desires
snowball and only when they become very strong  and  gross  do  we  suddenly
feel their presence and only then, maybe, we will  try  to  confront  it  by
applying the antidote.

But when the affliction is manifesting so strongly, even if we were  to  try
to overcome it, it is very difficult and challenging. Would  it  not  be  so
much easier not to allow the affliction to arise in  the  first  place?  And
even when it does arise, if we are able to detect it has arisen  right  from
the very beginning due to having mindfulness and introspection, we  will  be
able to deal with it there and then. Overcoming it would be much easier  and
less challenging.

If we claim to be practitioners and really want to practise,  then  we  have
to cultivate mindfulness and introspection with respect to our  conduct  and
activities  constantly  at  all  times.   This  is  said  to  be   extremely
important.

What does life have in stall for us if we do not recognise  the  afflictions
when they arise but instead  we  just  follow  after  them  when  they  have
arisen?
 • First, we don’t recognise that they have arisen.
 • Even when we recognise they have arisen, we do not apply any antidote  to
   counteract them.
 • What will happen when we simply allow our desire, anger and so  forth  to
   arise? Here,  the  verse  says,  “endangering  myself  and  others.”  The
   afflictions will harm us and others.
 • Therefore, we have to confront and avert them right away.

Here, one is making a pledge to oneself, “I  will  confront  and  avert  the
afflictions without delay. I will  practise  mindfulness  and  introspection
and I will apply the antidotes right away.”

Due to our lack of mindfulness and introspection, we do not really  see  the
arising of the afflictions. But when they do arise, in the  beginning,  they
are  relatively  weaker  in  strength  compared  to  when  they  are   fully
developed. That is why when afflictions arise, it  is  really  difficult  to
spot them when we do not have mindfulness and introspection.

Because of not seeing the arising of  the  afflictions,  they  snowball  and
become very  strong.  When  the  afflictions  become  very  strong  and  are
manifesting in a powerful way, what do they do?

Earlier on, we had talked about the predispositions of the afflictions  that
leave an imprint on the mind. When the afflictions  snowball  to  the  point
when they become very powerful, that is the time when a very strong  imprint
is left on our mind. What does this  mean?  It  means  we  are  leaving  the
potential on our mind to be afflicted  in  the  same  way  again,  for  that
desire or anger to arise strongly again in the future.

If we are not aware of the  afflictions  arising  and  we  don’t  apply  the
antidotes to them right away, then the afflictions will snowball and  become
stronger and  stronger.  The  stronger  the  affliction,  the  stronger  the
imprint left on our mind. That is why they are called imprints.

When a very strong imprint of the affliction is left on our mind, what  does
it do to us? It makes us so habituated  with  the  affliction  that  all  it
takes, for example, for desire to arise is meeting a small desirable  object
in the future. Because of  our  familiarity  with  desire,  we  will  be  so
attached to and have great desire for even small  insignificant  objects  of
desire.

Likewise, because of being so habituated with our anger, all we need  is  to
meet with some slight difficulty or  very  small  unpleasant  condition.  We
will get very upset right away.

So instead of letting ourselves follow after our  afflictions  and  becoming
more and more habituated with them, if from the beginning, we  see  them  as
faults and mistakes and confront  them  as  much  as  possible,  then  these
afflictions will not be so strong. As such, the imprint that is left on  our
mind will also be much weaker so much so that in the future, even if  we  do
meet with, say, many objects of attachment, because of not  following  after
our desires and attachment, we will not be attached to them so  easily.  And
even if attachment should arise, it is weak and not as strong as it can  be.
Because our desire is not so strong in the first place, it is said  that  if
we do meet with some small object of attachment,  attachment  may  not  even
arise.

Shantideva emphasised in his Engaging in  the  Bodhisattva  Deeds  that  our
afflictions are our main enemies. He emphasised the  importance  of  dealing
the afflictions using mindfulness and introspection. We  have  studied  that
text already where so much was  said  about  how  terrible  the  afflictions
are.[3]

Usually our concept of the enemy is that it is someone  external.  But  what
the teachings tell us is that that  external  enemy  is  nowhere  nearly  as
dangerous as our internal enemy, the afflictions. An external enemy  may  be
a person who harms us and may even take our  life.  But  at  the  most,  the
enemy can only harm us for the duration of this  one  lifetime  whereas  our
afflictions can harm us in all our lifetimes.[4]

The teachings tell us what we already know. The external enemy  can  be  won
over with gifts, by talking to them and so forth. We can even  make  friends
with the external enemy. That is possible. However, if we were  to  befriend
the enemy of our afflictions, the closer we are to them, then  the  more  we
will give in to them and in return, we  will  receive  more  harm  from  our
afflictions.[5]

It is said that no matter how powerful our external enemy may be,  they  are
nowhere near to being as powerful as our afflictions. The teachings tell  us
that even if every single person on this planet hates  us  and  becomes  our
enemy, there is nothing he or she can do to throw us into the lower  realms.
They do not have the power to send us to the lowest of the  hot  hells,  the
relentless hell of Avici. But our afflictions can do  that.  They  have  the
power to  throw  us  into  the  lowest  of  the  hot  hells.  As  such,  our
afflictions are far more deadly than the external enemy.[6]

The teachings tell us  that  no  matter  how  deadly  or  how  powerful  our
external enemy may be and no matter how many enemies we may have,  they  can
only harm our possessions or harm us physically.  At  the  very  most,  what
can happen is that they can take our life but that’s about it. The  external
enemy can only do this much. He cannot harm us beyond this life.

But our afflictions can harm us in all our lifetimes.  Our  afflictions  can
throw us into the worst suffering, the sufferings of the lower realms.

When the conditions are right, we can expel our enemy to a faraway place  or
we can physically distance ourselves from that  person.  Sometimes,  despite
our best efforts, he may still come back; literally, the external enemy  may
still knock at our door.

Khen Rinpoche: So be careful!

The external enemy can come back but the internal enemy—our  afflictions—can
never  come  back  to  harm  us  provided  we  rely   on   mindfulness   and
introspection.[7]

If we don’t think about this deeply, it is  not  apparent  to  us  that  our
afflictions are so deadly  and  harmful.  However,  if  we  were  to  really
reflect on this, gradually, we will come to see  how  powerful,  deadly  and
harmful our  afflictions  are.  Once  we  see  that,  we  can  see  how  the
afflictions endanger ourselves.

If we, ourselves, are endangered by our afflictions, then we can infer  that
everyone else will also be endangered by their own afflictions. As such,  as
it says in the verse, “endangering myself and others.”

Chandrakirti said in his Supplement to the Middle Way  that  even  a  person
who has a very good physical demeanour  and  generally  is  pleasant-looking
would become ugly when he is upset. As said  in  the  teachings,  having  an
unattractive  physical  appearance  is  the  karmic  result  of  a  lack  of
patience, which is the result of anger. When we are upset, probably we  will
not look very good and our physical appearance is unlikely to please  others
or to cause them to feel happy looking at us.

Khen Rinpoche: Maybe for some people, when they  get  so  angry,  they  just
smile. I am not sure. An angry smile you say? Could be but you can see  that
it is not really a smile, right?

With respect to someone who is usually regarded as  a  good  person,  people
will say, “This is a good person. He is a very kind  person.”  But  if  that
person gets angry, he is no longer considered to be a good person.

When we are upset and our anger is manifesting, we  cannot  think  straight.
Usually we are able to tell what is right, what is wrong, what  is  good  to
do and what is not good to do, i.e., we can discriminate between  right  and
wrong.  However,  when  our  anger  manifests,  we  lose  our   ability   to
discriminate,  our  ability  of  discernment  and  our  sense  of  what   is
appropriate and what is not. All this could be due to very strong  anger  or
very strong desire.

You may be someone who is usually quite wise  and  steady,  knowing  how  to
sort things out. But when the afflictions  are  very  strong  and  overwhelm
you, at those times, you are no longer able to think straight and  you  lose
all your good qualities.

We really have to know well the faults of our afflictions. We need  to  know
how we harm ourselves by following them, how they harm others  and  how,  in
general, afflictions harm everyone

When we talk about samsara—circling from life to life due to our  karma  and
afflictions—the primary cause is the  afflictions.  It  is  the  afflictions
that cause us to suffer from life to life. Circling from  life  to  life  is
the source of all problems and suffering.

If we can really feel and see  that,  naturally,  we  will  be  mindful  and
exercise  introspection  at  all  times  to  guard  ourselves  against   our
afflictions as much  as  possible.  In  order  to  help  us  deal  with  our
afflictions, a variety of methods were taught.

We can deal with the afflictions by:
 • adopting the correct view
 • the cultivation of meditation
 • modifying our conduct, i.e., primarily, our physical and verbal conduct.

SUMMARY

Verse 2 is the advice  to  consider  ourselves  lower  than  others  and  to
cherish and hold others as superior. Essentially, it is  advice  on  how  to
work with our ego and pride.

Verse 3 advises that if you consider yourself to be  a  practitioner,   then
at all times, regardless of what we are doing—even when  we  are  doing  our
daily prayers, recitations and so forth—we have to be mindful and  vigilant,
constantly checking our mind to see whether the afflictions are  arising  or
not.

With regard to whatever we do, we have  to  be  honest  with  ourselves  and
check whether these activities—our prayers and so forth—are  really  hurting
our  afflictions  and  becoming  an  antidote  to  the  afflictions.  It  is
emphasised very strongly in the  teachings  that  we  must  be  mindful  and
vigilant at all times, guarding our mind against our  afflictions.  This  is
extremely important.

If we don’t work with our afflictions, we are not mindful and  vigilant  and
we do not apply  any  antidotes,  the  teachings  say  that  we  are  not  a
practitioner. We are not a real practitioner at all.  We  may  look  like  a
practitioner. We may have the form or appearance of a  practitioner  but  in
reality, we not a practitioner.

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] “That some, hostile to you,/ held as the slaves of ignorance,/ are
unable to bear the sounds of no self-nature/ comes as no surprise.” (Page
227, The Splendour of an Autumn Moon—The Devotional Verse of Tsongkhapa,
translated and introduced by Gavin Kilty. © 2001 Gavin Kilty, Wisdom
Publications.
[2] “That others, accepting dependent arising,/ the crown jewel of your
teaching,/ are unable to tolerate the roar of emptiness/ does surprise me.”
(Ibid., page 227).
[3] Chapter 4 on conscientiousness.
[4] “All other enemies are incapable/ Of such a length of time/  As  can  my
afflictions,/ The long-time enemy with neither beginning  nor  end.”  (Verse
32, Chapter 4, Page 18, Engaging in the Deeds of a  Bodhisattva,  translated
by Toh Sze Gee. ©Toh Sze Gee 2006, Revised 2014).
[5] “If I agreeably honour and rely upon [others],/ All will  enact  benefit
and happiness,/ But if I rely upon these afflictions/ In return  I  will  be
harmed by suffering.” (Verse 33, Chapter 4, Ibid., page 18—19).
[6] “Should even all the gods and demi-gods/ Rise up against me as my
enemies, /They cannot lead me to nor place me in/ The fires of Relentless
Torment.” (Verse 30, Chapter 4). “But this foe, the powerful afflictions,/
In an instant can cast me there,/ Which when met will cause not even the
ashes/ Of Mount Meru to remain.” (Verse 31, Chapter 4, Ibid., page 18).

[7] “Ordinary enemies when expelled from one country/ Simply settle down  in
another and embrace it,/ And when their capability is  recovered  they  then
return;/ But the way of this enemy, my afflictions, is  different.”   (Verse
45, Chapter 4, Ibid., page 20).

