Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L11final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.625673
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove: Two Buddhist Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for use in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 11                                                   27 August 2015


Q & A & Discussion: Ordinary bodhisattvas taking rebirth due to karma and
delusions. Is there craving and grasping in the continuum of a superior.
Are the bodies of bodhisattva superiors true suffering? What is a mental
body? The root text: Verses 28—30. Verse 28: Setting aside the Dharma.
Verse 29: Disrespecting the textual and realisational Dharma. Verse 30:
Delighting in the afflictions.


ORDINARY BODHISATTVAS TAKING REBIRTH DUE TO KARMA AND DELUSIONS

Question: Bodhisattvas  are  disenchanted  with  taking  rebirth  in  cyclic
existence through karma and delusions. But there are  ordinary  bodhisattvas
who do take rebirth through karma and delusions.  Under  what  circumstances
does this happen?

Khen Rinpoche: Why are you asking this question?

Student 1:  I am curious because I cannot find the answer.

Khen Rinpoche: You must have a reason. Why are you wondering about this?

Student 1: Because  to  me,  there  is  a  contradiction.  Bodhisattvas  are
disenchanted with taking rebirth through karma and delusions but  there  are
ordinary bodhisattvas who take rebirth in that way. That is my qualm.

Khen Rinpoche: Can anybody answer this question? He thinks that there  is  a
contradiction. Bodhisattvas already have renunciation so why  do  they  take
rebirth in samsara again due to karma and affliction?

Student 2:  They take rebirth  because  they  have  not  realised  emptiness
directly. That is why they still have the ignorance of the twelve links.  Do
all ordinary bodhisattvas go to the pure land?

Khen  Rinpoche:  Student  1’s  qualm  is  that  bodhisattvas  have   already
renounced samsara so why are they still taking rebirth in samsara?

Student 2:  I think the bodhisattva has even stronger compassion so he  does
not primarily focus on realising emptiness in order to be liberated.  Rather
he focusses more on cultivating the bodhisattva path.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that therefore  he  has  to  take  rebirth  in
samsara due to karma and delusions?  Is  that  your  reason?  So  your  last
statement should be like this: Therefore, the ordinary bodhisattvas have  to
take rebirth in samsara due to karma and delusions.

Student 2:  Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Your statement doesn’t fit.

Does the bodhisattva take rebirth intentionally and by choice due  to  karma
and delusions?

Student 2:  No.

Khen Rinpoche: The consequence of your answer is  that  motivated  by  great
compassion, the  bodhisattva  purposely  takes  rebirth  due  to  karma  and
afflictions in samsara because  he  wants  to  benefit  sentient  beings  in
samsara

Khen Rinpoche: What Student 1 has asked is a very simple  question  but  you
must know how to answer it. You must understand what he  is  asking.  He  is
asking why the ordinary  bodhisattva  who  already  has  renunciation  takes
rebirth  in  samsara  due  to  karma  and  delusions?  He  thinks  this   is
contradictory.

(Khen Rinpoche selects a student to answer this question).

Student 3:  I think it is because they still do not have total control  over
their rebirth, therefore it is possible that they will still  take  rebirth.
We all don’t like to get sick, but because we have no control over this,  we
still get sick. I think it is similar to  that.  The  ordinary  bodhisattvas
still have ignorance so they will still take uncontrolled rebirth.

Khen Rinpoche: If one has ignorance, does it  necessarily  follow  that  one
will take rebirth?

Student 3:  It does not necessarily follow but it could happen.

Khen Rinpoche: You  still  have  to  answer  the  question,  “Why  does  the
ordinary bodhisattvas still take rebirth due to karma and affliction?”

Student 3:   Because they still have grasping.

Khen Rinpoche: You must know what you are saying. Just now you  said  it  is
because they have ignorance.

Student 3: They still have craving and grasping so at that  time  of  death,
craving and grasping could still happen for them  to  ripen  their  previous
karma that they have created to take rebirth in samsara.

Khen Rinpoche: What is the reason for them to have craving and grasping?

Student 3:   Because they have not overcome craving and grasping!

Khen Rinpoche: You are not answering the question.  You  are  repeating  the
same thing.
Student 3:   I thought it is because they still have the dependent link …

Khen Rinpoche: Why do they still have these links?

Student 3:  Because they still grasp on to true existence, i.e., they  still
have the apprehension  of  true  existence  and  from  there,  they  develop
craving and grasping.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that because he still has the apprehension  of
true existence, therefore he has craving and grasping?

Student 3: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Is that the correct reason?

Student 3: I thought they are the causes that will cause karma to ripen.

Khen Rinpoche: Is that the correct reason?

Student 3: I don’t know. I thought that was the reason.

Khen Rinpoche: There is no pervasion. When one has the apprehension of  true
existence, does one necessarily have craving and grasping?

Student 3: Not necessarily.

Khen Rinpoche: If it is  not  necessarily  so,  then  you  cannot  say  that
because there is apprehension  of  true  existence,  you  have  craving  and
grasping.  Earlier on, you said because there is the  apprehension  of  true
existence, and with that as the  reason,  therefore  there  is  craving  and
grasping.

Are the others getting what I’m talking about? You must listen  to  what  he
says and what I’m saying. This is also  part  of  learning  on  how  to  ask
questions. It is just one question. Somebody answers but it  does  not  stop
there.

Student 3: I don’t know what other reason there can be.

Khen Rinpoche: The  question  that  Student  1  posed  was  that  while  the
bodhisattvas have disenchantment with samsara and have renunciation, yet  on
the other hand, ordinary bodhisattvas take rebirth in cyclic  existence  due
to karma and afflictions. Is there a contradiction? If  the  answer  is  no,
how do you explain that there is no contradiction?

Student 3: Even though the bodhisattvas are disenchanted with samsara,  some
ordinary bodhisattvas still do not have control over their  rebirth  because
they still have craving and grasping. That is why the karma can still  ripen
for them to take rebirth in samsara.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Quite  OK.  But  answer  this:  why   do   these   ordinary
bodhisattvas have craving and grasping?

Student 3: Is it because before that they have feeling?

Khen Rinpoche: Then before feeling, what do they have?

Student 3: Contact.

Khen Rinpoche: Before contact, what do they have?

Student 3:  Before  contact  comes  the  six  sources,  name  and  form  and
consciousness. Before that, they have karma. Then ignorance.

Khen Rinpoche: After ignorance, what do they have?

Student 3: Karma and compositional factors.

Khen Rinpoche: Before ignorance, what do they have?

Student 3: The apprehension of true existence.

Khen Rinpoche: OK. Never mind.

Precisely because these ordinary bodhisattvas have  attained  the  path,  so
they necessarily have renunciation. They  have  projecting  karma  that  was
accumulated from the past. With many such projecting karmas,  they  have  no
choice but to take rebirth in cyclic existence  due  to  the  force  of  the
projecting karma they have accumulated before. They  don’t  have  a  choice.
They have no control. So although they  have  generated  renunciation,  they
have not yet abandoned projecting karma.

IS THERE CRAVING & GRASPING IN THE CONTINUUM OF A SUPERIOR

Now a question for you all: Is there craving and grasping in  the  continuum
of someone who has realised emptiness directly?

(Khen Rinpoche selects a student to answer this question).

Student 4: Yes, they still have craving and grasping.

Khen Rinpoche: Give an example that they have this and explain more.

Student 4: On the second ground, they have  not  abandoned  the  afflictions
yet.

Khen Rinpoche: Then on the third ground?

Student 4: On the third ground, yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Fourth ground?

Student 4: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Fifth ground?

Student 4: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Sixth ground?

Student 4: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Seventh ground?

Student 4: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche:  Eighth ground? Ninth ground? Tenth ground?

Student 4: On the pure grounds—the eighth, ninth and tenth grounds—he  won’t
have craving and grasping.

Khen Rinpoche: Why?

Student 4:  Because he has abandoned the afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche: OK. Good.

If there is the apprehension of true  existence  in  one’s  mind,  does  one
necessarily have craving and grasping?

Student 4: You are talking about the pure grounds?

Khen Rinpoche: If there is the apprehension  of  true  existence,  does  one
necessarily have craving and grasping?

Student 4:  Not necessarily.

Khen Rinpoche:  Posit an illustration.

Student 4:  The tenth ground bodhisattva.

Khen Rinpoche:  Does  the  bodhisattva  on  the  tenth  ground  possess  the
apprehension of true existence?

Student 4: No.

Khen Rinpoche: Then why do you posit that as  an  illustration  of  somebody
who has the apprehension of true existence but not necessarily  craving  and
grasping? There is no need to talk  about  that  because  the  tenth  ground
bodhisattva does not have the apprehension of true existence.

Student 4:  Did you say, “appearance” or “apprehension”?  Yes,  if  one  has
the apprehension of true existence, it necessarily means that one will  have
craving and grasping. The example is myself.

Khen Rinpoche: If there is craving and grasping, is it  not  the  case  that
you will definitely take rebirth in cyclic existence?

Student 4: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Do bodhisattva superiors take rebirth  in  cyclic  existence?
Is their rebirth in cyclic existence due to a karmic seed that is  nourished
by craving and grasping?

Student 4: At which ground?

Khen Rinpoche:  You can say first ground, second  ground  and  so  forth.  I
give you up to the seventh ground.  You  can  choose  whichever  ground  you
like.

Student 4: If you are asking whether at the seventh ground, the  bodhisattva
superior takes rebirth due to craving and grasping, the answer is yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t there then the fallacy of bodhisattva superiors  taking
rebirth due to karma and afflictions?

Student 4: On the eighth ground, he only achieves liberation. So before  the
eighth ground, i.e., on the seventh ground, he still has afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche:  Are  you  saying  that  bodhisattva  superiors—for  example,
those on  the  first,  second  and  third  grounds—take  rebirth  in  cyclic
existence due to karma and afflictions? Are you saying that?

Student 4: I have to say that.

Khen  Rinpoche:  As  such,  then  we  cannot  talk  about  such  bodhisattva
superiors possessing mental bodies.

Student 4: Actually I have a qualm. In  the  First  Basic  Program,  in  the
buddhanature module, Rinpoche said that they  have  a  mental  body  on  the
eighth, ninth and tenth grounds, not on the first to  the  seventh  grounds.
But in this  Second  Basic  Program,  in  the  module  on  Engaging  in  the
Bodhisattva Deeds, you said that the  mental  body  starts  from  the  first
ground onwards.

Khen Rinpoche: So you think they do not have a mental body?


ARE THE BODIES OF BODHISATTVA SUPERIORS TRUE SUFFERING?

In short, you are saying that the bodhisattva superiors—for  example,  those
who are on the first, second grounds and  so  forth—do  not  have  a  mental
body. They have a contaminated body. Therefore, they  have  true  suffering.
As such, the bodies of such bodhisattva superiors would be true suffering.

Student 4: I would have to say yes because they have not reached the  eighth
ground.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that from the first until the seventh  ground,
the bodhisattva’s  body  is  still  the  same  as  our  body?  There  is  no
difference and it is still true suffering.

Does anybody agree or disagree with that? (Khen Rinpoche selects  a  student
to answer this question).

If you disagree with him and if  it  is  not  correct,  then  you  make  the
correction.

Student 5: I disagree with him because it would mean  that  the  bodhisattva
still possesses the twelve links that are in the class of afflictions.  This
means that as they are progressing on the path to abandon the twelve  links,
at the same time, they are still producing the twelve links and  this  means
that they will never be able to be free of these twelve links.

Khen Rinpoche: You are not really answering the question.

What you are saying has nothing to do with his view. If his view  is  wrong,
you must correct it. What logic do you have to show that  his  view  is  not
correct?

Student 5:  My logic is that the bodhisattva will continue  to  produce  the
twelve links of the class of afflictions. This means that he  will  continue
to produce the twelve links even as he is continuing to abandon  the  twelve
links.

Khen Rinpoche:  Student 4 is not talking about producing the  karma.  He  is
talking about taking rebirth due to the twelve links.

Student 5: That means that he  will  not  have  the  direct  realisation  of
emptiness to stop that production.

Khen Rinpoche:  But you know that the bodhisattva superior is  not  creating
new karma. Are you still saying that the  bodhisattva  superior  will  still
take rebirth in samsara due to karma and afflictions.  Do you accept that?

Student 5: No, because he will have the direct realisation of emptiness  and
will not  accumulate  further  the  twelve  links  that  are  the  class  of
afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche:  Now you accept that.

Student 5: This means that he will not be producing the twelve links and  he
will also not be taking rebirth due to those twelve  links  because  he  has
the direct realisation of emptiness that is  powerful  enough  to  stop  the
projecting karma from manifesting or ripening.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that once you realise emptiness directly,  you
will not take rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions?

Student 5: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche:  Essentially, what you are saying is that  once  you  realise
emptiness directly, you necessarily do not have craving and grasping.

Student 5: Of the twelve links in the class of afflictions, yes.

Khen Rinpoche:  Student 4 is saying the opposite of that.

Student 5: Therefore, he has the mental body that is produced by the  twelve
links  of  the  class  of  knowledge  obscurations,   by   the   levels   of
predisposition and so on.

Khen Rinpoche:  What Student 4 is  saying  is  that  even  though  you  have
realised emptiness directly, you still have craving and grasping.  As  such,
those individuals will still take rebirth in  samsara  due  to  craving  and
grasping, i.e., essentially karma and  afflictions.  Your  position  is  the
complete opposite.

Student 5: Even though he may have ignorance as well as its imprints in  his
continuum, he does not newly produce a set of twelve links anymore.

Khen Rinpoche: The basis of debate is not that point. What  you  are  saying
is that once you realise emptiness directly, you do  not  have  craving  and
grasping, that definitely, you will not take  rebirth  due  to  craving  and
grasping.

Khen Rinpoche:  What Student 4 said is wrong. What you are  saying  is  also
wrong.

Is what Student 5 said correct or incorrect? If  it  is  not  correct,  then
give an example.

Student 6: An example of someone who directly realises emptiness  but  still
have craving and grasping is a stream-enterer or once-returner who needs  to
take rebirth in the desire realm.

Khen Rinpoche:  Good. Then how about what Student 4 said?

Student 6 (addressing Student 4):  You are saying  that  the  first  to  the
seventh ground is still true suffering. Do you accept that the first  ground
bodhisattva can manifest 100 bodies and that the second  ground  bodhisattva
can manifest even more bodies? Does that  mean  that  they  are  manifesting
more true suffering?

Khen Rinpoche:  Good.  Good.  So  when  the  bodhisattvas  reach  the  first
ground, they  can  manifest  1000  bodies.   This  would  mean  that  he  is
producing 1000 suffering bodies!

Student 4: Yes. On the first  ground,  they  manifest  100  bodies.  On  the
second ground, they manifest 1000 bodies,

Khen Rinpoche: He (Student 6) is asking you, “Why are  they  producing  more
suffering bodies?”

Student 4: For them,  their  concern  is  not  suffering.  For  them,  their
concern is helping others. The motivation for them is to help others.

Khen Rinpoche: They are still suffering.

Student 4: They may have suffering but  for  them,  their  aim  is  to  help
others.

My thesis is that before they reach the eight ground  or  the  pure  ground,
they still have ignorance.

Khen Rinpoche:  We accept  that  there  is  still  ignorance.  There  is  no
question about that. Nobody is debating about that.

Student: 4: Then what is your qualm? (Laughter from the class).

Khen Rinpoche: The qualm is that after you reach the first ground,  you  are
producing more suffering bodies. Then at the second ground, there is  double
(the amount of suffering bodies).

Student 4: I think there is no pervasion. It is like someone  who  prays  to
go to hell to help those in the hell realms. That doesn’t mean that he  will
suffer in the hell realms.

Khen Rinpoche: The bodhisattva emanates and goes  to  hell  but  he  doesn’t
suffer. It follows that the bodhisattva’s body is not true suffering.  There
is no pain and therefore there is no true suffering.

It is mentioned in the teachings on the perfection  of  generosity  that  if
you are not a bodhisattva superior, you are not  encouraged  or  allowed  to
give your body away.  Once you become a bodhisattva superior, you  can  give
your body away then.

It is said that the more the bodhisattvas  give  away,  the  more  happiness
they feel. With each additional body part they give  away,  they  experience
that much more happiness in return.

What does that prove? It proves that their body is not true suffering.  That
is the point.

Student 4: It proves that their compassion for others is greater than  their
self-interest.
So even when they are tortured, they will not feel the suffering.  In  their
mind-stream, they will not feel the true suffering. They will not  feel  the
pain because their aim is to help others.

Khen  Rinpoche:  The  supreme-mundane-qualities  level  of   the   path   of
preparation immediately precedes the  attainment  of  the  path  of  seeing.
This level of the path of preparation progresses onto the path of seeing  in
the same continuous meditative equipoise.

What is the difference between the body of the bodhisattva on  the  supreme-
mundane-qualities level of the path of preparation and the next moment  when
he enters the path of seeing? What is the body of the  bodhisattva  when  he
is already on the path of seeing?

Student 4: It is the same physical body.

Khen Rinpoche:  With  that  same  body,  the  bodhisattva  on  the  path  of
preparation  enters  the  path  of  seeing.  Does  that  mean   he   becomes
enlightened in the same body?

Student 4:  I get your logic.  You cannot depend on the  sutric  path  alone
to attain enlightenment.

Khen Rinpoche: Let’s come back to the seventh ground. At the last moment  on
the seventh ground and at  the  first  moment  on  the  eighth  ground,  you
asserted earlier that there is a mental body at that time. Is  it  the  same
body or is there any difference in the body?

Student 4: I would have to say no. From  the  tantric  point  of  view,  the
sutric path will not be able to get one to enlightenment.

Khen Rinpoche: There is a verse in  Maitreya’s  Ornament  for  the  Mahayana
Sutras that says that the bodhisattva superiors do not have  the  sufferings
of sickness, aging and death. That means that the bodhisattva  superiors  do
not have true suffering.

Once the first ground is  achieved,  the  bodhisattva  superior  acquires  a
mental body. Since bodhisattva superiors do  not  have  true  suffering,  as
such, when they give away their bodies, they don’t feel pain.

WHAT IS A MENTAL BODY?

Student 6:  Can I just clarify one point? Is the mental  body  the  illusory
body? Are they the same thing? I  think  on  the  tantric  path,  it  is  an
illusory body.

Khen Rinpoche: No, they are not the same.

The achievement of the illusory body  has  to  be  preceded  by  actualising
clear light. It is from within the  clear  light  that  one  arises  as  the
illusory body.  Such a presentation of clear light and illusory body is  not
found in sutra. There isn’t even the presentation of  the  extremely  subtle
mind in sutra.

Yet it is difficult for us to imagine what a mental body  is.  What  exactly
is a mental body? Among the qualms collated after the last exam, one of  the
questions relate to the mental body. We have to answer the  question,  “What
is the substantial cause of the mental body?” This is difficult.

According to sutra, the  causes  of  the  two  bodies  are  essentially  the
collection of wisdom that results in the truth body and  the  collection  of
merit that  results  in  the  form  body.  In  sutra,  there  is  no  better
explanation than that.

The explanation according to tantra is  much  more  profound.  According  to
highest yoga tantra:
 • The substantial cause for the truth body is the extremely subtle mind and
   the cooperative condition for the truth  body  is  the  extremely  subtle
   wind.
 • The substantial cause for the form body is the extremely subtle wind  and
   the cooperative condition for the form body is the extremely subtle mind.


This explanation of the causes of  the  two  bodies  in  tantra  makes  more
sense.

According to sutra, the collection of merit is the cause for the form  body.
They have  no  better  explanation  than  that.   In  order  to  answer  the
question, "What is the substantial cause  of  a  mental  body?"  It  is  not
stated in the texts. It is not obvious. Based on the sutric  explanation  of
the substantial cause of the form body, if we  reason  further,  perhaps  we
can say that it is the powerful accumulation of the collection of  merit  of
that bodhisattva on the path of preparation that acts as the cause  for  the
mental body of the first ground.

Do you think we can see the bodhisattva  superior’s  mental  body?  Does  it
look like our body?

Student 6: I have a feeling it is similar to the  body  of  an  intermediate
state being. It is an energy body. My feeling is that it is probably has  to
do with the winds. It is similar to  the  body  of  the  intermediate  state
being and also the dream body.

When you achieve the illusory body, you don’t lose your own  body,  do  you?
I don’t know how it works. If you are a yogi meditating and you achieve  the
illusory body, does it mean that you disappear and you don’t have  your  own
body  anymore?  You  don’t  because   you   have   not   actually   achieved
enlightenment yet. You still have use for this  body  so  you  probably  can
possess both bodies at the same time.

Student 1: Just now it was said that it was the  accumulation  of  merit  on
the path of preparation that is the substantial cause for  the  mental  body
of a bodhisattva on the first ground.

Won’t the cause be a contaminated one because it is not conjoined  with  the
wisdom directly realising emptiness? It seems to me  it  is  accumulated  on
the basis of an ordinary being. So how can something that is accumulated  as
an ordinary being be a cause for something that is  the  mental  body  of  a
superior? There seems to be a contradiction here. The merit  accumulated  is
ordinary merit as the bodhisattva has not directly realised emptiness.

As for my first qualm, now I remember why I asked my  question.  The  answer
was the ordinary bodhisattvas have no choice but they have to take  rebirth.
So why don’t they go to a pure land first?  Through  the  power  of  prayer,
they can take rebirth there. It is very safe.

SETTING ASIDE THE DHARMA


      Verse 28
      When my intellect is blind toward all that is worth knowing, it is the
      weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me for claiming as the  Dharma
      what ought to be put aside. From now on I shall cultivate  the  wisdom
      that comes from study, examination, and meditation.[1]

When we hear the teachings, we don’t remember the words. When we reflect  on
the teachings, we don’t understand their meaning. When we  meditate  on  the
teachings, we don’t get any realisations. Sometimes, we  feel  that  we  are
not so intelligent and not so wise  when  compared  with  others.  But  even
siblings do not necessarily have the same level of intelligence.  There  may
be people who are related, sharing the same parents, yet somehow, there  are
some who are more intelligent than others.

In Dharmakirti’s Pramanavartika (Commentary on  Valid  Cognition),  he  said
that the parents’ egg and sperm are not  the  substantial  causes  of  one’s
mind or consciousness. For if they  were,  it  would  follow  that  siblings
would have the same level of  intelligence  and  the  same  kind  of  mental
characteristics.  You  have  to  posit  that  the  substantial   cause   for
consciousness has to be a former moment of consciousness.  This  is  how  we
establish past and future lives.

It is quite clear that siblings don’t have the same level  of  intelligence.
Everybody is different. Sometimes people wonder, “Why am I not  intelligent?
Why am I not as smart as so-and-so?” The Buddhist explanation is that it  is
basically due to karma, i.e., one did not create the cause in the  past.  It
could be that in our past lives, we only engaged in  non-Dharma  activities,
entertaining non-Dharmic thoughts and so forth. Even when we met the  Dharma
in past lives, we didn’t  take  the  opportunity  to  study  it.  We  didn’t
cherish it because we thought that it is something that we  can  put  aside.
Yes, we did meet the Dharma but we didn’t do anything about it. That is  the
reason why in the present time,
 • when we hear the teachings, we don’t remember the words
 • when we reflect on the teachings we don’t understand their meanings
 • when we try to internalise the teachings, we don’t gain any realisations

In our present life, if we find ourselves in such a situation when we  don’t
understand the teachings no matter what we do, then we  have  to  understand
that it is the result of certain causes and conditions, i.e., basically  not
having heard and reflect on the teachings in our previous lives.

So we should tell ourselves that if we do not put in effort  in  this  life,
if we do not work hard at learning and reflecting on the teachings, then  it
is not going to be any better in our future lives. In fact, we  may  end  up
even more dull-witted than before.

Not being able to understand the teachings in this  life  should  not  be  a
reason to stop learning. In fact, it should be a reason  for  us  to  strive
and work even harder to learn and to reflect on the teachings  in  order  to
plant positive imprints in  our  mind.  The  advice  here  is  that  through
hearing, reflection and meditation, we strive to generate the wisdom  arisen
from hearing, the wisdom arisen from reflection and the  wisdom  arise  from
meditation respectively.

All of us make the same mistakes. Whenever we don’t understand  any  of  the
teachings, we just give up. That is a huge mistake because if  we  give  up,
it doesn’t mean that things will get better on their own.  No!  Things  will
never improve. In fact, we may become even more dull-witted.

There will always be something that we do not  understand  but  that  should
not be a reason for us to stop trying. We must work  hard  and  put  in  the
effort to learn and reflect. Only then can things get better in  our  future
lives. If we really strive and work hard,  definitely,  we  will  make  some
progress in this life. If there is progress in  this  life,  then  there  is
real hope for our future lives to be better. But if we  stop  and  give  up,
then definitely there will not be any progress in this life. If there is  no
progress in this life, how can there be progress in future lives?

These pieces of advice are really very helpful. The advice we have  seen  so
far is essentially asking us  to  take  responsibility  from  our  side  and
reflect on our own karma and its effects. Whenever the going gets  tough  in
whatever we do, the point here is to reflect on karma  and  its  effect  and
then to keep on working at it.

DISRESPECTING TEXTUAL AND REALISATIONAL DHARMA


      Verse 29
      When I am overcome by sleep while practicing Dharma, it is the  weapon
      of my own evil deeds turned upon me for piling up obscurations to  the
      holy Dharma. From now on I shall undergo hardship for the sake of  the
      Dharma.

Sometimes when we attend pujas or prayer sessions, before the puja,  we  are
not sleepy. But once the puja starts, around ten  or  fifteen  minutes  into
it, suddenly we just feel uncontrollably sleepy. Or before doing  our  daily
recitations or prayers, we may be wide-awake but once we start our  prayers,
we feel very sleepy. Or when people come to class to listen to  the  Dharma,
they feel sleepy. Yet somehow,  people  don’t  feel  sleepy  when  they  are
watching a show. This is what happens to us.

Sometimes no  matter  how  hard  we  try  to  stay  awake,  somehow  we  are
overwhelmed by sleepiness. It is uncontrollable. This is due  to  the  force
of our obscurations (or negativities) and is said to be  the  karmic  result
of having accumulated obscurations in  relation  to  the  holy  Dharma.  For
example, we don’t show proper respect to Dharma texts. We put  them  on  the
bare ground or a low place, walk over them or place things on  them.  We  do
not regard Dharma texts with reverence  and  respect,  viewing  them  as  an
ordinary article.

Then there is also the accumulation  of  negativities  in  relation  to  the
realisational Dharma. How does one do that? One criticises, despises or  put
down an individual who possess  the  realisational  Dharma  in  his  or  her
mental continuum.

The advice is that, “From now on I shall undergo hardship for  the  sake  of
the Dharma.” From now on, we will not disrespect Dharma texts  and  we  will
not put down, revile, despise or criticise the individual who possesses  the
realisational Dharma in her mind.

DELIGHTING IN THE AFFLICTIONS


      Verse 30
      When I delight in the afflictions and am greatly distracted, it is the
      weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me  for  not  meditating  upon
      impermanence and the shortcomings of cyclic existence. From now  on  I
      shall increase my dissatisfaction for cyclic existence.

These are the examples of taking “delight in the afflictions”:
 • Taking delight in attachment refers to being  wholly  involved  in  doing
   things to  acquire  material  wealth,  power,  reputation  and  followers
   motivated by attachment.
 • Taking delight in anger refers to enjoying looking down or  putting  down
   others and so forth.
 • Taking delight  in  ignorance  refers  perhaps  to  being  very  fond  of
   sleeping.

Being “greatly distracted” means that one has no mental space for Dharma  as
one’s emphasis and one’s goal is focussed on just this life. Day and  night,
one focusses on the affairs and happiness of this life  to  the  point  that
one does not have any space nor time to practise Dharma.

The teachings tells us that when we are in such a  situation—taking  delight
in the afflictions, being  greatly  distracted  and  completely  preoccupied
with the affairs of this life, thinking that  they  are  most  important  in
one’s life—that is the result of not having thought or  reflected  on  death
and impermanence and the faults of cyclic existence in our past lives.

The solution is that from now on, we have to  increase  our  dissatisfaction
for cyclic existence. We have  to  strengthen  our  renunciation  of  cyclic
existence  by  thinking  about  impermanence  and  the  faults   of   cyclic
existence.

Reflecting and meditating well on impermanence  and  the  faults  of  cyclic
existence is extremely important in  particular  for  beginners.  Reflecting
and meditating on impermanence is critical  and  is  very,  very  important.
Although meditation on impermanence itself will not eliminate our anger  and
attachment completely, it is  very  effective  in  reducing  the  power  and
strength of our afflictions.

On top of that, if we can reflect on the shortcomings and faults  of  cyclic
existence, of course, it will be  even  more  beneficial  and  effective  in
reducing the power and the strength of our afflictions.  This  is  extremely
important and we should pay attention to this. We  shouldn’t  look  down  on
these practices.

Exam results of Module 6

Khen Rinpoche: I have passed the exam paper back  to  you  all.  Well  done.
Whoever wrote an essay, well done! Some people wrote  quite  a  lot,  others
less but that is OK.

We graded them A, B, C and D. If you were to ask what is A, B, C or D,  then
A is apple, B is boy. Then C is cat and D is dog.  OK.  Now  you  know  what
ABCD means.  Anyway, it is just giving a label. My  point  is  that  if  you
have done your job, I am happy.

Whether you wrote ten pages or two pages, you put your hard work  in  there.
That is my point. Whether you get good marks or not so good mark is not  the
point. You put your heart in your studies and you wrote what you know.  That
is important.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] Ven. Gyurme: In the Tibetan text, “ study, examination, and  meditation”
reads as “hearing and so forth.”


