Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L14final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.675251
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove: Two Buddhist Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for use in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom
Publications.

Lesson 14                                                   8 September
2015


The root text: Verses 40—48. Verse 40: Internalising a pernicious view
Verse 41: Concentrating on one’s aggrandisement. Verse 42: Shamelessly
flitting from friend to friend. Verse 43: Increasing one’s selfishness,
pride and greed. Verse 44: Not considering one’s own devilish faults. Verse
45: Repaying kindness with ingratitude. Verse 46: A smith killed by his own
sword. Verse 47: A fletcher killed by his own arrow. Verse 48: Parents
killed by their cherished son. Qualms from the Tathagata Essence.



INTERNALISING A PERNICIOUS VIEW


      Verse 40
      When none of my practices reach their goal, it is the weapon of my own
      evil deeds turned upon me for internalizing a  pernicious  view.  From
      now on, whatever I do shall be solely for the sake of others.

In the course of one’s practice, doing retreat and so forth, if one  doesn’t
fulfil the purpose of that practice, then what  is  the  cause  of  such  an
experience? It is said that such an  experience  is  the  result  of  having
followed a pernicious or harmful view.  This  “pernicious  view”  refers  to
cherishing oneself and forsaking others.

The teachings tell us that if we want our  practices  to  fulfil  a  certain
goal, what we need to do is to perform the practice only  for  the  sake  of
others with the thought of benefiting them and not oneself.

CONCENTRATING ON ONE’S OWN AGGRANGISEMENT


      Verse 41
      When I cannot control my own mind even though I  engage  in  religious
      activity, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds  turned  upon  me  for
      concentrating on my own aggrandizement in the present life.  From  now
      on I shall concentrate on the desire for liberation.

The main purpose of engaging in virtue  with  our  body  and  speech  is  to
subdue and discipline our mind. If we find that our mind  is  not  improving
but instead may even be getting worse  despite  doing  prostrations,  making
offerings and so forth, then what is the cause of this?
When we are unable to discipline our mind  even  though  we  may  engage  in
virtue, this is the result of focusing on the happiness  of  this  life,  to
gain respect, reputation and so forth. In short, it is motivated by  one  of
the eight worldly dharmas.

The  solution  is  that  whenever  we  engage  in  virtue  such  as   making
prostrations and offerings, doing recitations and so forth, it is  important
to make sure that it is  not  mixed  with  and  contaminated  by  the  eight
worldly dharmas. Rather, whatever virtue we may engage in  including  making
prostrations and offerings, doing recitations and so forth, we should  think
that these practices are done for the sake of subduing  our  mind,  reducing
our afflictions and in order to achieve liberation.

Therefore, it is emphasised in the teachings that whenever we engage in  any
activity, in particular the practice of virtue, we must examine  and  adjust
our motivation, i.e.,   we should have the correct motivation for doing  the
practice. That is very important. Otherwise, even though  we  may  think  we
are engaging in virtue and doing something very  virtuous,  such  as  making
many prostrations, reciting many Om Mani Padme Hums  and  so  forth,  if  we
don’t examine and adjust our motivation  accordingly,  those  practices  may
not contribute to the pacification or disciplining  of  our  mind.  Whatever
practice we do, we should least adjust our motivation by  wishing  that  the
practice becomes a cause for subduing our mind.

SHAMELESSLY FLITTING FROM FRIEND TO FRIEND


      Verse 42
      When I despair as soon as I’ve sat  down  and  reflected,  it  is  the
      weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me  for  shamelessly  flitting
      about from one new friend of high status to another.  From  now  on  I
      shall be serious about my friendships with everyone.

The example cited in the commentary is this: There could be times  when  one
may actually stay in retreat for a certain period of time, even months.  But
towards the end, when one  looks  back  at  one’s  retreat,  one  may  feel,
“Nothing much has happened in this retreat. I didn’t really do a good  job.”
 One may even think, “I have wasted my time. If I had known this earlier,  I
would not have done this retreat.”  One feels regret.

This can happen to us in various  aspects  of  our  lives.  We  undertake  a
certain activity, but after a while, when we  look  back  at  what  we  have
done, we regret having started it in the first place. This  is  said  to  be
the result of having “shamelessly flitting about  from  one  new  friend  of
high status to another” in the past.

Such a situation also applies to running after gurus. One may see some  good
points in a prospective  guru  and  get  very  excited.  Then  one  forms  a
relationship with this guru receiving some instructions from him. But  after
a while, maybe one or two months later, one gets bored and  thinks,  “He  is
not so good after all.”

Then when one sees another person, one thinks that  this  person  may  be  a
better guru. One then runs to  this  person  seeing  him  as  the  guru  and
forsakes the earlier guru. Then the  same  thing  repeats  itself.  After  a
while, one moves on again to the next guru and the next one and so forth.
In this text, “shamelessly flitting about from one new friend” is  connected
with “of high status to another” but  in  the  Tibetan  edition,  these  two
parts can be read separately.

The second part—“of high status”—has to do with not  practising  the  Dharma
according to one’s  level.  When  we  engage  in  Dharma  practice,  we  are
supposed to be subduing our mind. We have to know where  our  level  is  and
train accordingly. We have to train the mind gradually,  starting  from  the
path of the person of small  capacity  because  that  is  one’s  level.  But
instead of doing that, we look for the high practices. We  want  to  do  the
Mahayana practices right away, followed by the practices of  secret  mantra,
running after practices that are not at our level.

The solution is that henceforth, before taking somebody as  your  guru,  you
have to check carefully. Once you  have  made  the  decision  to  take  that
person as your guru, make sure you rely properly on the  guru  to  the  very
end. It is same with making friends. Before you  make  friends,  you  should
check carefully. With regard to practice, you have to practise according  to
your own level and not  run  after  high  practices  that  are  beyond  your
current level of ability.

When it comes to listening to  the  teachings,  learning  and  studying  the
Dharma, we must study as extensively as possible. In fact, it would be  good
if you can  study  everything  such  as  sutra  and  tantra  and  all  their
different aspects. When comes to study, we have to know everything.

But when it comes to training the mind and practising, you have to do it  in
a proper order, without jumping ahead, i.e., you  cannot  start  right  away
with the high-level practices. You have  to  start  from  the  beginning  in
accordance with your level of mind.

The practices of the three types of persons—the  persons  of  small,  medium
and  great  capacities—are  the  practices  for  one   person   to   achieve
enlightenment. This is what is said. As such, first, we have  to  train  our
mind in the practices of a person of  small  capacity  and  actualise  those
practices before we move on to train  our  mind  in  the  practices  of  the
person of medium capacity. Once  we  are  trained  in  and  actualise  those
practices, only then do we move on to the practices of  a  person  of  great
capacity. When it comes to training the mind, there  is  no  such  thing  as
jumping ahead to the advanced practices.

INCREASING ONE’S SELFISHNESS, PRIDE AND GREED


      Verse 43
      When I am deceived by others’ cunning, it is the weapon of my own evil
      deeds turned  upon  me  for  increasing  my  selfishness,  pride,  and
      insatiable greed. From now on I shall markedly reduce all of them.

Sometimes in life, we do meet people who take advantage of us. They  succeed
in cheating us because of their deceit and guile. Sometimes we think we  are
smart and will never be cheated and that no one can  take  advantage  of  us
but nevertheless it happens to all of us.

When we are deceived and taken advantage of, we  are  disturbed  and  upset.
This is said to be the result of our own pride and insatiable greed,  always
hankering for the possessions and  the  wealth  of  others.  Henceforth,  we
should practise contentment.

Even in this life, when we have pride and desire, it causes us problems  but
it will also bring us problems in future  lives.  If  we  think  about  this
carefully, many of the problems and complications in life and in the  family
that we have experienced and that occur in the world at large  come  from  a
lack of contentment and greed.

For example, let’s look at the environmental  problems  that  the  world  is
facing today such as floods, rain not falling at the correct  times  and  so
forth. All these environmental problems originate from men’s greed. Many  of
the problems that the human race is facing today are man-made.

The earth has evolved in such a way that  it  has  the  natural  ability  to
accommodate all the  lives  on  this  planet.  Not  just  humans,  but  also
insects, animals and all the life forms that we can find in the world.   But
now the human race is facing all kinds  of  different  problems  related  to
survival, the environment and so forth. Most of the problems that the  human
race faces today originate from men’s greed.

We all need to survive and to stay alive. It is  our  right  to  pursue  the
things that will keep us alive.  But  what  about  doing  things  or  owning
things that are actually not necessary for our survival? We are  doing  more
than what we need to survive. So there is  a  difference  between  need  and
want. That is a completely different question.

If we actually possess more than what we need, are we actually  entitled  to
these possessions? Is it really fair for us to say, “I have the right to  do
whatever I want. This is my choice!” If we are not  content  and  we  follow
after greed, life becomes  very  complicated  and  we  create  problems  for
others and ourselves as well.

NOT CONSIDERING ONE’S OWN DEVILISH FAULTS


      Verse 44
      When I am side-tracked by attachment or  aversion  while  studying  or
      teaching, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me for not
      considering my own devilish faults. From now on I shall examine  these
      impediments and abandon them.

When practising the Dharma, listening to the Dharma and teaching the  Dharma
are  done  under   the   influence   of   attachment,   jealousy,   negative
competitiveness and so forth,  then  all  these  activities  of  practising,
listening  and  teaching  the  Dharma  do  not  become  antidotes   to   the
afflictions. Instead, they contribute to one’s attachment and hatred.

Isn’t this what happens? One may be learning the Dharma  for  a  long  time,
for years, but somehow the mind hasn’t improved. In fact, one may find  that
one has more afflictions, more anger and more attachment. The  same  applies
when one is teaching and explaining the Dharma. Instead of  contributing  to
the subduing of one’s mind, one may become angrier, more attached  and  more
competitive in a negative way.
These experiences are the result of not thinking of  or  reflecting  on  our
“own devilish faults.” In the context here,  the  “devilish  fault”  is  our
self-cherishing. We have not reflected well  on  the  faults  of  our  self-
cherishing. So the solution is to think deeply about the faults of our self-
cherishing and then abandon it.

REPAYING KINDNESS WITH INGRATITUDE


      Verse 45
      When all the good I’ve done turns out badly, it is the  weapon  of  my
      own evil deeds turned upon me for repaying kindness  with  ingratitude
      .From now on I shall very respectfully repay kindness.

Sometimes, we do things with a good intention but people don’t  reciprocate.
This is similar to what  was  mentioned  in  the  Eight  Verses  of  Thought
Transformation. Despite doing things with a good  intention,  they  are  not
reciprocated and turn out badly.

This is said to be the result  of  repaying  the  kindness  of  others  with
ingratitude in the past, such as being ungrateful to  those  who  have  been
kind to us, for example, our parents. It is  also  because  of  harming  our
friends or people who have helped us.

The advice is that we should repay the kindness of those who have helped  us
and were kind to us such as serving and taking care of our parents  and  not
harming others. Starting with our parents, we should respect them  and  take
care of them. Likewise, we should do the same for others.

A SMITH KILLED BY HIS OWN SWORD


      Verse 46
      In short, when calamities befall me, it is the weapon of my  own  evil
      deeds turned upon me, like a smith killed by his own sword.  From  now
      on I shall be heedful of my own sinful actions.

It happens to all of us. In life, there are things that we  want  but  don’t
get. When we don’t get what we want, we suffer. Also there are  many  things
that we don’t want in life but they just come our way. So not  getting  what
we want and getting everything we don’t want,  i.e.,  when  the  undesirable
befalls us, it is the weapon of “my own evil deeds turned upon  me,  like  a
smith killed by his own sword.”

The solution henceforth is to be conscientious and be  mindful  of  our  own
negative actions.

 A FLETCHER KILLED BY HIS OWN ARROW


      Verse 47
      When I experience suffering in the wretched states of existence, it is
      the weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me, like a fletcher killed
      by his own arrow. From now on I shall be  heedful  of  my  own  sinful
      actions.
The “wretched states of existence” refer to the lower realms. This verse  is
similar to the preceding verse.

PARENTS KILLED BY THEIR CHERISHED SON


      Verse 48
      When the sufferings of the householder befall me, it is the weapon  of
      my own evil deeds  turned  upon  me,  like  parents  killed  by  their
      cherished son. From now on it is right for me to  leave  worldly  life
      forever.

“To leave worldly life” means to get ordained.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, this  line  deals  with  the
training  in  the  perfection  of  wisdom  on  the   path   of   meditation,
“Shariputra, therefore, in emptiness  there  is  no  form,  no  feeling,  no
discrimination, no compositional  factors,  no  consciousness.”  First,  the
five aggregates are mentioned.

Next are the 12 sources. “No eye, no ear, no nose, no tongue,  no  body,  no
mind” are the six sense powers that are the empowering  conditions  for  the
generation of the five sense consciousnesses and the mental consciousness.

“No visual form, no sound, no odour, no taste, no object  of  touch  and  no
phenomenon” are the objects of observation of  the  six  consciousnesses—the
five sense consciousnesses and the mental consciousness.

“There is no eye element and so on up to and including no mind  element  and
no  mental  consciousness  element.”  This  sentence  encapsulates  the   18
elements (or constituents). Of the 18 elements:
 • there are the six elements that are the  empowering  conditions  for  the
   generation of consciousness, i.e., both the sense consciousnesses and the
   mental consciousness. They refer to the six sense powers: the  eye  sense
   power, the nose sense power and so forth.
 • “… and no mental consciousness element” indicates the six consciousnesses
   that are dependent on the six sense  powers.  These  are  the  other  six
   elements.

So the 18 elements are:
(1-12) The six sense powers (five sense and one  mental  sense  power)  that
are  the   empowering   conditions   for   the   generation   of   the   six
consciousnesses. This makes 12 elements.
(13-18) The presentation of the six objects of the  six  consciousnesses  is
implied.[1]

This is an answer to an earlier question about the  difference  between  the
mind element and mental consciousness element.[2]
 • The mind element refers to one of the six sense powers, the mental  sense
   power.
 • The mental consciousness  element  refers  to  the  main  mind.  It  also
   includes the five sense consciousnesses.

QUALMS FROM THE TATHAGATA ESSENCE

Qualm:  When  the  defilements   are   completely   eradicated,   does   the
disintegratedness of the defilements still exist? If so, what function  does
it perform?

Khen Rinpoche (addressing the class):  Do  you  have  any  opinions  on  the
disintegratedness of the defilements?

Khen Rinpoche: Does anyone have any answers?

Student 1: When the defilements are removed, their  disintegratedness  still
remains. An example is the case of a stream-enterer. He  realises  emptiness
at that point in time and because of that,  he  doesn’t  generate  any  more
afflictions that produce new throwing karma.  However,  he  still  needs  to
take rebirth several times because of  the  disintegratedness  of  the  past
karma that he had created.  Those  are  not  removed.  The  defilements  are
removed but their  disintegratedness  remains  to  produce  an  effect  that
causes him to take rebirth.

If you have  realised  emptiness,  the  strong  anger  and  attachment  that
produce   throwing   karma   no   longer   arise.   But   because   of   the
disintegratedness that he had accumulated before, those continue to  produce
a rebirth for him. Their effects remain.

In the past, he did produce new afflictions but now, no new afflictions  are
produced, so there is  the  disintegratedness  that  produces  the  throwing
karma.

The disintegratedness of the  defilements  does  exist.  After  he  realised
emptiness, it still continues on to produce effects.

Khen Rinpoche: That part is  OK.  It  can  be  accepted.  But  you  are  not
answering my question.

How far can the disintegratedness of the obscurations go? When  one  becomes
an  arhat  (a  foe  destroyer),   does   the   arhat   still   possess   the
disintegratedness of the defilements?

Does the defilements still exist at arhathood? Yes or no?

Does the disintegratedness of the path of seeing abandonments exist  in  the
continuum of the person on the path of seeing?

Student 1:  During  the  uninterrupted  path,  the  disintegratedness  still
exists but once he goes into the path of release, the  disintegratedness  no
longer exists.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Does  the  disintegratedness  of   the   path   of   seeing
abandonments exist in the continuum of the person on the path of seeing?
Student 1: No.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Isn’t  the  disintegratedness  of  the   path   of   seeing
abandonments a composite phenomenon, a functioning thing?

Student 1: Yes but I read in the text that the defilements and  their  seeds
are removed.

Khen Rinpoche: That point is clear. But what we are looking at here  is  the
disintegratedness of the path of seeing abandonments.  Does  that  exist  in
the continuum of the person on the path of seeing?

Student 1: No, it doesn’t exist.

Khen Rinpoche: Why is that so? Isn’t the disintegratedness of  the  path  of
seeing abandonments a functioning thing?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen  Rinpoche:  If  it  is  a  functioning  thing,   where   is   it?   The
disintegratedness of the path of seeing abandonments occurs after  the  path
of seeing  abandonments  have  been  abandoned  or  before  they  have  been
abandoned?

Student 1: It should be after.

Khen Rinpoche: Then in whose continuum does it exist? Doesn’t  it  exist  in
the continuum of the person who is on the path of seeing?

Khen Rinpoche: Anyone else wants to answer this question?

Student  2:  The  disintegratedness  of  the  afflictions  means  that   the
afflictions have to  stop  to  exist.  That  is  why  the  disintegratedness
started in the first place. Therefore, the disintegratedness of the path  of
seeing abandonments has to come into existence after the path of release.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Basically,  did  you   not   just   say   then   that   the
disintegratedness  of  the  path  of  seeing  abandonments  exists  in   the
continuum of that person on the path of seeing?

Student 2: There would be a problem if I were to say that.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that or not?

Student 2: Can I say that the disintegratedness exists for a while  then  it
disappears?

Khen Rinpoche: There is no need to explain. Does it exist?

Student 2: It exists.

Khen Rinpoche: If you say  the  disintegratedness  of  the  path  of  seeing
abandonments exists,  is  this  disintegratedness  of  the  path  of  seeing
abandonments a path of seeing abandonment in itself  or  is  it  a  path  of
meditation abandonment or is it an obscuration?

Student 2: It exists in a superior’s mind and it is  a  path  of  meditation
abandonment.

Khen Rinpoche: Is it an afflictive obscuration or a knowledge obscuration?

Student 2: I think it is still an afflictive obscuration.

Khen Rinpoche: Based  on  what  you  have  said,  we  can  extend  the  same
conclusion to the disintegratedness of  the  knowledge  obscurations,  i.e.,
the disintegratedness of the knowledge  obscurations  exist  on  the  buddha
ground.

We do have to think about things.

Are  you  saying  that  the  disintegratedness  of  the   path   of   seeing
abandonments does not exist in the continuum of the person on  the  path  of
seeing? It would seem that you would  have  to  say  that  because  of  your
earlier position. If you reject that, what alternative do you have?

You would have to say that the  disintegratedness  of  the  path  of  seeing
abandonments does not exist in the continuum of the person on  the  path  of
seeing.

Earlier on, if you said yes, then you have some  problems.  The  alternative
then is no.

Khen Rinpoche: Someone else should take over.

The question is when the defilements are  completely  eradicated,  does  the
disintegratedness of the defilements still exist? If so, what function  does
it perform?

Student 3: I think it still exists. Disintegratedness  means  the  cessation
of something, i.e., something has ceased. That is a functioning thing.  That
means the cessation of the defilements has happened  already.  As  it  is  a
functioning thing, it has to continue to exist. It cannot just go into  non-
existence. It has to produce something and go on and on.

Khen Rinpoche: If that is  the  case,  then  the  disintegratedness  of  the
knowledge obscurations should exist on  the  buddha  ground  because  it  is
produced. The cessation of the knowledge obscurations  is  followed  in  the
next moment by the disintegratedness that is  left  on  the  buddha  ground.
That  means  the  Buddha  has  the  disintegratedness   of   the   knowledge
obscurations.

Student 3: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: It follows then that the disintegratedness of  the  knowledge
obscurations  is  Buddha  and  the  disintegratedness   of   the   knowledge
obscurations is therefore an object of refuge.

Student 3: OK …

Khen Rinpoche:  Is  the  disintegratedness  of  the  knowledge  obscurations
Buddha or not?

Student 3: It is the basis of designation of Buddha.

Khen Rinpoche: Is it Buddha?

Student 3: It has to be Buddha because everything about him is pure.

Khen Rinpoche: Then it seems that the knowledge obscurations have  moved  to
the buddha ground.

Student  3:  Why  is  that  so?   The   knowledge   obscurations   and   its
disintegratedness  are  different.  The   disintegratedness   of   knowledge
obscurations comes  about  because  the  knowledge  obscurations  no  longer
exist. If that is not the case, how then do you posit the  disintegratedness
of knowledge obscurations?

Khen Rinpoche: Is the disintegratedness  of  knowledge  obscurations  not  a
fault of knowledge obscurations? Is it not a continuum?

Student 3: Yes. But the cessation of  knowledge  obscurations  only  happens
after they cease.

Khen Rinpoche: When the knowledge obscurations cease, doesn’t the  continuum
of the knowledge obscurations also cease?

Student 3: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: So the continuum of the knowledge obscurations  doesn’t  move
to enlightenment.

Student 3: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Then the  disintegratedness  of  the  knowledge  obscurations
doesn’t go to enlightenment either, right?

Student 3: But then there  is  a  fault  because  that  would  mean  that  a
functioning thing has ceased to exist.

Khen Rinpoche: If the knowledge obscurations do  not  go  to  enlightenment,
can the disintegratedness of  knowledge  obscurations  go  to  enlightenment
since the disintegratedness of the knowledge obscurations is  essentially  a
continuation of the knowledge obscurations?

Student 3: I think it can. If it cannot do so, then it has  to  change  into
something else because it is a functioning thing.

Khen Rinpoche: Does the disintegratedness of knowledge  obscurations  go  on
to enlightenment? Essentially that is the question.

Student 4: The question  is  saying  that  the  defilements  are  completely
ceased?

I take it that the defilements would include both the  afflictions  and  the
knowledge obscurations together with their seeds and their  predispositions.
The defilements would include the  manifest  obscurations.  That  means  the
mind itself, for example, ignorance together with its  seeds  while  one  is
abandoning  the  afflictions  obscurations.  When  one  is  abandoning   the
knowledge obscurations, this would include the predispositions  as  well  as
the appearances.  So  these  two  come  together.  If  you  have  completely
abandoned the  defilements,  this  means  that  logically,  you  would  have
abandoned both of these.

Khen  Rinpoche:  The  very  essence  of  the   question   is   whether   the
disintegratedness of the knowledge obscurations is a  functioning  thing  or
composite phenomena?

Student 4: One would have  to  say  that  as  a  functioning  thing,  it  is
impermanent.

Khen Rinpoche: This disintegratedness happens before the abandonment of  the
defilements or after the abandonment of the defilements?

Student 4: We have already discussed  this.  It  cannot  be  before  but  if
after, there would be a problem.

Khen Rinpoche: In between?

Student  4:  At  the  point  of  abandoning  the  defilements  itself,  this
disintegratedness would also be abandoned at that point. If not, then  there
would be infinite regression, which is what  we  discussed  for  factors  of
disintegratedness. If we have infinite regression, then there is no  end  to
it. We cannot abandon the afflictive or knowledge obscurations. So  I  would
take the position that both the afflictions and the  knowledge  obscurations
together with their imprints or predispositions are abandoned.

Khen Rinpoche: Let’s go all the way to the  last  moment  of  the  knowledge
obscurations. At that last moment, the subtlest knowledge  obscurations  are
abandoned.  Does  the  cessation  of  the  knowledge  obscurations   produce
disintegratedness?

Student 4: Isn’t it the case that there is  no  subtle  mind  in  the  sutra
path?

Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t (disintegratedness) produced?

Student 4: I would take the first position  that  it  is  not  produced.  It
ceases together with whatever manifest obscurations there are.

Khen Rinpoche: There is the factor of disintegratedness of the cessation  of
the  knowledge  obscurations.  That  factor  of  disintegration  is  a  non-
composite phenomenon. The factor of disintegration exists. If it exists,  it
is either permanent or impermanent.
Student 4: So you are saying that it becomes a permanent  phenomena  because
it ceases to exist.

Khen Rinpoche: This is a difficult topic.  It is  not  clear  in  the  great
treatises.

But I am inclined to think that the disintegratedness of the path of  seeing
abandonments does not exist. In general,  the  disintegration  of  composite
phenomena does produce a continuum of disintegratedness. But here,  when  we
talk about the cessation of a particular defilement through the force  of  a
powerful antidote, that particular defilement together  with  its  continuum
is severed and destroyed. This is what I think.

When you talk about functioning things:
 • There  are  some  functioning  things  whose  disintegration  produces  a
   continuation of disintegratedness
 • But there are also some whereby the continuation of the phenomenon itself
   is severed.
As such, when it  comes  to  the  defilements,  through  the  force  of  the
antidote,  that  particular  defilement  together  with  its  continuum   is
severed.

We have to think a lot about it.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.






-----------------------
[1] Pages 4—5, Lesson 8, Second Basic Program, Module 4 on The Heart of the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra and the Six Perfections.
[2] Page 6, Lesson 12.

