Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L09final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.823719
================================================================================


Transcript  of  the  oral  commentary  by  Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson  9                                                         4   August
2015


Benefits of cherishing others.  The  root  text:  Verses  15—20.  Verse  15:
Cultivating pure vision. Verse 16: Causing disharmony  among  others.  Verse
17: Displeasing the holy ones.


BENEFITS OF CHERISHING OTHERS

Happiness of this life
Shantideva said in Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds

      All the happiness in this world comes from cherishing others.
      All the problems and sufferings in this  world  come  from  cherishing
      oneself.

Perhaps we can use this verse as the basis for our continual reflection on:
 • how all happiness comes from cherishing others
 • how all our problems and sufferings come from cherishing ourselves.

Reflect on those times when  we  felt  hurt  by  somebody  saying  something
unpleasant  to  us  and  how  we  were  disturbed  when  we  met  with  some
challenges, maybe even just small difficulties, in our life. It  is  evident
that those feelings of being hurt or  the  mind  becoming  very  uneasy  and
disturbed are all due to our  holding  the  ‘I’  as  being  very  important,
cherishing it so much.

Conversely, if we were to reverse  our  attitude—that  is,  if  we  accustom
ourselves to thinking of the happiness of  others  rather  than  emphasising
our  own  happiness  and  if  we  view  others  as   more   important   than
ourselves—then  even  though  we  may  be  criticised  by  others  and   the
unpleasant  words  remain  the  same,  because  of  the  difference  in  our
attitude, we are not so disturbed. This comes from thinking more of  others.
The words are the same, but from our side, we  experience  less  disturbance
and suffering. This is quite clear if we think about it.

We should investigate and see for ourselves, looking at our own  experience,
whether this is true. We suffer more when we are overly  obsessed  with  our
own happiness compared to when we do not prioritise our own  happiness  over
that of others.

When we believe that we are very precious and the most important  person  in
the world, by having that  attitude  of  holding  on  to  the  ‘I’  as  more
important than others, then even when we  face  very  small  problems,  they
become very difficult for us to bear and to tolerate  because  of  our  very
strong self-cherishing.

Happiness of future lives
Besides the happiness of  this  life  coming  from  cherishing  others,  the
happiness of future lives and good rebirths as humans  or  celestial  beings
also come from taking care of and cherishing others.  So  cherishing  others
results in the happiness of future lives. We should understand how  this  is
so.

The cause of a good rebirth—to be reborn as a human  being  or  a  celestial
being—is the practice of ethical discipline, intentionally  refraining  from
harming others. By not harming others, in a way, we are already taking  care
of and cherishing them. Due to  this,  we  get  a  good  rebirth  in  cyclic
existence as a human being or a celestial being.

Having a pleasant physical demeanour or appearance and  meeting  people  who
help us in life are the results of having practised patience. Having  wealth
and prosperity are the results of having practised generosity. So  likewise,
the practices of  generosity  and  patience  can  only  be  accomplished  in
dependence on taking care of sentient beings,  cherishing  and  not  harming
them.

The opposite of this is not caring about the happiness or welfare of  others
but rather just focussing on our  own  happiness  and  following  our  self-
cherishing thought. In the absence of cherishing others, we  disregard  them
and create many different negativities such as taking the lives  of  others,
stealing the belongings of others and not practising generosity due  to  our
miserliness. All these negativities come  from  neglecting  the  welfare  or
happiness of others. Depending on the severity of  these  negativities,  one
will be reborn as a hell being, a hungry ghost or an animal.

If we take care of others and cherish  them,  we  help  them  by  practising
generosity and refrain from harming them. We offer  our  service  to  others
and also respect them. We will then experience the results of such  virtuous
actions in the future.

When we follow our self-cherishing thought and  disregard  others,  we  also
feel disconnected from  others.  We  feel  that  there  is  no  relationship
between others and ourselves. This can make us  arrogant,  looking  down  on
others and  again  disregarding  them.  No  one  else  other  than  us  will
experience  the  ripening  results  of  these  actions.  Because  of  having
disregarded the welfare of others and putting  others  down,  from  life  to
life, we will experience a similar result, i.e., others will  look  down  on
us, despising and disregarding us.

It is emphasised in the mind training literature and also in the  stages  of
the path to enlightenment that we have to reflect  thoroughly  from  various
angles on the faults and  disadvantages  of  self-cherishing.  Likewise,  we
have to  reflect  from  many  angles  on  the  advantages  and  benefits  of
cherishing others. These  particular  reflections  are  very  important  and
crucial.

On the basis of understanding  that  cherishing  others  is  the  source  of
happiness, this should  be  reflected  in  our  daily  lives  and  practical
actions that are within our means, such as giving material gifts and  Dharma
to others. Then, by continually relying on  mindfulness  and  introspection,
we should check our body, speech and  mind  and  refrain  our  thoughts  and
actions from harming others.  If  we  really  understand  the  benefits  and
advantages of cherishing others, then in our interactions  with  others,  we
will generate love and compassion toward every sentient being  and  we  will
feel that every sentient being, whoever the person in question may be, is  a
merit field and presents an opportunity for us to accumulate  merit.  It  is
said that  by  understanding  the  benefits  and  advantages  of  cherishing
others, one will look at every sentient being with affection  and  one  will
be able to respect him or her.

Pleasing the buddhas and bodhisattvas
It is said in the teachings that when we can look upon sentient beings  with
love, affection and compassion, then that really  pleases  the  buddhas  and
bodhisattvas. When such feelings towards sentient beings arise, they  become
supreme offerings to the buddhas and bodhisattvas.

It is also said that if we look at sentient beings with  the  wish  to  harm
them or with the attitude of disregarding them,  then  it  is  no  different
from disregarding the buddhas and bodhisattvas.

So if we really want to please the buddhas and bodhisattvas  and  make  them
happy, we should look upon sentient beings  with  affection  and  love,  and
benefit them. This becomes the supreme offering and is also the offering  of
practice.

It is said in the teachings that even if one  makes  a  small  insignificant
offering to the buddhas and bodhisattvas motivated by  love  and  compassion
for sentient beings, the benefit  is  vast  as  the  merit  created  is  far
greater than making vast offerings not motivated by love and compassion  for
others.

It is also mentioned in the teachings that if we analyse  well,  the  gurus,
our special meditational deities and sentient  beings  are  all  similar  in
being the ones who grant us the common and supreme realisations.

With respect to talking about mind training, we  must  understand  that  the
most important essential point to grasp is how our  self-cherishing  results
in all our problems and faults. We  must  reflect  until  we  ascertain  for
ourselves how cherishing others is the source of all  happiness.  Only  then
can we talk about mind training and  the  various  visualisations  and  mind
training techniques that are covered in the mind  training  text,  including
this one. On the basis of having realized  that  first,  then  we  can  talk
about the practice of tonglen, giving our happiness to others and taking  on
their sufferings upon ourselves.

The practice of tonglen
The practice of giving  one’s  happiness  to  others  and  taking  on  their
sufferings is a method to further enhance one’s love and compassion:
 • Giving our happiness to others enhances  and  strengthens  our  love  for
   others.
 • The practice of taking on the suffering of others develops, enhances  and
   strengthens our compassion.
Having developed well one’s love and compassion for others and  through  the
visualisation of giving one’s  happiness  to  others  and  taking  on  their
sufferings, only then is generating whole-hearted resolve  possible.  It  is
with  this  whole-hearted  resolve  that  we  can  talk  about  the  result,
generating bodhicitta, the mind of enlightenment.

CULTIVATING PURE VISION


      Verse 15
      When I am reborn into an impure land, it is the weapon of my own  evil
      deeds turned upon me for always cultivating impure  vision.  From  now
      on, I shall cultivate only pure vision.

“Impure land” refers to the samsaric environment of cyclic  existence  where
we live and spend our lives. In such an environment, it doesn’t  matter  who
we make friends or interact with, every single relationship is only a  cause
of problems and, in reality, is just suffering. Whatever we see  is  also  a
cause for problems and sufferings.

Regarding the formation of such an “impure land,” does  it  exist  from  its
own side? If we think about it, actually, it does not  exist  from  its  own
side. It is but the  result  and  a  projection  of  our  own  distorted  or
mistaken mind.  Due to our distorted mind, we accumulate contaminated  karma
and due to the force of that, we have this view of the samsaric  environment
or impure world. So it does not come into existence from its own side.

In previous lessons, we saw  how  the  heroes,  the  bodhisattva  superiors,
purposely take rebirth in cyclic existence to benefit sentient  beings.  For
us, everything in cyclic existence is a cause of suffering.  I  don’t  think
that  that  is  the  case  for  the  bodhisattva  superiors  because   their
experience is radically  different.  Whatever  they  see  or  experience  in
samsara does not cause them suffering  or  problems.  Whatever  we  see  and
whatever is presented in samsara—full of its  distortions  and  problems—are
causes of suffering. These  heroes,  the  bodhisattvas,  in  particular  the
bodhisattva superiors, may be in  the  same  physical  world,  the  samsaric
environment, as us but what they  experience  is  radically  different  from
ours.

Why is there such a big difference? The difference lies  in  the  fact  that
the bodhisattva superiors only have the thought of cherishing  others  while
we only have the self-cherishing thought. Even though we  are  in  the  same
world, their experiences are therefore radically different.  The  difference
lies in having or not having self-cherishing. It also shows that  the  world
we know is not self-established. It does not exist on  its  own  accord  and
from its own side.

The reason why  we  are  born  in  an  impure  land  and  experience  impure
appearances is because we have always cultivated impure  vision.  Therefore,
henceforth, we make an oath and pledge to cultivate only pure vision.

What are the ways in which we can  cultivate  pure  vision?   The  teachings
give an example such as when we meet with a person who harms us. We can  use
that experience of being harmed as a means to exhaust our  negativities.  We
can think, “This person  who  is  here  to  exhaust  my  negativities  is  a
manifestation of the buddhas or  bodhisattvas.  She  is  appearing  in  this
aspect to help exhaust my negativities.” If we can  really  think  that  the
person  who  is  harming  us  is  a  manifestation  of   the   buddhas   and
bodhisattvas, appearing for the sole purpose  of  purifying  and  exhausting
our negativities, this will make the difficult experience more bearable.

Likewise, we can do the same when we encounter people who ask us for  money,
beg from us or who are always asking us for this and that. If we  can  think
of that person as a manifestation of the buddhas or bodhisattvas,  appearing
in  that  aspect  to  help  us  overcome  our  miserliness  and  finish  our
accumulation of merit, then we won’t feel so disturbed.

Whatever big or small problem or difficulty we experience  in  life  is  the
result of our own negative karma. Even the existence of a harm-doer  harming
us is a result of our own negative karma. Nobody else is  responsible,  just
ourselves. Whether we see that person as a  buddha  or  bodhisattva  who  is
helping us to exhaust our negative karma, or even if  we  were  to  look  at
that person as just someone ordinary who is helping us exhaust our  negative
karma, the fact remains that that person is exhausting our  negative  karma!
That is what the gurus, meditational deities and buddhas are supposed to  do
for us as well.  So if we think about  it,  whether  it  is  the  guru,  the
buddha, the deity or the harm-giver, in  that  respect,  they  are  same  as
their job is just to exhaust our negative karma.

Khen Rinpoche: It is said that when you go to Wu Tai Shan[1]  for the  first
time, the first person you see there  is  the  manifestation  of  Manjushri.
When you go there for the first time, whether you see some beggar  bothering
you, a worker or  a  driver,  that  person   could  be  a  manifestation  of
Manjushri!

From the very beginning, your mind-set should be that the first  person  you
see must be a manifestation of Manjushri. Then you have a different  respect
for whatever this person does. It is the same idea.

At that time (when I was at Wu Tai Shan), I saw a  man.  I  thought  he  was
Manjushri. After that, I didn’t see him  anymore.  There  are  many  stories
like this. The reality is that he could be Manjushri or  maybe  he  was  not
Manjushri. It doesn’t matter. But it really helps your mind  when  you  have
such a mind-set.

Here,  it  is  the  same  thing.  The  person  harming  you  could  be   the
manifestation of Manjushri, the buddhas or the gurus. When  you  think  that
way, then there is less problem in your mind. You don’t become so  angry  or
upset. This is how your mind and your thinking can work in a different  way.


Our usual attitude is that when we are harmed, we consider ourselves  to  be
the poor victim and the harm-doer is the aggressor. We always  think,  “That
person is completely at fault. It has nothing to do with me. I’m the  victim
and that person is the harm-doer.” We hold on to the  view  that  the  other
party is the harm-doer. Psychologically, what will  happen  then?  Won’t  we
get very upset?

As long as we hold on very strongly to the view, “That  person  is  a  harm-
doer!” then we  will  definitely  get  upset.  We  are  not  at  peace  with
ourselves. Not only are we upset but the mind is so disturbed.  This  is  so
meaningless. There is no benefit. So it is really a problem.

On top of that, we give ourselves even more problems because we  continually
get upset. So we accumulate negativities. As such,  the  verse  says,  “From
now on, I shall cultivate only pure vision.” We should make this promise  to
ourselves.

We will find countless advice in the teachings, telling us  that  we  should
not focus  on  the  faults  of  others  but  rather,  concentrate  on  their
qualities. We also find statements encouraging us  to  regard  all  sentient
beings as the Buddha. Their import and meaning is the same.

CAUSING DISHARMONY AMONG OTHERS


      Verse 16
      When I am separated from helpful and loving friends, it is the  weapon
      of  my  own  evil  deeds  turned  upon  me  for  luring  away  others’
      companions. From now  on  I  shall  not  separate  others  from  their
      companions.

What should we think when we experience separation from people that we  feel
emotionally very close to or those who have been very helpful  to  us?  Such
things happen quite often in life. When it happens, we feel  very  hurt,  we
feel a sense of great loss and we are  disturbed  by  the  experience.  What
should we do then?

When such things happen to us in life, it is very useful  to  think  of  the
practices of the person  of  small  capacity,  such  as  the  meditation  on
impermanence. Thinking of impermanence, we recall how everything is  in  the
nature of change and that there is no real stability in  life.  Thinking  of
these points would be very helpful for the mind.

But  just  having  the   intellectual   knowledge   and   understanding   of
impermanence or even being able to explain how things are in the  nature  of
change are useless on their own.  They are not  helpful  when  the  problems
come. Mere intellectual knowledge and understanding are not enough.  Without
the experience that  comes  from  continual  reflection,  we  cannot  expect
ourselves to feel comforted by the word “impermanence” when  problems  come.
It is only on the basis of having  continually  thought  about  impermanence
and having some real feeling in the heart that it is helpful  when  problems
come. Because of having  had  that  experience  already,  we  remember  that
experience and recreate that experience and understanding. As  such,  it  is
extremely  important   to   meditate   consistently   and   continually   on
impermanence.

Then when we experience, say, separation from helpful  and  loving  friends,
we can remind ourselves that we are experiencing  the  ripening  results  of
similar actions we had done in the past. At some point in the past,  we  had
lured away the companions of others, we caused others to be  separated  from
their companions or we caused a split or division between people.

Since those unpleasant experiences are  the  results  of  our  own  negative
karma, from now on, we promise  ourselves  that  we  will  not  repeat  such
actions. We will not cause others to be separated from their companions  and
loved ones. We will not lure away people from the  ones  they  love,  making
them love us instead.  Essentially, it is not to  cause  disharmony  between
people who were harmonious.

DISPLEASING THE HOLY ONES


      Verse 17
      When all the holy ones are displeased with me, it is the weapon of  my
      own evil deeds turned upon me for casting them aside and resorting  to
      bad companions. From now on I shall renounce bad companions.

“The holy ones” could be our own gurus or  those  extraordinary  beings  who
are different and special. When these holy beings are displeased  or  upset,
then one becomes very upset and one’s mind is disturbed.

Let’s say that you may be very devoted, respectful and have a lot  of  faith
in a special being or your teacher. But  somehow  that  virtuous  friend  or
guru does not reciprocate and remains unhappy and displeased no matter  what
you do. When that happens, generally, for most people,  their  minds  become
very disturbed. Some may even get upset, generate  wrong  views  and  become
very negative.

When this happens, the teachings say that the solution is not to  point  the
finger at the holy being but to point it  at  ourselves.  We  have  to  take
responsibility, as this is the weapon of our own  evil  deeds  turning  upon
us. In the past, even when  we  met  with  real  virtuous  friends  or  holy
beings,  we  did  not  follow  their  advice  but  instead,  relied  on  bad
companions. In this context, “bad companions” are those who  only  work  for
and are concerned about their own happiness, and who act in  ways  that  are
opposite to the Dharma.

When something like this happens to us, from our side, we feel that we  have
been respectful and devoted. How come  the  holy  being  is  still  unhappy,
upset and displeased with us? When we experience this,  we  become  unhappy.
We cannot take it. We don’t like it. But in the first place, why do we  feel
unhappy when the holy being is displeased with us? The answer is  the  same.
It is our own self-cherishing. The  problem  does  not  lie  with  the  holy
being.

This is something that everybody has experienced  and  will  experience.  It
cannot be the case that  the  virtuous  friend  or  holy  being  is  forever
smiling at us. Then when he doesn’t smile at us, we think that something  is
wrong. But the problem doesn’t lie with the virtuous friend.  He  cannot  be
smiling all the time. But we don’t like it when he doesn’t smile. We  become
unhappy when we think that he is unhappy with us. The  problem  is  our  own
self-cherishing.
In essence, the advice is always about  looking  inward,  not  pointing  the
finger outside.  It is always about, “What did I do?  What  is  my  role  in
this?”

      Verse18
      When others sin against me by exaggeration or deprecation, it  is  the
      weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me for reviling the holy ones.
      From now on I shall not revile others by exaggeration or deprecation.


      Verse 19
      When my material necessities waste away, it is the weapon  of  my  own
      evil deeds turned upon me for scorning others’ necessities.  From  now
      on I shall provide for others’ necessities.

      Verse 20
      When my mind is unclear and my heart is sad, it is the  weapon  of  my
      own evil deeds turned upon me for causing others to sin. From now on I
      shall renounce contributing to others’ sinning.

Sometimes we may feel sad for no apparent reason or we feel that  our  minds
are just very unclear. When  we  meditate,  there  is  nothing,  just  pitch
darkness and fogginess. We think that this is due to  spirit  harm  or  some
non-humans disturbing us.

Here, the verse is saying that this is not due to spirit  harm.  The  answer
is that in the past, we did not cultivate virtue.  Rather,  we  were  always
engaging in non-virtue. This  is  the  weapon  of  our  own  negative  karma
returning to haunt  us.  We  proclaim  ourselves  to  be  practitioners,  in
particular,  practitioners  of  the  Mahayana  Dharma,  yet  in  our   daily
behaviour, we do not conduct ourselves well  physically  and  we  use  harsh
words that put others off, causing them to create negativities.

As such, we now make a promise  to  train  and  practise  not  to  become  a
condition for others to sin.

We should reflect on this. We should look at ourselves with regard to  these
points. Are we carrying ourselves well? When we speak, will our words  upset
others? Often, other people are upset or  disappointed  when  they  see  our
behaviour. They think,  “Buddhists  are  like  that?”  or  “These  so-called
Mahayana practitioners are like that!” Based  on  what  others  see  of  our
actions, they may get a bad impression of us  as  practitioners  who  follow
the Mahayana tradition. So we have to be careful and check  whether  we  are
contributing to others creating negative karma in this way.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Now we will look at some of the qualms that some of  you  have  raised  from
the previous module.

Question 1: Among the nine defilements, the number one to  four  defilements
(the first three are the dormant forms of the three poisons and  the  fourth
is the strong arousal of  those  three)  are  those  that  accumulate  fresh
projecting karma, and those who abandon the Path of Seeing  abandonments  do
not accumulate fresh projecting karma, are the  defilements  number  one  to
four actually the same as the Path of Seeing abandonments?

Question 2: Since  the  superiors  who  have  abandoned  the  intellectually
acquired apprehension of true existence do not accumulate  fresh  projecting
karma, does that mean that the intellectually acquired afflictions  are  the
cause  for  accumulating  projecting  karma  while  the  innate  afflictions
actualise those projecting karma?

Answers: These are the two questions as I understand them:
 • The first question: Are the first four of the nine defilements  mentioned
   in the Tathagata Essence the path of seeing abandonments?
 • The second question: Does the  intellectually  acquired  apprehension  of
   true existence motivate the accumulation  of  projecting  karma?  Do  the
   innate afflictions nourish the karmic seeds?

What  motivate  the  accumulation  of  projecting  karma  are   the   innate
afflictions, not the  intellectually  acquired  afflictions.  The  ignorance
that pertains to the twelve links of dependent origination is posited as  an
innate affliction. As such, what motivates the  accumulation  of  projecting
karma for cyclic existence  has  to  be  the  innate  afflictions,  not  the
intellectually acquired afflictions.

It is true that when one achieves the path  of  seeing,  the  intellectually
acquired afflictions  are  abandoned  and  one  does  not  accumulate  fresh
projecting karma. But this  is  not  the  result  of  having  abandoned  the
intellectually acquired afflictions. When one achieves the path  of  seeing,
one will not accumulate fresh projecting karma  because  one  has  seen  the
truth directly, i.e., one has realised  selflessness  directly.  Because  of
that direct realisation of selflessness, that  wisdom  can  harm  ignorance.
Henceforth, ignorance is weakened to the point that it cannot  motivate  the
fresh accumulation of projecting karma.

So it is not the case that the intellectually acquired afflictions  motivate
the accumulation of fresh projecting karma and that the  innate  afflictions
only nourish the karmic seeds. What motivate the accumulation of  projecting
karma are the innate afflictions.

You cannot establish that the first four  defilements  are  necessarily  the
path of seeing abandonments. Why? Because they are the innate forms  of  the
first  four  defilements.  As  such,  if  it  is  any  of  the  first   four
defilements, they are not necessarily path of  seeing  abandonments  because
the  path  of  seeing   abandonments   are   the   intellectually   acquired
afflictions. As such, the first four defilements are  not  necessarily  path
of seeing abandonments.

Khen Rinpoche: Think about it. There are many questions and I  can’t  finish
everything. Maybe from time to time, I shall read them when I think you  are
bored. I will put aside five to ten minutes to answer these questions.

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] One of the four holy mountains  in  China,  said  to  be  the  abode  of
Manjushri.

