Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L16final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.569038
================================================================================


Transcript  of  the  oral  commentary  by  Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 16                                                 15 September 2015


The root text: Verses 54—62. Verse 54: Another request to  Yamantaka.  Verse
55: Targetting the mode of apprehension. Verse 56:  Desire  for  comfort  is
great; desire and greed are great. Verse 57: One’s effort  is  small.  Verse
58: Relationship with the guru.  Verse 59: Skilled at flattery and  hinting.
Verse  60:  Swollen  with  pride.  Verse  61:  More  on  the   guru-disciple
relationship. Verse 62: Many vows, minimal practice.


Question: With regard to the objects of abandonment, we  were  taught  there
are afflictive  obscurations  and  knowledge  obscurations.  Are  these  two
exhaustive or are there objects of abandonment that is neither of the two?

Maybe I should explain why I am asking this. An arhat  has  abandoned  self-
grasping but still  has  self-cherishing  whereas  the  bodhisattva  on  the
middle path of accumulation does not have self-cherishing. I  have  no  idea
which object of abandonment self-cherishing comes under.

Khen Rinpoche:  What about trying to answer this question first: Is there  a
common locus between self-cherishing and a path, i.e.,  is  there  something
that is both self-cherishing and a path?

Student 1: What is a path?

Khen Rinpoche: It is where people walk. That is called a path. (Laughs).

Is it possible for such a common locus to exist?

Student 1: I think there is another problem. What exactly is the  definition
of self-cherishing? Even  if  I  were  to  recite  prayers  or  develop  the
Mahayana mind-generation, there is  an  element  of  acting  for  one’s  own
welfare per se so there are two  parts—acting  for  one’s  own  welfare  and
acting for the welfare of others. There is a sentient being here that  needs
to be cherished as well. If I can’t even cherish  myself,  how  can  I  talk
about cherishing others?

What exactly is this self-cherishing we are talking about?  Do I take  other
people as a priority in comparison to myself but  not  totally  not  cherish
myself either because after all, I am a sentient being too?
I find it hypocritical to say that I cherish others more than myself when  I
totally don’t cherish  myself  at  all  because  I  don’t  even  think  this
sentient being is worth cherishing. In the first place,  the  definition  of
self-cherishing is not so clear.

Khen Rinpoche: I still want my answer.

It is said that we must discard our self-cherishing in order  for  the  mind
of enlightenment to arise. When bodhicitta is generated, the  power  of  our
self-cherishing decreases and gradually there will come a point when  it  is
eliminated.

In the case of cherishing others, I don’t think  there  is  the  element  of
disregarding oneself.  Usually  self-cherishing  means  that  we  prioritise
ourselves over others, that we see ourselves as more important than  others.
Therefore cherishing others has to be the opposite of that attitude.

It is not that you disregard  yourself.  Rather,  from  the  perspective  of
cherishing others, others become  more  important  and  more  precious  than
oneself. So I don’t think there is an element of neglecting or  disregarding
ourselves when we have the attitude of cherishing others.

Ordinary bodhisattvas are forbidden from giving their bodies to  others.  It
is said that ordinary bodhisattva should not give away any  parts  of  their
body, such as their eyes and so forth, to others because the time  for  that
has not come.

When we talk about the objects of abandonment, we  usually  talk  about  the
two   obscurations—the   afflictive   obscurations   and    the    knowledge
obscurations. I would think that if it were an  object  of  abandonment,  it
would have to be one of these two. It may be difficult to posit otherwise.

An object of abandonment is abandoned by an  uninterrupted  path,  which  is
its antidote. So this is an object of abandonment.

Having said this, we now back to your question: Whether  self-cherishing  is
an object of abandonment? Going by what we have said so far, it  seems  that
we would have to say that it is not an object of abandonment because  if  it
is an object of abandonment, it  would  have  to  be  either  an  afflictive
obscuration or a knowledge obscuration.

When one trains the mind in the path of the person of medium  capacity,  for
example, through that training, one comes to develop the  renunciation  that
wishes to abandon cyclic existence for oneself.  We  are  primarily  seeking
our own nirvana or liberation. That  thought  seeking  personal  liberation,
i.e., seeking nirvana for oneself, is like self-cherishing.

But in the normal sense of the word, self-cherishing is  not  an  object  of
abandonment. If it is an object of abandonment, it has to be either  a  path
of seeing abandonment or path of meditation abandonment. Nevertheless, self-
cherishing is to be discarded from the perspective of the Mahayana.
In general, however, it is not to be discarded as  in  the  example  of  the
mind wishing to achieve liberation for oneself. That is a virtuous mind.  As
it is a virtue, it is to be adopted and not discarded.

Khen Rinpoche:  Do you understand my answer? Yes or no?

If  you  were  asked,  “Is  self-cherishing  necessarily  an  object  to  be
discarded? Yes or no?”

(Students’ responses are inaudible).

If it is a virtue, is it necessarily to be adopted?

(Students’ responses are inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche: You have to say something. When you  say  something,  then  I
can respond. Otherwise, I have nothing to say. Either you say  yes  and  say
what you think or you  say  no,  then  say  something.  The  answer  doesn’t
matter. It is according to your knowledge, your idea.

If it is a virtue, is it necessarily to be adopted?  If  you  were  to  say,
“Not necessarily,” then right away, you should  be  able  to  give  me  some
examples of virtues that I don’t really need.

Khen Rinpoche: When I tell you something, if you don’t  understand,  then  I
will ask you more questions. The whole purpose of asking more  questions  is
for you to respond to them. Then that would make  things  clearer  for  you.
But if you don’t participate, I will not be able to make things clearer  for
you.

Let’s deal with this one by  one.  Self-cherishing  is  not  necessarily  an
object of abandonment. Yes or no?

Khen Rinpoche: Do you or don’t you want  to  participate?  If  you  are  not
participating, I can just make a simple statement.

In order to be an object of abandonment:
 • it has to be either an afflictive obscuration or a knowledge obscuration
 • it has to be abandoned by an uninterrupted path
As such, self-cherishing is not an object of abandonment.  But  if  you  are
looking at this from the Mahayana perspective, then it is an  object  to  be
discarded.

In general, self-cherishing is not an object to be discarded.  Why  is  this
so? Because there is a common locus  between  self-cherishing  and  a  path,
i.e., there is something that is both self-cherishing and a  path,  that  is
self-cherishing and a virtuous mind. Therefore, self-cherishing  is  not  an
object to be discarded. If it is a path, it is necessarily virtuous.  If  it
is virtue, it is necessarily an object to be adopted.

If you have any doubts, you should bring them up right away.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you agree or disagree?

Student 1: I do not agree (that if it is virtue, it  is  necessarily  to  be
adopted). It is not necessarily so.

Khen Rinpoche: If it is a  path,  isn’t  it  necessarily  an  object  to  be
adopted?

Student 1: Even if it is a path, it is  not  necessarily  something  that  I
must adopt.

Khen Rinpoche:  That is not the question. You must listen  to  the  question
and you must answer according to the question.

If it is a path, isn’t it necessarily an object to be adopted?

Student 1: Yes. That is no problem because I didn’t say that all paths  must
be cultivated by a single person. It is not an issue. If it is a path,  yes,
it is necessarily to  be  cultivated,  but  it  is  not  necessarily  to  be
cultivated by one person.

Khen Rinpoche: Nobody is asking that question.

Student 1: There is no contradiction.

Khen Rinpoche: Nobody is asking that question. That I already know. That  is
why I didn’t ask.

 • Earlier I have said that self-cherishing is not to be  discarded  on  the
   Hinayana path but bodhisattvas don’t need it and they don’t  want  it  so
   they discard it.
 • A path is necessarily virtue, which is to be cultivated.
As such, self-cherishing is not necessarily an object to be discarded.

Student 1: This whole text is telling us that the enemy  is  self-cherishing
by listing out all these negative karmas  and  so  forth.  The  arhats  also
won’t have duplicity and all these  negative  karmas.  So  why  would  self-
cherishing be a problem to an arhat?  The enemy  is  not  necessarily  self-
cherishing. It can be self-grasping. By looking at the text in  a  different
context with a  different  motivation,  the  enemy  can  actually  be  self-
grasping.

Ven Gyurme: You are basically asking how the self-cherishing in the  arhat’s
continuum harms him?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche:  Are you suggesting that  self-cherishing  doesn’t  harm  the
arhats?

Student 1: Yes because all the verses are talking about karma.

Khen Rinpoche: I heard “Self-cherishing doesn’t hurt  the  arhat”?  Did  you
say something like that?

Student 1: What I meant is that the whole text is talking  about  all  these
different karmas and it is saying that self-cherishing is the cause  for  us
to create all these karmas.

But from the perspective of an arhat who does  not  have  self-grasping  but
does have self-cherishing, he won’t go on to  create  these  karmas.  So  it
would be difficult if you want to convince an arhat using this text  because
they won’t even create the karma in the first place.

I think even the Buddha cannot do much in this case. The arhat won’t  create
these karmas because they don’t even have self-grasping.  The  reasoning  in
this text won’t work for arhats unless they were to have  this  thought,  “I
may not create these karmas but  other  sentient  beings  can  create  these
karmas because of their  self-cherishing.”  Maybe  that  will  work.  So  my
question is how to you convince an arhat based on this text?

Khen Rinpoche: I am not quite sure what you talking about. I have no idea!
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

ANOTHER REQUEST TO YAMANTAKA


      Verse 54
      Approach, great tutelary deity Yamantaka. I beseech you at  this  very
      moment to rip to shreds this leather sack  of  actions  and  the  five
      poisonous afflictions that mire me in the mud of worldly action.

There were a few preceding verses making requests to the deity Yamantaka  to
destroy our self-grasping  and  self-cherishing.  Likewise,  this  verse  is
making another request.

Here, one is making a further request to the deity Yamantaka.  Just  like  a
very dirty place that  is  filled  with  all  kinds  of  filthy  substances,
likewise, samsara is filled with the filth of  karma  and  the  afflictions.
This is the creation of one’s self-cherishing that causes one to  fall  into
the mud of samsara. One is thus making a request to the deity  Yamantaka  to
immediately destroy our self-cherishing.


TARGETTING THE MODE OF APPREHENSION


      Verse 55
      Although it has brought me suffering in the three wretched  states  of
      existence, not knowing enough to fear it, I rush to  its  cause.  Roar
      and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally
      strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

It says that all of us have already experienced the terrible  sufferings  of
the lower realms in the past due to our self-cherishing.  Although  we  have
suffered for a long period of time in the lower realms but now we seemed  to
have forgotten all those sufferings. It seems we are  not  afraid  of  those
sufferings, and we accumulate many causes  again  to  return  to  the  lower
realms under the control of the power of our own self-cherishing.

By seeing how self-cherishing is the cause of our  suffering,  and  in  this
case, how self-cherishing had caused us to go to the  lower  realms  in  the
past and is still the cause of us accumulating the karma to be born  in  the
lower realms again, the  last  two  sentences  come  into  play:  “Roar  and
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction.”  “The  destroyer,
false construction” refers to the evil thought or  conception  that  is  our
self-cherishing.

“Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!” As I said  in
the last lesson, the “enemy” refers to both our  self-cherishing  and  self-
grasping. We should strike at the heart of  this  enemy,  the  “heart”  here
meaning the mode of apprehension of our self-cherishing  and  self-grasping.
How do we overcome our self-cherishing and self-grasping? We target the  way
our self-cherishing and self-grasping apprehend phenomena, i.e.,  we  strike
at their mode of apprehension.

In the Tibetan edition, many verses end in maraya, which means  to  kill  or
mortally strike by taking life in Sanskrit.

DESIRE FOR COMFORT IS GREAT, DESIRE AND GREED ARE GREAT


      Verse 56
      Although my desire for  comfort  is  great,  I  don’t  accumulate  its
      causes. Although my tolerance for suffering is small,  my  desire  and
      greed are great. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer,  false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!

What does “desire for comfort” mean?  There  are  times  when  our  life  is
running smoothly and things are going well. We don’t have any  problems  and
we feel that life is wonderful. We are not particularly aware that  we  need
happiness and peace not just for a day but for months,  years,  even  beyond
this lifetime and for many lifetimes to come.

If we want to have a similar standard of living  or  whatever  happiness  we
have now for the rest of our life and for all future lives  to  come,   then
we need to accumulate the merit that is the cause of such happiness.  It  is
better if we were to think of the wish for ourselves to have  the  happiness
of  future  lives,  the  happiness  of  liberation  and  the  happiness   of
enlightenment than just to think of the  happiness  of  this  life,  out  of
concern for ourselves.

Very often in life—whether it is our work, our  job,  studying  the  Dharma,
doing our daily recitations, doing retreats and so forth—when we  meet  with
some challenges and difficulties, we just give up or we will  procrastinate,
“Not now. Forget it. I’ll do it next time.” Generally,  we  don’t  think  of
the happiness of future lives.  We  just  focus  primarily  on  this  life’s
happiness. We work so hard but everything we do is to achieve happiness  for
this life alone. We only have a short-term view in  relation  to  everything
we do, focussing only on the here and now and never  really  looking  beyond
this life.

If we investigate what is the cause of us not having  a  long-term  view,  I
think it comes back to our self-cherishing attitude.

When it comes to earning money, our greed is  amazing.  We  are  so  greedy.
Whether it is work or studies, we always aim to be the richest  or  to  have
the highest position. Here the advice is that all these problems arise  from
our self-cherishing. As such,  there  is  a  need  to  eradicate  our  self-
cherishing.

ONE’S EFFORT IS SMALL


      Verse 57
      Although that which I desire is near at hand, my effort to achieve  it
      is small. Although my projects are many, none of them  are  completed.
      Roar and thunder on the head of  the  destroyer,  false  construction!
      Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Self!

“Projects” are  activities  or  plans.  Here,  the  order  of  the  text  is
reversed. Verse 57 should precede Verse 56.


RELATIONSHIP WITH THE GURU


      Verse 58
      Although I have many new friendships, my modesty and  friendships  are
      of short duration. Although I freeload off of others, I eagerly pursue
      those who pilfer. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!

One  of  the  earlier  verse[1]  talked   about   new   friendships,   i.e.,
establishing relationships with friends or gurus.  The point here is not  to
rush into things. In the case of taking on somebody as a  guru,  one  should
not rush into  it  right  away,  but  one  should  think  and  examine  very
carefully before one decides to rely on him or her. If one does not  analyse
in this way and rush into the  relationship,  then  there  is  a  danger  of
giving up the guru later. As mentioned before, one decides to  switch  gurus
and this will never stop.

In the Lam-rim Chen-mo, The Great Treatise of the Stages  of  the  Path,  in
the section on correctly relying on the virtuous friend, two  examples  were
given when it came to the number of gurus that one should  have.  There  was
one lama by the name of  Sungpuwa  who  had  many  gurus.  He  would  regard
whoever gave teachings as a guru and then take those  teachings.  The  great
master Dromtonpa on the other hand had only five gurus in  his  life.  These
are two different approaches. There was a  discussion  between  the  Kadampa
lamas, Geshe Potowa and Gompa Rinchen. In  their  discussion,  Geshe  Potowa
was asked “Which approach is better? Is it better to be  like  Sungpuwa  who
took on many gurus or is it better  to  take  the  approach  of  Dromtonpa?”
Geshe Potowa said, “When your mind is still untrained and you  tend  to  see
faults in others easily, then you will generate non-faith easily. When  your
mind is at that level, then it is better to have fewer gurus.  Therefore  it
is better to follow the approach of Dromtonpa.”[2]

In the section on correctly devoting to the virtuous friend in the  lam-rim,
there is an extensive and detailed explanation  on  the  eight  benefits  of
correctly  relying  on  the  virtuous  friend  and  the  eight   faults   or
disadvantages of relying incorrectly after one  has  taken  on  somebody  as
guru. The point is that if you do not know how  to  rely  properly  on  your
virtuous friend after you have taken him as your  guru,  then  there  is  no
profit for you  but  only  great  loss  as  a  disciple.  Therefore,  it  is
extremely important to know and understand this and to find  out  more  from
the lam-rim.

There are people who go around taking on gurus. They take one  person  as  a
guru. After a while, they start to see faults and get  upset  and  criticise
the guru. They then switch gurus with the hope that the next  one  would  be
better. But the same thing happens. The same story repeats itself  over  and
over again. All of this is the result of self-cherishing.

When one has great desire, one will find it  difficult  to  be  generous  to
make offerings to accumulate merit. Although we need to develop  a  generous
heart and accumulate merit by making  offerings,  but  when  we  have  great
desire, we don’t do all of these things. In fact, we may  end  up  hankering
after the wealth of others, stealing, robbing and deceiving  others.  Again,
these actions are the results of self-cherishing.

SKILLED AT FLATTERY AND HINTING


      Verse 59
      Although I am skilled at flattery and asking for things indirectly, my
      despair is great. Although I  assiduously  amass  things,  miserliness
      binds me. Roar and  thunder  on  the  head  of  the  destroyer,  false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!

Here  flattery  and  hinting,  i.e.,  asking  for  things  indirectly,   are
mentioned. These are part of the five types  of  wrong  livelihood  that  is
mentioned in the lam-rim:
1. Flattery: Out of wanting to acquire some material goods, one may  put  on
   a show in front of others  such  as  acting  in  a  holy  way  and  maybe
   flattering others.
2. Hinting: One is asking for things indirectly. Motivated by the desire  to
   acquire an object or some material possession, one hints, “I do have this
   particular object but I don’t have enough of it.” Saying such  things  is
   hinting with the motivation of getting something from the person  one  is
   talking to. However, if one doesn’t have that intention but simply making
   a plain honest statement that is fine and is not hinting.
3. The use of force or pressuring others: Sometimes the person doesn’t  want
   to give another something but motivated by the  desire  to  acquire  that
   object, this persons says or does things that makes it difficult for  the
   first person to say no.
4. Baiting: One puts out a bait, wanting something  bigger  in  return.  One
   gives a small thing to somebody with the hope that the recipient will  in
   return give one something bigger or more than what one has given.
5. Hypocrisy: This refers to acting holy  by  putting  up  a  front  but  in
   reality one is neither disciplined nor subdued. In order to get something
   in return from somebody, one puts up this false front or show.
It is said that all of these faults are motivated by our self-cherishing.

Again, due to our self-cherishing, we are  stingy  and  miserly,  unable  to
give to others and to make offerings. We may even end  up  being  unable  to
use things for ourselves. All of these again are said to be  the  faults  of
our self-cherishing.

Going back to the question, “How  does  self-cherishing  harm  the  arhats?”
Actually that is the arhat’s business. Our business is to see whether  self-
cherishing harms us in that way. We have to  see,  investigate  and  analyse
for ourselves whether we are actually harmed  by  our  own  self-cherishing,
based on the numerous examples given in the  text.  We  have  to  think  for
ourselves individually whether  all  the  numerous  examples  cited  in  the
teachings about the faults of self-cherishing are  indeed  true  or  not.  I
guess if we really think about it, the answer is pretty obvious.

BEING SWOLLEN WITH PRIDE


      Verse 60
      Although whatever I have done has been  insignificant,  I  am  swollen
      with pride. Although I have no reputation, my hunger for it is  great.
      Roar and thunder on the head of  the  destroyer,  false  construction!
      Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

“Although whatever I have done has been insignificant,  I  am  swollen  with
pride.” The meaning has to do with qualities. Although  one  does  not  have
any qualities and there is really nothing good about oneself,  yet  one  has
desire for many things, “I want this and I want that.”

We may have done a small thing but we make a big deal out of  it  as  if  we
had done a lot. For example, “I offered great service to my lama! I  offered
service to the Sangha community! I did so much for the  Dharma  centre!”  We
did something insignificant but we make a big deal out of it,  going  around
saying, “I did this. I did that”.

Khen Rinpoche: It is not boasting.

(Students’ suggestions as to how to describe this attitude are inaudible).

When it comes to offering service to the guru, offering service to a  Dharma
centre and so forth, if the motivation is really just to do  something  good
or to accumulate merit and purify the mind, then  no  matter  how  much  one
does, there is no need to even mention, “I did this. I  did  that.”  Anyway,
we do this because of our self-cherishing.

From the Dharma point of view,  actually  we  have  no  accomplishments,  no
knowledge and no understanding. Nothing! Even  from  the  worldly  point  of
view, we don’t have much that is significant or worthy of  mention.  We  are
like that, yet at the same  time,  we  have  very  high  aspirations  to  be
famous, to be powerful, or to attain a very high status in the  organisation
or society. All of these are manifestations of our self-cherishing.

MORE ON THE GURU-DISCIPLE RELATIONSHIP


      Verse 61
      Although my preceptors are many, my ability to keep my vows is  small.
      Although my disciples are many, I give little time to  help  and  look
      after them. Roar and thunder on  the  head  of  the  destroyer,  false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!

Back to the issue of relying on the guru. We may have many gurus but we  may
not have paid attention to keeping pure the  samaya  between  the  guru  and
disciple. When we take someone as a  guru,  it  is  extremely  important  to
maintain a pure bond, a pure samaya and a  good  relationship.  Although  we
may have many gurus, yet do not pay attention to maintaining  a  pure  bond,
and in fact let it degenerate. Again, this is a result of self-cherishing.

Here is the advice for taking on students. Before we take  on  any  student,
we have to check and see whether it is right and beneficial to do so.  After
we have taken on the student or disciple, we have to make sure to help  them
to the end, giving them both Dharma advice and advice on how  to  deal  with
daily life.

The bond of the guru-disciple relationship is  extremely  important.  Before
taking on anybody as a guru, it is important to  check  carefully.  Once  we
have taken on someone as our guru, it is important from our own side to  not
let our samaya and bond with our guru degenerate. Likewise,  for  those  who
have students, it is important to take care of the students both  materially
and spiritually.

MANY VOWS, MINIMAL PRACTICE


      Verse 62
      Although my promises are many, my  practical  assistance  is  minimal.
      Although my fame is great, if it were examined, the  gods  and  demons
      would put me to shame. Roar and thunder on the head of the  destroyer,
      false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the  butcher,  the
      enemy, Ego!
In this  context,  “promises”  can  be  understood  to  refer  to  vows  and
commitments. As such, “my practical assistance is minimal”  can  be  amended
to “my practice is minimal.”

“Although my fame is great, if it were examined, the gods and  demons  would
put me to shame.” This is referring to all of  us.  We  are  all  guilty  of
this. When it comes to taking on vows, all of us have  taken  on  the  three
classes of vows—tantric vows, bodhisattva vows and the  different  kinds  of
pratimoksha vows.  All of us have taken these vows. These are  not  promises
that are made lightly but are great promises. When we took  on  these  vows,
who were our witnesses? The witnesses were the gurus  and  all  the  buddhas
and bodhisattvas, and in their presence, we voluntarily accepted the vows.

We have taken on all kinds of vows, commitments and promises. If we were  to
honestly examine the purity of our vows, I don’t think we will  be  able  to
point to any vow that was kept purely, not even one. Instead  all  we  would
find is this, “I’ve degenerate this vow. I have broken this  commitment  and
that promise.” That is what we will find. We will not  find  any  vows  that
were kept purely. This is what is meant by “my practice is minimal”.

“Although my fame is great”: One could be a famous teacher  or  one  may  be
famous for whatever reason. If one were to honestly examine  oneself,  one’s
behaviour, our conduct and way of thinking would embarrass even  the  ghosts
or spirits. If that is the case, then there is no need to mention  what  the
worldly gods will think.

Whatever has been said so far in the text is talking about us.  We  are  all
like that. All of these are the results of our self-cherishing.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] Verse 42. Lesson 14, page 2—3.
[2] The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment by  Tsong-
ka-pa, Volume 1. Snow Lion Publications, Page 77.

