Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L23final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.496484
================================================================================


Transcript  of  the  oral  commentary  by  Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson     23                                                              8
October 2015


The  root  text:  Verses  106—117.  Verse  106:  All  phenomena   are   mere
appearances. Verse 107:  Embracing  virtue  and  avoiding  sin.  Verse  108:
Forsaking evil actions. Verse  109:  Ignorance  and  the  like  are  without
substance. Verse 110: The effect of the  unanalysed  aggregate.  Verse  111:
Analysing causes and effects. Verse 112—114: Appearance  and  emptiness  are
mutually complementary. Verse 115: The state of meditative equipoise.  Verse
116: Becoming a great being. Verse 117: Realising the two aims.


ALL PHENOMENA ARE MERE APPEARANCES


      Verse 106
      This butcher, the enemy Ego, is just the  same.  It  seems  as  if  it
      really exists, but it has never really existed. It seems as if  it  is
      really true, but it has never been really true anywhere. It  seems  as
      if it is vividly appearing, but it is beyond the realm of  affirmation
      or denial.

“This butcher, the enemy Ego, is just the same. It seems  as  if  it  really
exists, but it has never really existed.” If we stand in front of a  mirror,
we will be reflected in the mirror. It looks  as  if  we  exist  within  the
mirror itself. However, it is just a reflection and we are  not  inside  the
mirror.

Likewise, let’s say you climb up  a  mountain.  When  you  reach  a  certain
height where you are above the clouds, when you  look  down,  you  will  see
that the whole space below you is covered with clouds. It appears as if  the
clouds will be there forever.  Although it seems that way, that  the  clouds
will remain unchanged forever, in reality, change is happening in  each  and
every single moment because there is air movement, the wind  and  so  forth.
All composite phenomena undergo momentary change although they appear to  be
unchanging, stable and always there.

These are the analogies. The point is that in the same  way  self-cherishing
and self-grasping also do not  exist  truly.  They  exist  because  of  this
mistake in our mind. By depending on these analogies, we come to  understand
that all phenomena, including our  self-cherishing  and  self-grasping,  are
just mere appearances. They do not exist in and of themselves.

“It seems as if it is really  true,  but  it  has  never  been  really  true
anywhere. It seems as if it is vividly appearing.” All phenomena  appear  to
our mind to be truly existent although in reality, they do not exist  truly.
They do not  exist  inherently.  Nevertheless,  when  anything  that  exists
appears to our mind, it appears to have this concrete existence. It  appears
to exist truly. In reality, inherent existence has never existed.  There  is
never been a phenomenon such as inherent existence.

Whether it is our self-cherishing or self-grasping together with the  person
or the ‘I’ that is observed  by  our  self-grasping,  when  we  bring  these
different objects to the attention of  our  mind,  they  all  appear  to  be
inherently existent and we believe that they are  inherently  existent.  But
their appearing to us to be inherently existent doesn’t mean that  they  are
inherently  existent.  The  appearance  of  phenomena  to  our  mind  to  be
inherently existent comes not from the side of the object but rather  it  is
due to our wrong mental projection.

“…but it is beyond the realm of affirmation or denial.” The phenomenon  that
is designated, i.e., the thing that is designated as a phenomenon, does  not
exist truly.
 • Our self-grasping,
 • together with the self-cherishing induced by that self-grasping,
 • together with the karma that  we  have  accumulated  motivated  by  these
   attitudes,
 • together with the results of that karma, which is suffering,
have never existed inherently, have never existed truly. They do  not  exist
in and of themselves. They are all mere appearances of the mind.

Up to this point  in  the  text,  starting  from  the  section  on  ultimate
bodhicitta (from Verse 103 onwards), many examples and reasons are given  to
delineate the view of emptiness.

There are different examples and analogies that we can think of in order  to
understand how things do not exist truly.

For example, take our dream experience. When we are  dreaming,  we  see  and
experience many things in our  dream.  Nevertheless,  these  are  just  mere
appearances to our dream consciousness.

Likewise, when we see  the  illusion  that  is  created  by  a  magician  or
illusionist. He is able  to  conjure  up  the  appearance  of  an  elephant.
Because we are not aware that it is just an illusion, we think that it is  a
real elephant but in reality, there is no elephant.  It is just an  illusion
that looks exactly like an elephant. If we were to look  for  the  elephant,
there is no elephant out there. There isn’t any functioning elephant. It  is
just an appearance to the mind that has been affected by the illusion.

In a dream, we may see different things such as  an  elephant  or  a  horse.
There is this appearance of a real horse or a real  elephant  but  they  are
not a real elephant or a real horse. They do not function as  such  so  they
do not qualify  as  an  elephant  or  horse.   But  there  are  still  these
appearances to that particular dreaming consciousness.

Likewise, during a magic show, when we  see  the  illusion  created  by  the
illusionist and there is the appearance of an elephant or horse,  those  are
not real elephants or  horses  as  they  are  not  functional  elephants  or
horses. They are just appearances to  the  mind  that  is  affected  by  the
illusions.

Khen Rinpoche: You must understand the  example.  Otherwise  you  will  have
problems with its meaning later.

You see things in your dreams such as an elephant. That elephant is  a  mere
appearance to the dreaming consciousness so it is a dream elephant. What  is
a dream elephant? It is a mere appearance to the dreaming consciousness.

Likewise,  everything  that   exists—others   and   oneself,   samsara   and
nirvana—exists in mere name and is merely imputed by thought. All  phenomena
are mere appearances and are merely  designated  in  dependence  upon  their
bases of designation.

The phenomenon in question, whatever it may be,  does  not  exist  from  the
side of its  basis  of  designation.  It  doesn’t  exist  in  the  basis  of
designation and it doesn’t exist on  the  basis  of  designation.  There  is
nothing from the side of the basis of designation that is the phenomenon.

What the teachings are saying is that all phenomena have never  existed  and
do not exist from the side of their bases of designation. There  is  nothing
from the side of the basis  of  designation  that  is  the  object.  Rather,
phenomena exist as mere appearances that are merely imputed by  thought  and
exist in mere name.

Why  do  we  say  that  a  particular  phenomenon,  the  one  we  choose  to
investigate, doesn’t exist from  the  side  of  its  basis  of  designation?
Because if a phenomenon exists from  its  own  side,  this  means  that  the
phenomenon in question exists within the basis of  designation.  Then,  from
the side of the basis  of  designation,  we  should  be  able  to  find  the
phenomenon if we were to look for it there.

But when we analyse and investigate the basis  of  designation  closely,  we
cannot find the phenomenon in question. That is the funny  thing.  Since  it
cannot be found, this is why it is said that the phenomenon does  not  exist
from the side of its basis of designation. This is the  ultimate  nature  of
all phenomena—how they have always been. We term this, ‘the mode of  abiding
of phenomena’. This is the real nature of phenomena—nothing exists from  the
side of their bases of designation. Because if they did exist from the  side
of their bases of designation, then they should be  findable.  But  as  they
cannot be found, therefore, they do not exist from their own side.

This question then arises: Although this is the nature of phenomena, why  do
we not realise this? Why does this ultimate nature of phenomena  not  appear
to us in that way?  Why is it that we see things to be truly existent?

That mistake comes from our side, because our mind is  polluted  by  stains,
the predispositions of ignorance. It is like the way we  see  all  kinds  of
strange things that are not true in our dream consciousness.

Likewise, due to this mistake in our mind,  particularly  the  pollution  of
ignorance, everything appears to us to be truly existent  while  it  is  not
so. Basically the mistake comes from  our  own  mind  because  our  mind  is
polluted by the predispositions or latencies  of  ignorance.  The  fault  of
these  mistaken  appearances   of   true   existence   is   due   to   these
predispositions of ignorance.

To the mind that is polluted by the predispositions of ignorance,  there  is
the appearance of true existence. Whether we call this factor of  appearance
the object of negation or not, it is the object of negation. The  object  of
negation is the object that we have to realise does not exist. This is  what
we need to target at.

The few examples given in the text will help us to understand how  phenomena
are not truly existent.

EMBRACING VIRTUE AND AVOIDING SIN


      Verse 107
      And as for the wheel of actions, it is just the same; though it  lacks
      an inherent nature, yet it appears, like the reflection of the moon in
      water. Actions and their consequences are a  variegated  multitude  of
      falsehoods. Even though they are  just  appearances,  I  urge  you  to
      embrace virtue and avoid sin.

“I urge you to embrace virtue and avoid sin” means  that  we  are  urged  to
adopt virtue and to abandon negativity.

The Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS) says that  although  all  phenomena
are not truly existent, nevertheless, the presentation of cause  and  effect
is feasible conventionally. Conventionally, there is  an  agent,  an  action
and the object.

For example, when there is the coming  together  of  a  body  of  water  and
moonlight, there is the appearance of the moon on the surface of  that  body
of water. So as long as there is moonlight, i.e., there is  a  moon  shining
up in the sky, and as long as there is a  body  of  water,  when  these  two
factors come together, there will  be  a  reflection  of  the  moon  on  the
surface of  that  body  of  water.  We  cannot  stop  that  reflection  from
appearing.

Similarly, when we engage in virtue, we will experience happiness, and  when
we engage in non-virtue, we will  experience  suffering.   Although  nothing
exists   truly—   everything   that   exists   is    empty    of    existing
inherently—nevertheless, it  is  impossible  for  suffering  to  arise  from
virtue and happiness to arise from non-virtue.

FORSAKING EVIL ACTIONS


      Verse 108
      When in a dream a peat fire blazes, we are terrified by the heat,
      although it is without substance. In the same way, although the hell
      realms and such are without substance, we fear the smelter’s fire and
      other tortures. As that is so, we should forsake evil actions.

It is possible to dream that you are caught in  the  middle  of  a  mountain
fire when suddenly everything is on fire. When that happens in  your  dream,
you will be afraid and experience fear in that dream. You may even sweat  or
scream in the dream although it is just a dream.  If  you  happen  to  sleep
with someone and you start screaming in your dream, the person  beside  will
see you screaming but he or she is not able to see the  fire.   Although  it
is just a fire in a dream and there  is  no  real  fire,  nevertheless,  you
experience fear and physical and mental suffering.

Likewise, in the hell realms, the hell fires, the  hell  guardians  and  all
the terrifying weapons that hell beings see exist  but  they  do  not  exist
inherently. Nevertheless, they bring about fear, suffering and  great  pain.
All these are mere appearances and projections of a non-virtuous mind.

The point here is not to  misunderstand  that  mere  appearances  mean  that
phenomena are non-functional. One should not look down on mere  appearances.
A mere appearance does not mean a phenomenon  doesn’t  function  as  it  can
still give rise to a result. Therefore, the point is not to disregard  karma
and  its  effects.  Although  everything  that   exists   exists   as   mere
appearances, nevertheless it functions. Virtue leads to happiness  and  non-
virtue leads to suffering.

IGNORANCE AND THE LIKE ARE WITHOUT SUBSTANCE

      Verse 109
      In a feverish delirium we may feel as if we are wandering around
      suffocating in a deep cave, even though there is no darkness at all.
      In the same way, even though ignorance and the like are without
      substance, we should get rid of our delusions through the three
      wisdoms.

“Ignorance and the like are without substance” means that ignorance and  the
like do not exist inherently.

It is said here that sometimes, when people have heat disorders of the  body
due to a very high fever, they may have the appearance of their  environment
being enveloped in darkness.  It  is  like  seeing  dark  clouds  or  a  fog
although in reality, they are not there.

Similarly, due to ignorance, everything appears to us to be  truly  existent
while they are not truly existent. Although everything that exists are  mere
appearances, nevertheless,  mere  appearances  do  function  conventionally,
giving rise to their respective results.

The three wisdoms
In order to understand how all phenomena are mere appearances,  we  have  to
cultivate “the three wisdoms”:
1. the wisdom arisen from hearing
2. the wisdom arisen from reflection
3. the wisdom arisen from meditation

 • First, we have to pursue extensive hearing and learning of the  teachings
   on emptiness or selflessness. Then we develop some idea of what emptiness
   or selflessness is. This is the wisdom arisen from hearing.
 • Then whatever we have heard and  studied,  we  have  to  reflect  on  and
   analyse the knowledge we have gained over and over again until we develop
   an ascertainment, a definite certitude in our heart, about  the  subject,
   in this case, emptiness or selflessness. This is the wisdom  arisen  from
   reflection. The best  kind  of  wisdom  arisen  from  reflection  is  the
   inferential cognition of emptiness.
 • With whatever certitude and ascertainment we have developed  with  regard
   to emptiness from familiarising ourselves over and over  again  with  its
   meaning, then we come to develop the wisdom arisen  from  meditation.  Of
   the different wisdoms arisen from meditation with respect  to  emptiness,
   the best is the direct realisation of emptiness. With that, we  have  the
   tool to uproot ignorance and overcome the predispositions or latencies of
   ignorance.

THE EFFECT OF THE UNANALYSED AGGREGRATE


      Verse 110
      When a musician plays a melody on a lute,  the  sound  lacks  inherent
      nature, if we analyze it. But when  the  sweet  sounds  emerge,  their
      unanalyzed aggregate eases the anguish in people’s hearts.

When someone plays the guitar well and it is pleasing to the ears, one  will
enjoy it. If one were to  analyse  where  that  pleasant  sound  was  coming
from—did it come from the body of the guitar alone? The  strings  alone?  Or
from the side of the guitarist?—the sound did not come  from  any  of  these
factors alone. Rather, they came from the aggregate  of  all  these  factors
coming together.

When somebody plays the guitar well, it sounds very beautiful and  pleasing.
If we were to go beyond the appearance of that sound  and  search  for  what
exactly it was and where it was coming from, we would not be  able  to  find
it in the guitarist or any part of the guitar itself. It cannot be found  in
any of the parts that make up the composite or aggregate.

However, if we were to just leave it at the level of appearance and just  be
aware of  the  sound  without  investigating  and  analysing  further,  that
pleasant sound does bring comfort, it does exist and it does function.

ANALYSING CAUSES AND EFFECTS


      Verse 111
      When we analyze all causes and effects, they lack inherent  nature  as
      either identical or different. Yet phenomena vividly appear  to  arise
      and perish, and we experience pleasure and suffering as if they really
      existed. Even though they are just appearances, I urge you to  embrace
      virtue and avoid sin.

When we investigate and analyse all causes and effects, we will not be  able
to find a truly existent cause and effect, a cause and effect that exist  in
and of themselves. But if we do not investigate and analyse, leaving  it  at
the level of appearances, they do exist and function. So  at  the  level  of
mere appearance, cause and effect are feasible.

APPEARANCE AND EMPTINESS ARE MUTUALLY COMPLEMENTARY


      Verse 112
      When drops of water fill a jar, the first drop does not fill  it,  nor
      the last, nor each  drop  individually.  Yet  the  dependently  arisen
      aggregate fills the jar.


The meaning of the analogy in Verse 112 appears in Verse 113.

      Verse 113
      Similarly, when someone experiences their reward of pleasure or  pain,
      it is due neither to the first moment of the cause, nor  to  the  last
      moment, and so on. Yet  the  dependently  arisen  aggregate  makes  us
      experience pleasure or pain. Even though they are just appearances,  I
      urge you to embrace virtue and avoid sin.

      Verse 114
      Aha! The appearance that delights our mind,  though  independent  when
      unanalyzed, definitely lacks an inner core.  However,  the  fact  that
      phenomena appear as if they exist is profound and  difficult  for  the
      dull-witted to understand.

“The dull-witted” means the lowly ones. “Aha!” in Tibetan  is  e  ma  ho,  a
positive proclamation of one’s amazement—“Wow! How wonderful!”

The author is proclaiming how wonderful it is to have  realised  that  there
is no contradiction between appearance and emptiness—that these two are  not
contradictory but are in fact mutually complementary. We  need  the  correct
understanding that this is so. This is the understanding we need  to  arrive
at:
 • Due to the fact that things are not truly existent,  therefore  they  are
   mere appearances.
 • Because they are mere appearances, therefore they are empty  of  existing
   truly.
 • In reality, the meaning is that they are mutually complementary.

It is difficult for most people to understand that because when we think  of
emptiness, we do not know how to posit the existence of phenomena and we  do
not know how to posit that things are mere appearances.  When  we  think  of
how things are appearances and how they exist, we then lose  the  bit  about
things being empty of true existence. So  it  is  very  difficult  for  most
people to bring these two together.

If we were to relate phenomena at the level of appearances, that is,  if  we
are satisfied with mere  appearances  without  investigating  and  analysing
further,  there  is  a  whole   variety   of   appearances.   Things   exist
conventionally and function. We are able to posit a multitude of  phenomena.


But if we are not satisfied with mere appearances and  analyse  more  deeply
beyond the level of appearances and look for the final nature of  phenomena,
we will not be able to find anything that  is  truly  existent.  Yet  things
exist. That is why it is said that if we are satisfied  with  the  level  of
mere appearances, things do function. But if we are  not  satisfied  and  go
deeper, then we  will  not  be  able  to  point  to  anything  that  is  the
phenomenon in question.

We have to understand that whatever conventional phenomena we bring  to  the
attention of our mind, they will  necessarily  appear  to  us  to  be  truly
existent. Although they are not truly existent, they will appear  to  us  to
be truly existent because our minds are polluted by the  predispositions  of
ignorance. As long as the predispositions of  ignorance  are  still  in  our
mind, all phenomena will continue to appear to us to be truly existent.   So
it is extremely difficult to see that appearance and emptiness are  mutually
complementary instead of being contradictory. It is extremely  difficult  to
see how they mutually support one another. It is very difficult to  be  able
to posit that things exist conventionally at the level  of  appearances  and
yet they function. It is very difficult to  attain  these  two  realisations
and understanding with the exception of those who understand the  assertions
of the CMWS.

As mentioned in the text,  the  “dull-witted”  or  the  lowly  ones  do  not
understand this. Here, perhaps we can  take  the  lowly  ones  to  mean  the
proponents who follow the Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS) and  the  tenets
below it.

THE STATE OF MEDITATIVE EQUIPOISE


      Verse 115
      Now, when you are absorbed in meditative equipoise on  this,  what  is
      there really to a mere appearance? How can either  existence  or  non-
      existence exist? How can anyone anywhere assert  “it  is”  or  “it  is
      not”?

This verse is saying that in the perspective of the wisdom of a  person  who
is realising emptiness in meditative equipoise, there is  no  appearance  of
conventional phenomena whatsoever. But  while  there  is  no  appearance  of
conventional phenomena, that does not mean  that  nothing  appears  to  this
meditative equipoise.
 • “How can either existence  …  exist?”  “Existence”  here  refers  to  the
   conventional appearances that do not exist  in  the  perspective  of  the
   meditative equipoise realising emptiness.
 • “How can … non-existence exist?” Although conventional appearances do not
   exist in the perspective of the meditative equipoise realising emptiness,
   what appears is emptiness itself. So, it is  not  non-existence  that  is
   appearing, i.e., it is not that nothing appears at all.

BECOMING A GREAT BEING

      Verse 116
      Subject and object lack ultimate reality. If your mind remains in  its
      innate nature, uncontrived and shining, free from  all  discrimination
      and conceptual proliferation, you will become a great being.
The mind that is “shining,  free  from  all  discrimination  and  conceptual
proliferation,” is the mind that is free of both the objects that are to  be
adopted and the objects that are to be abandoned  in  their  ultimate  sense
and also free of all elaborations.

Just as phenomena do not  exist  truly,  emptiness  itself  does  not  exist
truly. Nothing exists ultimately  and  nothing  is  ultimately  established,
including the objects to be adopted and the  objects  to  be  abandoned.  As
such,  in  the  perspective  of  the  meditative  equipoise   focussing   on
emptiness,  there  is  the  freedom  of  all  elaborations  of  conventional
appearance. Without any distraction, one enters  into  meditative  equipoise
focussing on emptiness and by familiarising oneself  with  that  realisation
over and over again for a long period of  time,  there  comes  a  time  when
emptiness will be perceived directly. At  that  time,  one  will  become  “a
great being,” an arya or a superior being.

REALISING THE TWO AIMS


      Verse 117
      Thus, by practicing the  conventional  and  ultimate  bodhicitta,  and
      thereby uninterruptedly carrying  the  two  accumulations  through  to
      completion, may I perfectly realize the two aims.

“The two aims” refer to the two purposes.

As I have mentioned before, first, we have to think very  deeply  about  the
faults and disadvantages of our self-cherishing attitude and arrive at  that
understanding from many angles and perspectives. We also have to think  very
deeply, from many different  angles,  to  realise  the  advantages  and  the
benefits of cherishing others. Only based on these two realisations can  one
train the mind in developing bodhicitta through  the  system  of  exchanging
self and others. Then one will come to develop the  mind  of  enlightenment,
conventional bodhicitta. With this conventional bodhicitta, one  can  finish
accumulating the collection of merit.

By using analogies and reasoning, one comes  to  realise  emptiness  through
hearing, reflection  and  meditation.  One  develops  the  wisdom  realising
emptiness. When one realises  emptiness  directly,  ultimate  bodhicitta  is
generated in one’s heart. With  ultimate  bodhicitta,  one  accumulates  the
collection of wisdom.

Through the union of  the  practice  of  method—conventional  bodhicitta—and
wisdom —ultimate bodhicitta—one accumulates the two  collections.  When  one
completes the accumulation of the two  collections,  one  achieves  the  two
bodies, the truth body and the form body.  Through  that,  one  accomplishes
the aims of others and oneself.

Now,  you  have  achieved  the  perfect  and  complete  full   enlightenment
mentioned in the Heart Sutra.

Lama Atisha relied on many teachers and  he  received  tantric  empowerments
from many of them. But among all his gurus, he considered a few of  them  to
be the most kind and precious. One of them was Dharmarakshita.  Lama  Atisha
considered the author of this text, Dharmarakshita, to be one  of  his  most
precious and kindest teachers because of having  received  the  instructions
on cultivating and developing the  two  types  of  bodhicitta,  conventional
bodhicitta and ultimate bodhicitta, from him. Why is this  so?  Because,  at
the end of the day, in order to achieve  enlightenment,  we  need  different
teachings and instructions and their  essence  are  these  two  bodhicittas.
There can be no enlightenment without the cultivation  of  conventional  and
ultimate bodhicitta.

All of us  have  been  tortured  and  tormented  by  our  afflictions  since
beginningless lifetimes up to now. What  will  enable  us  to  overcome  and
defeat our afflictions? It is the two bodhicittas,  conventional  bodhicitta
and ultimate bodhicitta.

What should we focus on in our practice?  The whole point is to learn  about
these two bodhicittas and, as much as possible, to  cultivate,  develop  and
experience them. If we are able to do so, we will enjoy peace in  our  heart
and experience happiness. We will also be  able  to  destroy  our  ego,  our
afflictions and our ignorance. So that is the focus.

What we need to do is to gain mastery and  control  over  our  mind  because
since beginningless lifetimes up to now, we have  not  gained  control  over
our minds. Rather our afflictions have always had the upper hand.  In  order
to gain control and mastery over our mind, we need to cultivate and  develop
these two bodhicittas.

Many people ask these questions, “What should I practise?” or “What  is  the
main practice?” The answers lie in what I have just  said.  The  essence  is
the two bodhicittas. There is nothing more than that.

We have always been advised to be a good person with a  good  heart.  It  is
true that we must have a good heart. But there are different levels of  good
heart as well. The ultimate good heart is bodhicitta.  One  of  our  primary
focus then should be to aim for bodhicitta—to learn, train and  move  closer
to actualising bodhicitta.

Once we have the good heart and, in particular, once we  have  the  ultimate
good heart, bodhicitta, it doesn’t matter where  we  are  reborn.  There  is
only happiness whether we are  in  the  pure  lands  or  the  hells  realms.
Because we have bodhicitta, we will be happy everywhere.

Often people think that the main practice  is  tantra,  the  deity  yoga  of
meditating on deities. While deity yoga is  very  good,  in  order  for  the
practice of deity yoga to  be  correct,  first  one  must  have  bodhicitta.
Without the practice and experience of  bodhicitta,  there  is  no  way  for
deity  practice  to  become  a  correct  and   genuine   practice.   Without
bodhicitta, there is no real tantric practice.

When we talk about bodhicitta, we are talking about the two  bodhicittas—the
ultimate  good  heart  plus  the  understanding  and   experience   of   the
realisation of emptiness. Without these two bodhicittas, it is not  possible
to do tantric practice. If tantric practice is done on the basis  of  having
an experience of these two bodhicittas, then tantric practice is  beneficial
in that it can  act  as  the  antidote  to  our  self-cherishing  and  self-
grasping.
But if one is doing tantric practice without any  experience  of  bodhicitta
and meditation on emptiness, instead of decreasing  our  afflictions,  self-
cherishing  and  self-grasping,  there  is  the  danger  that  that  tantric
practice will only strengthen our ego and our self-cherishing.

So our focus should be to learn and think about these two  bodhicittas  and,
as much as possible, to practice and try to integrate them  into  our  daily
life. If we practise in that way, then our life  will  become  a  meaningful
one.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong


