Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L10final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.613846
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove: Two Buddhist Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for use in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 10                                                   11 August 2015


The root text: Verses 21—27. Verse 21: Lack of success. Verse 22:  Duplicity
towards the Dharma. Verse  23:  Belittling  shame  and  modesty.  Verse  24:
Disharmony among followers. Verse 25: Harbouring evil  thoughts.  Verse  26:
Stealing others’ wealth. Verse 27: Transgressing one’s samaya.


LACK OF SUCCESS


      Verse 21
      When I am deeply troubled over my lack of success, it is the weapon of
      my own evil deeds turned upon me for hindering the work  of  the  holy
      ones. From now on I shall renounce all hindering.

“Lack of success” here can mean different things.  We  can  look  at  it  in
terms of lack of success in Dharma practice. One may claim to be  practising
Dharma or want to practise Dharma  and  actually  go  about  doing  so.  But
somehow one’s Dharma practice doesn’t really become a practice and  one  may
just end up accumulating negativities. As a result  of  that,  the  mind  is
disturbed. So this is a kind of lack of success.

In terms of worldly activities, for example, if you want to do  business  in
order to acquire wealth, but things don’t turn  out  the  way  you  want  or
planned, then that is a lack of success.

In terms of Dharma practice, lack of success could mean that one’s  mind  is
becoming harder instead of becoming more subdued  and  more  disciplined.  I
don’t think one starts practising Dharma with  the  intention  of  making  a
loss, do we? Yet somehow, even though we are engaging  in  Dharma  practice,
the mind is not  subdued.  Perhaps,  one  may  get  involved  in  even  more
negativities. When that happens, this is lack of success. Then  one  has  to
remember that this is the ripening effect of  the  negativities  accumulated
in the past.

When one encounters such lack of success,  one  may  wonder,  “What  is  the
reason for this?” Verse 21 says, “It is the weapon  of  my  own  evil  deeds
turned upon me for hindering the work of the  holy  ones.”   So  it  is  the
result  of  causing  obstacles  to  holy  beings.  When  they  were   giving
teachings, one had caused interruptions or problems for them.   When  people
were engaging in virtue, such as doing their daily recitations,  studies  or
meditations, one had interrupted their  practice  and  caused  problems  for
them. If one had caused obstacles for their practice,  then  one  becomes  a
condition for them to turn  towards  non-virtue.  These  kinds  of  negative
karma will ripen in the experience  of  oneself  lacking  success  in  one’s
undertakings.

There are people who blame the Dharma for their lack  of  success,  such  as
when they encounter problems. They think, “The Dharma  doesn’t  benefit  me.
It is the fault of the Dharma.”  We must remember that it is not  the  fault
of the Dharma, but rather it is our own fault  because  we  had  accumulated
the cause in the past for our lack of success.

It is the spirit of mind training instructions not to look for  the  problem
or the fault outside. All  mind  training  instructions  say  that  whatever
problems we are experiencing, the culprit is us, and nobody else. The  fault
lies with us. Instead of looking outside for the cause of  the  problem,  we
should reflect on the workings of karma and its effect and realise that  we,
ourselves, are at fault. Whatever  problem  we  might  be  experiencing,  we
created the cause of the problem.

Based on the understanding of the workings of cause and  effect,  we  should
set the determination to give up causing obstacles to others when  they  are
engaging in virtue. On top of refraining from causing  obstacles  to  others
in their practice of virtue, ideally we should rejoice  sincerely  from  the
heart and praise their practice of virtue. Based on this  understanding,  we
make a pledge to renounce hindering others’ practice of virtue and  to  live
by our pledge. If we live by our pledge, we actually  accumulate  the  merit
that will become the cause for our own success in the future.

DUPLICITY TOWARDS THE DHARMA


      Verse 22
      When my guru is displeased with me no matter what  I  do,  it  is  the
      weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me  for  acting  duplicitously
      toward the holy Dharma. From now on I shall reduce my duplicity toward
      the Dharma.

Sometimes due to one’s lack of skilfulness, one  may  end  up  doing  things
that displease the virtuous friend. When the guru is  displeased,  one  gets
upset, worried or depressed. When one’s mind is disturbed, one  may  end  up
having wrong views, negative thoughts and lose one’s faith in  and  devotion
towards the virtuous friend. When this happens, one has to remember  not  to
point the finger at the virtuous friend. According to this verse, the  cause
for this situation is because in  the  past,  we  had  acted  “duplicitously
toward the holy Dharma.”

What does duplicity here mean?  For example, in the presence of others,  one
puts on the appearance to gives others the  impression  that  one  is  holy,
peaceful, calm and subdued. But when one is not in the presence  of  others,
one acts in a completely  different  way,  with  bad  conduct,  engaging  in
negativities and so forth.

For example, your guru tells you to abandon certain  activities  and  engage
in some other activities. You promise the guru, “Yes, I  will  do  it”.  But
you don’t do it. After you have made the promise,  when  your  guru  is  not
around, you behave in  ways  that  contradict  the  promise  you  had  made.
Instead of abandoning what you  should  abandon  and  cultivating  what  you
should cultivate, you engage in non-virtue and negativities. That is  acting
with duplicity.

When the karma ripens, as mentioned in this verse, it  doesn’t  matter  what
you do, the guru will be displeased.

Realising this, you should make a promise not to act  duplicitously  towards
the Dharma henceforth. The teachings are telling you that  it  is  important
not to act with duplicity, i.e., what you look like from  the  outside  must
accord with who you really are on the inside.

The example used is of a piece of fruit.  A  fruit  may  look  ripe  on  the
outside but it should also be ripe on the inside. If it is ripe both  inside
and out, then that is good. But even if it doesn’t look ripe on the  outside
but it is actually  ripe  inside,  it  is  still  perfectly  alright.  As  a
practitioner, if one has substance, that’s all that  matters,  even  if  one
doesn’t look like someone with substance from the outside.  The  very  worst
is if one is unripe both inside and out. The point is that if one is  unripe
both inside and out, then there is not much point  in  saying  that  one  is
practising the Dharma because there has not been any benefit. Even if  one’s
external behaviour is not so pleasant but one is peaceful,  calm  and  happy
on the inside, then that is alright. Of course, that is not ideal. The  best
is if one is ripe both on the outside and the inside.  Besides  being  happy
and calm inside, one’s external conduct is also pleasant.  Then  that  would
be perfect.

We cannot tell what is happening in people’s minds and people cannot  really
tell what is happening in our minds.  Generally,  our  external  conduct  is
important especially if we consider ourselves to be a  practitioner  or,  in
particular, a follower of the Mahayana teachings.

One of the earlier verses mentioned that our behaviour  or  conduct  ideally
should not be a condition for others to accumulate non-virtue or should  not
cause others to be upset. So our external conduct is still important.  There
is a saying in  Tibetan  that  goes  something  like  this,  “Even  if  your
realisations are  equal  to  the  gods,  your  conduct  should  accord  with
mankind.” So even if one has realisations, that  doesn’t  mean  one  can  go
around saying  all  kinds  of  things  because  external  conduct  is  still
considered important.

BELITTLING SHAME AND MODESTY


      Verse 23
      When everyone contradicts me, it is the weapon of my  own  evil  deeds
      turned upon me for belittling shame and modesty. From now on, I  shall
      avoid rough behavior.

In a situation where  you  are  contradicted,  when  everyone  seems  to  be
against you even though you have not done anything,  when  others  criticise
and put you down, then how should you think?  When  such  situations  arise,
there is nothing else to do but think that these are  the  results  of  your
own karma.

What kind of karma had we accumulated in order to have  everyone  contradict
or criticise us even if we had not done anything wrong in this life?  It  is
said it is the weapon of our own evil deeds turned upon  us  for  belittling
or disregarding  shame  and  embarrassment  in  relation  to  our  teachers,
parents, loved ones,  relatives  and  so  forth  in  the  past.  Because  of
disregarding shame and embarrassment, we had engaged in all  kinds  of  non-
virtue.

The lack of shame is the mind that does not  refrain  from  committing  non-
virtue on account of oneself. What is shame? For  example,  you  have  taken
the lay vow of abstaining from alcohol. You find  yourself  in  a  situation
where alcohol is present and if you wanted  to,  you  could  drink  it.  But
because of remembering that you have taken the vow to  abstain,  you  think,
“I have made the promise not to drink.  Since  I  have  taken  that  vow,  I
should not drink.” Then you restrain yourself  from  drinking.  This  is  an
example of the mind that abstains from drinking alcohol on  the  account  of
having taken the lay vow. That is shame. You must  not  think  of  shame  in
terms of the English word because in English, shame is  a  bad  thing.  Here
shame is a good thing because it is a mind that causes you to  abstain  from
a particular non-virtue on account of yourself.

Khen Rinpoche: Shame is a good thing or a bad thing?  No  shame  is  a  good
thing? Being shameless is bad but shame is good.  I think so.

If you have taken the vow of not  killing,  when  you  find  yourself  in  a
situation where you could kill if you wanted to, nevertheless,  you  abstain
from killing on account of having taken the vow  of  not  killing.  That  is
having shame. If you don’t feel shame, you could choose to kill.

Embarrassment is abstaining  from  non-virtue  on  account  of  others.  For
example, you have taken the lay vow of abstaining from alcohol  or  the  lay
vow of not killing. You find yourself in a situation where you  could  drink
or kill if you chose to but nevertheless you decided not  to.  For  example,
you abstained from that non-virtue on account of the guru. You remember,  “I
have taken this vow from my teacher.” Or you remember the Buddha and  think,
“If I drink or kill, he will know for sure.” Hence this  is  on  account  of
others, whether it is the guru, the Buddha or somebody else.

Remembering that our past disregard  for  shame  and  embarrassment  is  the
cause for experiencing criticisms and blame from others, we make  a  pledge,
“Henceforth,  I  shall  avoid  rough  behaviour.”   “Rough   behaviour”   is
essentially behaviour that is not in accord  with  the  Dharma,  i.e.,  non-
Dharmic actions. Here we make a pledge to avoid non-Dharmic actions  and  to
have both shame and embarrassment.  The  point,  henceforth,  is  that  with
shame and embarrassment, one abstains from non-Dharmic actions.

DISHARMONY AMONG FOLLOWERS


      Verse 24
      When there is disagreement as soon as my companions gather, it is  the
      weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me for peddling my  discontent
      and evil disposition everywhere. From  now  on  without  any  ulterior
      motive, I shall behave well toward all.

The commentary explains that you have gathered many people who work for  you
or help you, yet somehow they don’t  stay  long  and  they  leave  you  even
though you had succeeded in bringing them into your fold.  These  things  do
happen. That is said to be the result  of  bad  conduct  in  the  past  that
caused people to be disharmonious, in disagreement with one  another  or  to
split up.

In general, if our own conduct and behaviour is not up to the  mark,  people
will not stay with us for a long time. The solution is to  have  a  pleasant
disposition and to be honest and truthful. So one makes the pledge  to  have
a pleasant disposition, to behave properly and be straightforward,  truthful
and honest. The result will be that one will have many helpers  and  friends
in the future and they will stay with us for a long time.

HARBOURING EVIL THOUGHTS


      Verse 25
      When all my kin become my enemies, it is the weapon  of  my  own  evil
      deeds turned upon me for harboring evil thoughts. From now on I  shall
      reduce my deceit and guile.

When we become distant from the virtuous friend  or  when  our  loved  ones,
friends, and companions become enemies, we become  unhappy  and  suffer.  At
that time, we have to remember karma. When the people who matter to  us  and
are close to us become our enemies, it is said  these  are  the  results  of
having harmed them in the past or having harboured, in  the  depths  of  our
heart, thoughts of malice towards them even though we did not directly  harm
them in the past.

You may remember from our past discussions that  just  harbouring  malicious
thoughts, thoughts of wanting  to  harm  or  holding  a  strong  grudge  and
resentment is enough to accumulate karma that will  ripen  in  the  form  of
suffering in the future.

It is possible that one may think, “I didn’t actually harm them directly.  I
just have the thought of harming them but I  didn’t  actually  do  anything.
That should be alright.” But actually that is not the case. If we  harboured
malicious thoughts in our mind for a long  time  or  it  is  a  very  strong
resentment or holding on to a grudge, that in itself will already result  in
the accumulation of karma. We will have to experience the suffering  result.
So from now on, we make the pledge, “I shall reduce my deceit and guile.”

The two mental factors of deceit and guile were covered  in  the  module  on
the mind and mental factors.
 • Deceit is the mind that purposely or  intentionally  hides  one’s  faults
   from others, motivated by the desire for material gain, praise  and  good
   reputation.
 • Guile is the mind  that  puts  up  a  false  front,  pretending  to  have
   qualities that one actually does not possess,  motivated  by  desire  for
   material gain, respect, reputation and so forth.
So guile is putting up a false front, pretending to have qualities that  one
doesn’t  have  whereas  deceit  is  also  putting  up  a  false  front,  but
intentionally hiding one’s faults from others.

Having said this, what is the relationship between the pledge  reducing  our
deceit and guile and the experience of our loved ones becoming  our  enemies
that is said to be the result of us harbouring evil thoughts?

Khen Rinpoche: Do you  see  any  connection?  I’m  not  sure  how  they  are
connected.

STEALING OTHERS’ WEALTH


      Verse 26
      When I am sick with consumption or edema, it is the weapon of  my  own
      evil deeds turned upon me for unlawfully and indiscriminately stealing
      others’ wealth. From  now  on  I  shall  renounce  plundering  others’
      wealth.

There may be different versions of the root text. In my commentary, it  says
that we are  beset  with  obstacles  and  sicknesses.  When  practising  the
Dharma, we may meet with interferences from both humans and  non-humans.  We
may also fall sick, be it  due  to  consumption  (tuberculosis)  or  cancer.
Whatever the sickness may be, the end result is we  become  very  frail  and
weak to the point where we cannot do much practice.

Here, it is translated as “unlawfully and indiscriminately stealing  others’
wealth,” but in Tibetan, it  means  taking  the  possessions  of  the  Three
Jewels, such as taking things belonging to the Buddha, and using them.

“Unlawfully” means that an ordained person who has  committed  a  defeat  of
the pratimoksha and in reality is no longer ordained, still  living  in  the
monastic community and using the possessions of the  sangha  community  such
as the abode, food and so forth. It says  here  that  would  be  “unlawful.”
Actually it is unethical because that person no longer has the vows and  yet
is still using the possessions of the sangha community. It also refers to  a
situation where one is partaking of those possessions  indiscriminately  and
carelessly without any consideration for  whether  a  particular  action  is
virtuous or non-virtuous.

“From  now  on,  I  shall  renounce  plundering   others’   wealth.”   Here,
“plundering others’ wealth” refers to taking and using  the  possessions  of
the Three Jewels


TRANSGRESSING ONE’S SAMAYA


      Verse 27
      When my body is suddenly struck  by  contagious  disease,  it  is  the
      weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me for  committing  acts  that
      corrupted my vows. From now on I shall renounce non-virtuous acts.

Being suddenly inflicted by a contagious disease is said to  be  the  result
of having transgressed one’s  samaya—be  it  a  spiritual  commitment,  vow,
precept or promise— in the past. If one keeps to one’s samaya, one’s  pledge
and promise, one becomes good,  excellent  and  holy.  If  one  transgresses
one’s samaya, then one will fall to the lower realms and  suffer.  As  such,
one makes the pledge to henceforth abandon non-virtue.
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

Qualms from the Tathagata Essence.

Qualm: I have a qualm about the quality of spontaneity  of  a  buddha.  This
quality is uncompounded. I’m not very sure if I fully understand  this.  The
quality of spontaneous enlightened activity is to help all sentient  beings.
Therefore, in a way, it is dependent on the existence  of  sentient  beings.
If so, why is it uncompounded?

On the other hand, it is also not correct to say it  is  compounded  because
that would mean that effort and cause is  required  to  perform  actions  to
benefit sentient beings.  That is not the case.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand the qualm? I better not answer  it  if  you
don’t understand the qualm.

Of the eight qualities of the  Buddha  Jewel  that  were  mentioned  in  the
Tathagata  Essence,  what  is  the  second  quality  and  is  that   quality
compounded or uncompounded?

What is the second quality? Spontaneity.

Is it compounded or uncompounded?

How does the Buddha’s effortless and spontaneous enlightened  activity  come
about? What makes it possible for the Buddha’s enlightened  activity  to  be
spontaneous and effortless?

This is made possible by the  abandonment  of  the  two  obscurations.  This
quality of acting effortlessly and spontaneously without needing  to  depend
on thought is a quality of the buddhas  only.  It  does  not  exist  on  the
sentient beings’ ground. Why are sentient  beings  not  able  to  do  things
without thought and effort? It is said that that is because we have not  yet
abandoned the two obscurations.

First, we need to get an idea  of  what  is  non-abiding  nirvana,  what  is
enlightenment and what is nirvana. These are important points. When we  talk
about the non-abiding nirvana or enlightenment, what  exactly  do  we  mean?
Essentially, what is enlightenment? This is crucial  to  understanding  this
question.

Nagarjuna said, “What is liberation? Liberation is the exhaustion  of  karma
and afflictions.”  What  are  karma  and  afflictions  exhausted  into?  The
sphere of reality is where all karma and afflictions  and  all  elaborations
cease. Essentially, that is what liberation is.

But prior to talking about this, first, we have to know  how  suffering  and
samsara comes about. The root of samsara is ignorance, the  apprehension  of
true existence, the mind that actively believes  that  each  and  everything
that exists must exist from their own side. Whatever appears to  us  appears
as established or existing from its own  side  or  existing  inherently.  So
first, there is this appearance of true existence.  Inside  us  there  is  a
mind that assents to that appearance and believes that that  is  how  things
exist. This mind is called the apprehension of true existence.

With that as the basis, incorrect  mental  attention  comes  into  play.  In
reality, whether the object in question  is  good  or  bad,  it  is  just  a
projection or a mere imputation by the mind.  But that  is  not  how  things
appear to the mind. That is not what we believe.

Whether the object in question is good or bad, as long as we think  that  it
is good, that object will appear to us as completely good from its own  side
with qualities over and above what the object  actually  possesses.  But  we
don’t realise that. We exaggerate the  attributes  of  the  object.  If  the
object is good, everything is 100 per cent good from its own  side.  If  the
object is bad, then everything is 100 per cent bad from  its  own  side.  It
has nothing to do with our perception at all. The  goodness  or  badness  is
right there coming from the side of the object.  Based  on  that  appearance
and belief, very strong anger arises  towards  objects  we  find  inherently
repulsive. Or  we  develop  very  strong  attachment  for  objects  we  find
inherently pleasant or attractive. Based on that, we engage in all kinds  of
actions where we accumulate karma. The result is  continuous  suffering  and
problems.

We  said  that  liberation  is  the  state  of   emptiness—the   sphere   of
reality—into which all  elaborations  dissolve.  “Elaborations”  has  a  few
meanings  but  essentially  the  fundamental   elaboration   here   is   the
elaboration of true existence. It refers to ignorance, the  apprehension  of
true existence.  While  things  do  not  exist  from  their  own  side,  the
apprehension of true existence conceives things  to  exist  from  their  own
side. That is an elaboration because in reality, there is no true  existence
but the apprehension of true existence “elaborates,” exaggerates or  imputes
inherent existence onto phenomena.

This  elaboration,  this  apprehension  of  true  existence,  is   a   wrong
consciousness from which all problems and suffering arise.  Since  it  is  a
false elaboration of reality, if we  apply  the  antidote—the  understanding
that true existence has  never  and  will  never  exist—it  can  weaken  the
apprehension of true existence.  In  so  doing,  we  can  also  remove  this
apprehension of true existence.

Comes the day when we generate the wisdom,  the  mind,  that  directly  sees
emptiness, that  mind  becomes  an  antidote  that  is  powerful  enough  to
overcome ignorance, the apprehension of true existence. If you were to  ask,
“When  you  generate  the  wisdom  realising  emptiness,  where   does   the
apprehension of true existence go?” then there is nothing else to say  other
than that it goes into  emptiness.  Where  does  the  apprehension  of  true
existence cease? It ceases in its  sphere  of  reality.  It  ceases  in  the
reality, the suchness, of the mind.

The mind is accompanied by defilements. When the suchness  with  defilements
is separated from the defilements, what  remains  is  the  suchness  of  the
mind. That is liberation. There is nothing else to point  to.  That  is  the
final sphere of reality.
It is the same thing as the non-abiding nirvana. When the  two  obscurations
are abandoned, what is left  is  that  suchness.  That  is  the  non-abiding
nirvana, the suchness that is  not  accompanied  by  the  two  obscurations.
That is the second quality of spontaneity, the non-abiding nirvana.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting it?

This non-abiding nirvana is uncompounded. It is the  emptiness  or  suchness
of the mind that has been separated from the two obscurations.

The emptiness of the mind has always existed. It  is  just  that  along  the
way, it acquires different names:
 • When it is  accompanied  by  defilements,  it  is  called  suchness  with
   defilements.
 •  When  it  is  not  accompanied  by  defilements,  i.e.,  when  the   two
   obscurations have been removed, it is called non-abiding nirvana.

As the mind acquires these different names, maybe  one  may  think  that  at
certain times, the mind is uncompounded and  then  at  other  times,  it  is
compounded. It is not like that. When  we  talk  about  the  final  ultimate
nature of the mind, the suchness of the mind, it  is  uncompounded.  It  has
always been uncompounded and it will remain that way. That  is  the  quality
of the suchness of the mind.

If you think about it, the emptiness or the suchness  of  the  mind  is  the
basis from which samsara arises. It is that same suchness of the  mind  that
makes nirvana possible.

It is challenging and not easy when you  hear  how  all  phenomena  are  the
elaborations of emptiness, how they are the play of emptiness and  how  they
are in the nature of emptiness.

Because the mind is empty of  existing  inherently,  there  is  samsara  and
there is nirvana. If that is not the final nature of the mind, there  is  no
way for samsara and nirvana to exist.  If the mind exists  inherently,  then
the  presentation  of  samsara  and  nirvana  would  be  untenable  and  not
possible. If the mind exists inherently, why is  it  that  there  cannot  be
nirvana and there cannot be samsara?

Samsara is established  from  within  the  emptiness  of  the  mind.  So  is
nirvana.  With  that  as  the  basis,  the  non-abiding  nirvana   that   is
essentially  the  uncompounded  suchness  of  the  mind,  the   Buddha,   is
spontaneous. And because of that, the Buddha’s  enlightened  activities  are
spontaneous and effortless.

But when you talk about  the  Buddha’s  enlightened  activities  themselves,
then they are not uncompounded.  The  Buddha’s  enlightened  activities  are
compounded.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
