Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L04final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.862930
================================================================================


Transcript  of  the  oral  commentary  by  Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson  4                                                           14  July
2015


Eight Verses of Thought Transformation (cont’d): Reviewing Verses 5 & 6.
Verse 7: The practice of tonglen. Verse 8: The practice of wisdom.


EIGHT VERSES OF THOUGHT TRANSFORMATION (CONT’D)

Reviewing Verses 5 & 6
      Verse 5
      When, out of envy, others mistreat me  with  abuse,  insults,  or  the
      like, I shall accept defeat and offer the victory to others.

In the situations when we are experiencing  such  mistreatment  from  others
who are motivated by their jealousy, this verse  is  saying  that  our  mind
should remain undisturbed and we should  train  in  accepting  the  loss  or
defeat. This advice is meant for the practice of patience.  The  benefit  we
will get from this practice of patience greatly exceeds the  merit  that  is
accumulated from the practice of generosity  and  the  practice  of  ethical
discipline.  Likewise,  the  same  applies  to  the  purification   of   our
negativities when we practise patience here.

However, if our mind becomes  disturbed  and  we  are  unable  to  abide  in
patience  in  such  situations,  our  hatred  will  destroy  our  merit.  As
mentioned by Shantideva in his Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds

      There is no negativity like hatred,
      And no fortitude like patience. [1]


In such situations, this verse advises us to accept defeat and take  on  the
loss. We can relate this to  karma.  Since  we  will  never  experience  the
result of an action that we had not created in the past, as such,  there  is
purpose to accepting this loss.




      Verse 6
      When someone whom I have benefited and in  whom  I  have  great  hopes
      gives me terrible harm, I will regard that person as my holy Guru.

The person mentioned in Verse 6 is either someone we have helped greatly  or
in whom we have placed a lot of expectations and  great  hopes.  When  these
people harm or take advantage of us, we are advised to regard  them  as  our
guru.

Generally speaking, with respect to such people, when they  harm  us  or  do
something that we dislike, we find it more intolerable  and  more  difficult
to accept them. Compared to someone who we have not helped much  or  someone
in whom we do not have much expectation, it does not bother us so much  when
they harm us.

Conventionally speaking, most people would consider it totally  unacceptable
if someone whom they have helped greatly or in whom they have  placed  great
expectations and hopes were to cause them harm. However, the advice here  is
intended for a serious and dedicated practitioner  of  bodhicitta  and  mind
training.  For such a practitioner, the advice is to regard such  people  as
their gurus.

~ The practice of patience
The practice of patience is done when we are upset and angry.  In  order  to
practise patience, we need the conditions for that practice, i.e.,  we  need
an object of patience. An opportunity to practise patience  can  only  arise
when we are harmed by another person. That person who is harming us  becomes
an essential condition for the practice of  patience.  As  such,  we  should
look upon that person as a teacher or guru.

~ Our expectation of reward
Often when we extend our help to others, we do so with some expectations  on
our part. We have some expectations of how things should turn out  after  we
have helped that person.  But  it  is  taught  in  the  teachings  that  the
practice of bodhicitta and the practice of the  perfections  of  generosity,
ethical  discipline  and  so  forth—whatever   help   we   may   extend   to
others—should be carried  out  without  expecting  anything  in  return.  We
should not even expect  to  accumulate  merit  or  good  karma  or  want  to
experience the positive effects from the ripening of that karma.

However, our problem is that when we help others, we do have  all  sorts  of
expectations. The greater the expectations, the greater  the  pain  we  feel
when our expectations are not met. In the first place, if  we  had  extended
our help sincerely without any expectations, even if we were  to  be  harmed
by those we are helping, the pain will not be so great. Yes,  there  may  be
some pain but there isn’t the pain that comes when things do  not  turn  out
in a certain way.

In the context of Mahayana  mind  training,  bodhicitta,  it  is  said  that
whatever practice we do, it should not be done with the expectation  of  any
reward or even the ripening of good karma in the future.

I think not expecting any  reward  or  good  karma  is  in  the  context  of
something that has to do with the samsaric experience.

For example, consider the mind-set of the persons of  small  capacity.  They
accumulate merit and abandon non-virtue. They also practise generosity.  But
deep down, all these practices are done with the  expectation  of  something
in return. For instance, with regard to practising generosity, one hopes  to
be rich in the future. As such, the person of small capacity engages in  the
practice of generosity with the hope of gaining  wealth  and  prosperity  in
future lives. They engage in the practice of patience with the hope  perhaps
of getting a pleasant physical appearance and a good  body  in  the  future.
Although these practices that relate to  looking  for  happiness  in  future
lives are  Dharma,  nevertheless,  they  are  done  with  expectations.  The
results are just a rebirth as a human  or  a  celestial  being  in  samsara,
i.e., it is still an experience that is included in cyclic existence.

If we compare those who practise charity looking for something in this  life
versus someone who practises charity looking for happiness in future  lives,
there are expectations in both instances but  the  expectations  are  a  bit
different. I would think that those people who give  looking  for  something
in this life will face more difficulties and more unhappiness.

I don’t think the  person  of  medium  capacity  and  the  person  of  great
capacity are looking for any kind of reward or ripening of good  karma.  The
person of medium capacity is not looking for samsaric happiness  but  rather
liberation from cyclic existence. As such, we could say  that  perhaps  they
don’t have the expectation of reward or the ripening of good karma.

Likewise, the person of great capacity is looking for enlightenment to  help
others. I don’t think we would say that the person  of  great  capacity  has
the expectation of reward either.

It is said  in  the  teachings  that  in  the  practice  of  mind  training,
bodhicitta or whatever practice one does, one should not be doing them  with
any expectation of reward, ripening of good karma and  so  forth.  For  such
practitioners, when they are harmed by  people  whom  they  have  benefitted
greatly, they are advised to  look  at  such  people  as  teachers  who  are
reminding them of the need to practise without expecting any reward.

When we extend our help to someone, that  person  becomes  our  friend.  But
when that person harms us, immediately, he becomes the enemy. It is  evident
that friends  can  become  enemies.  This  is  the  fault  of  samsara.  The
teachings talk about how  samsara  is  uncertain  in  that  due  to  certain
conditions, friends can become enemies.

We return to Verse 6. In the situation where we are harmed  by  someone  who
we have benefited, we can look at the person as a teacher, teaching us  this
particular fault of cyclic existence, its uncertainty. This person  is  also
a teacher of patience, showing us how we should not  have  any  expectations
of reward.
~ How karma applies here
Likewise, think about how karma applies in this situation  as  well.  If  we
did not create the cause  in  the  past,  there  is  no  way  that  we  will
experience its result. The reason we experience people  returning  harm  for
the benefit we have shown them is due to our  own  action  of  harming  that
person in the past. In that sense, it is  appropriate  to  receive  harm  in
return as the result of what we have done in the past.

It is clear that we experience problems and suffering  because  of  our  own
negativities.  Otherwise,  there   is   no   reason   to   experience   such
difficulties. Let us take as an example the  superiors  who  have  abandoned
negativities. It is said that they never experience  problems  because  they
have already abandoned the causes of suffering.

Because  of  having  accumulated  negativities  in  the  past,  we  are  now
experiencing being harmed by someone. It is  only  the  result  of  our  own
negativities that is causing that person to dislike us  or  to  have  malice
towards us. This person who is harming  us  accumulates  negative  karma  as
well. If we think about  this,  essentially  we  are  responsible  for  that
person’s accumulation of negative karma. Therefore,  all  the  more,  it  is
inappropriate for us to be upset and angry.

The Kadampa masters tell us that the best  response  when  someone  we  have
benefitted harms us to meditate on compassion. The teachings  tell  us  that
in such situations, when we experience abuse, slander,  harm  or  hurt  from
others, we should even make this prayer, “May those beings have the  fortune
to achieve enlightenment because of having done these things to me.”

~ The guru or the virtuous friend
In general, we regard the virtuous friend, the guru who gives us  our  vows,
oral transmissions, teachings,  advice  and  so  forth  as  kind.  Generally
speaking,  it  is  considered  not  very  appropriate  to  disregard   their
teachings and their advice. We can receive vows from the  teachers,  but  if
we don’t keep those vows, then we are not going to  achieve  anything.  When
we receive teachings from the virtuous friend, if we  don’t  practise  those
teachings, then we are not going to achieve anything either. Likewise,  when
we face the enemy, who is the teacher of patience, if  we  do  not  practise
patience, then nothing will be achieved.

What exactly is a virtuous friend or guru? Essentially, he must  be  someone
who is effective for  our  mind  in  that  through  his  teachings  and  his
guidance, our mind is actually transformed and changes. The person  who  can
do that to us is a virtuous friend or guru.

In reality, our guru has to be someone who does not give us any  ‘face’  and
can tell us directly where we have gone wrong and when we are wrong. He  has
to be someone we can accept when he tells us to  our  face,  “You  are  just
wrong!” Then that relationship will be effective.  Of course,  for  that  to
happen in the first place, there must be  a  good  and  stable  relationship
between the guru and the disciple. There has to be devotion and  faith  from
the side of the disciple. Otherwise, if the relationship and  connection  is
not stable and strong and there is no faith, then  when  the  teacher  tells
the disciple what is wrong with him, instead of benefit, there is only  harm
and more problems.

Many of you know the story of how Marpa treated Milarepa. Milarepa was  able
to bear  so  much  hardship  and  his  mind  was  so  transformed  from  his
relationship with his teacher Marpa. But in this day and age, for those  who
are in the role of teachers, most of the time, they  have  to  behave  in  a
politically correct way, i.e., they  have  to  say  those  things  that  the
listeners like to hear. The teachers have to  act  in  accordance  with  the
wishes of the listeners and the audience. As such, there isn’t any  progress
on either side. Both the teacher and student do not progress. The  positions
and the roles of the teacher and disciple  become  so  blurred  sometimes  I
wonder who is the actual teacher.

The great yogi Padampa Sangye said, “The scolding by the guru  is  like  the
recitation of a wrathful mantra.” Of course, this advice is meant for  those
who have devotion and faith. When the guru scolds us even in front of  other
people, whether we have committed a mistake or not, if we have  faith,  then
we will be able to regard that scolding  as  a  wrathful  mantra.  We  think
highly of wrathful mantras. We have no issue in adopting  them  and  happily
reciting them.

Actually, the guru scolding us is one of the best antidotes and remedies  to
our ego. In the first place, what is the  reason  that  we  cannot  tolerate
being scolded by the guru or someone else?  It is our ego.  Because  of  our
pride, we just cannot accept it.

It is said, “A scolding is like a wrathful mantra  and  a  beating  is  like
receiving an initiation.” If one has the idea  that  being  beaten  is  like
receiving an initiation, then one will have no issue with it  and  bear  the
beating  happily  because  generally  speaking,   one   likes   to   receive
initiations!

Being  beaten  by  the  virtuous  friend  is  said  to  purify  a   lot   of
negativities. This advice is for those  who  have  faith.  If  there  is  an
obstacle to be pacified, this is what will pacify our  obstacles.  If  there
is one thing that can bless us, this is the very thing that  can  bless  us.
So when we are being  beaten  or  scolded,  these  are  the  real  blessings
because they are the remedies to  our  ego  and  pride.  When  our  mind  is
transformed and changes for the better, when there are these  antidotes  and
remedies to our ego and afflictions, then it is  said  that  these  are  the
real blessings.

These are the advices for practitioners—those who really want  to  practise,
those  who  know  how  to  think  and  those  who  know  how  to   practise.
Essentially, it has to do with adopting a different mental  perspective.  If
we know how to think with regard to our practice, it  is  said  that  it  is
possible to put up with scoldings, beatings, seeing the enemy as  a  teacher
and so forth.

The teachings tell us that wherever we go or whoever we relate  to,  whether
the person is a friend or enemy, if we can regard them as our  teachers,  we
will always be able to stay happy all the time. All this is possible  if  we
practise. It is a matter of training.

This is similar to what is said in the Lama Chöpa (or guru puja).  Verse  96
says,

      Even if the environment and beings  are  filled  with  the  fruits  of
        negativity,
      And unwished for sufferings pour down like rain,
      I seek your blessings to take these miserable conditions as a path
      By seeing them as causes to exhaust the results of my negative karma.

In  this  way,  we  will  be  able  to  transform  all  the  obstacles   and
unfavourable conditions into positive conditions  that  will  contribute  to
our enlightenment. In short, whatever good or bad things may happen  to  us,
they are all the results of our own karma. If we  can  remember  and  accept
this, I guess we will always be calm and happy.

~ Distinguishing between the person and his afflictions
As I mentioned in the previous lesson, Aryadeva said  in  his  Four  Hundred
Stanzas about making a distinction between the person and  his  afflictions.
I think making this distinction is very  important.  Likewise,  Chandrakirti
said that when we are experiencing harm from someone,  we  should  attribute
the problem to the person’s afflictions and not to the  person  himself.  We
should not get upset with the  person.  The  teachings  say  we  should  not
confront and oppose the person but rather  we  should  confront  and  oppose
that person’s afflictions. We should  have  affection  for  the  person  but
oppose his afflictions.

Likewise, we do not see that we are our pride. In reality, our pride and  we
are different things.  When  we  are  harmed  by  someone  in  the  form  of
scolding, verbal abuse and so  forth,  we  find  it  so  very  difficult  to
tolerate because we feel that she is attacking us. We tend to  conflate  the
two—our ego and ourselves—into one.

But if we can entertain the view that that person’s  abuse  is  directed  at
our ego and not us personally, it makes the abuse more tolerable and  easier
to handle. The reality is that our afflictions, especially our anger,  pride
and ego are our real enemies.  When someone is harming our afflictions  such
as our pride, shouldn’t we be happy instead? This is the reality. We  should
be happy and thankful. But of course that is not how we think.

If we reflect well and see that there is indeed  a  difference  between  our
afflictions and us, it is possible to think that  that  person’s  abuse  and
harm is directed at our ego, our  pride  and  our  afflictions  rather  than
seeing the abuse as a personal attack. If we see the purpose  behind  making
such a distinction, it will make a difference. But this is difficult for  us
to accept.

We should think deeply about this and be  honest  with  ourselves.  We  call
ourselves practitioners and we  say  we  accept  karma,  but  even  when  we
experience a small problem, we cannot handle it. We don’t want to deal  with
it and find the problem intolerable. This is a very  obvious  sign  that  we
are not practising Dharma at all.

It doesn’t matter how many prayers we recite a day, the sadhanas  we  do  or
the number of Om Mani Padme Hums we recite  every  day  of  our  life.  When
something small happens, if we cannot tolerate and put up with it,  this  is
a clear sign that we are not practising the Dharma.

When someone stares at us in  an  unfriendly  way,  criticises  us  or  says
something unpleasant to us, we cannot tolerate  even  that.  When  we  think
about all the Dharma practices that we have done all this  while,  there  is
nothing to show for it.  We have to reflect on this. Practising  the  Dharma
means changing the mind for the better and subduing the mind. The result  of
practising Dharma is that our  mind  should  be  calmer,  more  relaxed  and
virtuous  regardless  of  the  situation,  whether  we  are  happy,  sad  or
experiencing suffering.

I don’t remember exactly who said this. Perhaps it was Guntang Rinpoche  who
said, “One looks like a Dharma practitioner when things are going well.  One
keeps up the appearance of doing one’s prayers and practices.  One  has  the
appearance of someone who is practising the Dharma. However, when  something
bad happens, one cannot tolerate it and do not know how  to  deal  with  it.
Immediately, the appearance of a practitioner is gone.” The  teachings  tell
us that if we  want  to  be  a  Dharma  practitioner  or  we  are  a  Dharma
practitioner, we should not become like this. If we  want  to  be  a  Dharma
practitioner or are a Dharma practitioner, we have to be  an  actual  Dharma
practitioner and not just look like one.

Unfortunately, we only have the form of a practitioner. We  do  prayers  and
so forth and we look like we are practising or we think  we  are  practising
when things are going well. But when something bad happens in our  life  and
we encounter some difficulties and challenges, we don’t  know  how  to  deal
with them. We don’t know how to react or we react  in  a  negative  way.  We
cannot put up with the difficulties or we refuse to accept them. This  is  a
sign that we have never practised the Dharma. Therefore, the teachings  tell
us  to  keep  this  in  mind—we  should  really  try  to  become  an  actual
practitioner and not just look like a practitioner.

There are many such practical and realistic advices on Dharma practice  from
the great Kadampa masters of the past. The teachings of the Kadampa  masters
are very straightforward, very practical and  realistic.  We  should  regard
these teachings, advices and instructions as introductions  to  our  faults.
They tell us directly and immediately what is wrong  with  us  and  what  we
need to do. They are telling us that we need to get rid of these faults.  We
should regard whatever teachings that we learn and practise in  that  way—as
clear indications of our faults and what we need to  do  to  overcome  them.
Whatever we learn and practise must transform our mind for  the  better.  In
particular, they must result in our afflictions becoming weaker over time.

Verse 7: The secret practice of tonglen
      Verse 7
      In short, both directly and indirectly, do I offer every happiness and
      benefit to all my mothers. I shall secretly take upon myself all their
      harmful actions and suffering.

If there is any benefit that we can offer both directly  and  indirectly  to
others, we should do so and take upon ourselves all their  sufferings.  This
shows the practice of tonglen, the practice of giving and taking.  There  is
a mind training prayer that goes like this, “When I experience problems  and
suffering, may my experience of all these sufferings dry  up  the  ocean  of
suffering of all sentient beings.”

When we experience happiness and the benefit of good things,  they  are  the
results of having accumulated merit  in  the  past.  We  dedicate  all  this
happiness to all sentient beings, wishing  that  they  may  also  experience
such happiness. If we actually have these  helpful  mental  attitudes,  then
when we meet with the destitute and the poor,  we  will  happily  give  them
food, clothing and other necessities.  Our  mental  attitude  will  manifest
itself in such  practical  actions.  Even  in  situations  when  it  is  not
possible to do something directly on a practical  level,  we  can  still  do
this practice secretly. Here, “secretly” means to do it at a  mental  level,
i.e., even if we cannot actually give, mentally, we can dedicate  and  give.
This is done in the mind that nobody can see. This  is  one  explanation  of
the word, “secret.”

It is said in Engaging in  the  Bodhisattvas  Deeds  that  the  practice  of
exchanging self and others is to be done in secret.[2] In the  first  place,
why is the practice of exchanging self and others  secret?  Because  such  a
practice of exchanging self and others cannot fit the mind  of  the  hearers
and  solitary  realisers.  Even  amongst   the   bodhisattvas,   there   are
bodhisattvas who have dull faculties and sharp faculties. It  is  said  that
the practice of exchanging self and others cannot fit even the minds of  the
bodhisattvas of dull faculties. The practice of exchanging self  and  others
is meant for the bodhisattvas of sharp faculties.

Verse 8: The practice of wisdom
      Verse 8
      Undefiled by the stains of the  superstitions  of  the  eight  worldly
      concerns, may I, by perceiving all phenomena as illusory, be  released
      from the bondage of attachment.

This verse shows the practice of wisdom. It is said that we should  dedicate
the merit after any practice we do. This dedication has to  be  sealed  with
emptiness.

When we  talk  about  the  eight  worldly  dharmas  (or  the  eight  worldly
concerns), there are three forms of the eight worldly concerns:
1. The eight black worldly dharmas
2. The eight white worldly dharmas
3. The eight mixed worldly dharmas

Whatever we do in life and in particular, whatever practice  we  may  engage
in, they should not be done with the motivation of and  be  stained  by  the
eight worldly concerns. The eight worldly  concerns  that  we  usually  talk
about refer to the eight black worldly dharmas  that  simply  refer  to  the
motivation of attachment to the happiness of this life:
    • Everyone is happy to be happy and unhappy when they are suffering.
    • Everyone is happy to be praised and no one likes to be criticised.
    • Everyone likes a good reputation and dislike a bad reputation.
    • Everyone takes delight in gathering wealth  and  material  possessions
      and is unhappy when such things are lost or cannot be acquired.

These are our worldly concerns and whatever we do  in  life  is  mixed  with
these eight worldly concerns. Even if it is a so-called Dharma practice  but
when it is motivated by these eight worldly  concerns,  then  that  practice
will never become a Dharma practice.

It is not that we don’t need  happiness,  material  gain,  praise  and  good
reputation. It is not about rejecting these things.  In  fact,  there  is  a
case for wanting praise, good reputation,  material  gain  and  just  to  be
happy. The point is not to be so emotionally attached to and  involved  with
them to the point where the mind becomes disturbed by these things.

If we are very emotionally attached  to  and  involved  with  these  worldly
concerns, we build up a lot of expectations, hopes and  fears.  The  greater
our attachment to these concerns, the greater our  fears,  expectations  and
hopes.  Driven  by  our  expectations,  fears   and   worries,   we   become
hypocritical in our behaviour. We have  to  pretend  to  act  and  speak  in
certain ways. For example, we pretend to  smile  when  we  don’t  feel  like
smiling or we say nice things to people that we do not really  mean.  We  do
all this because we want something.  Because  of  our  attachment  to  gain,
praise and reputation, we behave  in  such  a  hypocritical  manner,  saying
things we do not mean. When people  know  what  we  are  up  to,  they  will
gradually lose their trust in us.  All  this  comes  from  our  very  strong
desire for fame, praise and fortune.

We need material possessions, we need to be happy, it is  all  right  to  be
praised and have a good reputation, but  when  we  become  very  emotionally
attached to such concerns, these become the conditions for us to  meet  with
many problems and a lot of fear, anxiety, hopes, worries and so forth.

This happens to all of us, even  so-called  practitioners.  Because  of  the
attachment to praise and reputation, they put  up  a  false  front  and  act
holy. There are some teachers who put on an act of pretending  to  be  holy.
Even some meditators, deep down, are looking for praise.  Even  though  they
are not really meditating, they put on this front as if  they  can  sit  and
meditate very well,  because  they  want  people  to  regard  them  as  good
meditators.

So whatever we do, whether it is  meditation,  studying  or  practising,  we
have to check ourselves to make sure that our so-called practice  of  Dharma
actually becomes Dharma and not just look like Dharma.

I can’t say much about the eight white worldly dharmas and the  eight  mixed
worldly dharmas.
Khen Rinpoche: Does anybody know? If I find something on them,  I  will  let
you know.

“By perceiving all phenomena as illusory, be released from  the  bondage  of
attachment”: Whenever we dedicate our merit, we should seal  the  dedication
with emptiness. When doing practices such as generosity  and  so  forth,  we
can bring to mind that the agent  (i.e.,  ourselves),  the  object  and  the
action itself are all illusory.

“Attachment” is the  grasping  that  refers  to  the  apprehension  of  true
existence. By perceiving everything to be illusory, we  can  be  freed  from
the bondage of the apprehension of true existence.

This  completes  the  presentation  of   the   Eight   Verses   of   Thought
Transformation. These Eight Verses of Thought Transformation are very  short
and concise but very effective. It is very good to memorise  this  text  and
treat it as a daily prayer. If we  can  recite  this  text  every  day  from
memory and reflect on it as we  recite  I  think  this  would  be  the  most
effective daily prayer.

You can say it is the best  sadhana  as  the  words  are  not  difficult  to
understand. We may recite so many prayers and sadhanas in  our  daily  lives
but if we think about it, at our level,  what  real  practical  benefit  can
they offer us in our daily lives?

I’m not saying that you should stop whatever prayers and  sadhanas  you  are
already reciting. I think I mentioned before  that  someone  had  asked  me,
“Can I stop doing some of my prayers because I have too many to do?” I  gave
you all the answer, right? As I mentioned before, if you are not  reflecting
or meditating anyway, then it is better to  at  least  recite  some  prayers
rather than not recite any prayers. However, in the case of someone  who  is
really reflecting and meditating consistently  on  the  teachings,  such  as
this particular prayer, even if he were to miss or doesn’t do  some  of  his
other prayers, I don’t see that as a serious problem. But  if  you  are  not
reflecting or meditating consistently and you also end  up  not  doing  your
daily recitations, then I think that is also really pointless.

This prayer is short and is not difficult to understand but it is  difficult
to put into practice. If we can memorise this teaching  and  reflect  on  it
daily, then there is a real practical benefit especially when we  meet  with
challenges and difficulties and times when we are upset.  When  someone  who
we have to interact with closely on a regular basis such as a  close  friend
says something nasty or unpleasant to us, immediately  that  person  becomes
an enemy. In such a situation, it is helpful if we can bring to  mind  these
verses. The eight verses are telling us to be patient and to  view  everyone
as precious and dear, as a loved one or friend.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] Verse 2, Chapter 6, Page 32, Engaging in the  Deeds  of  a  Bodhisattva,
translated by Toh Sze Gee. ©Toh Sze Gee 2006, Revised 2014.

[2] “Whoever wishes to quickly protect/ Himself and others/ Should  practice
that holy secret —/ The exchanging of self for others.”  Verse 120,  Chapter
8, Ibid., Pages 65-66.


