Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L12final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.980404
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove: Two Buddhist Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for use in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 12                                                   1 September
2015


Q & A & Discussion: Inferential cognition transforming into a direct
perception. The root text: Verses 31—33. Verse 31: Disparaging karma and
its effects. Verse 32: Turning to the dark quarter for help. Verse 33: Not
believing in buddhahood.


INFERENTIAL COGNITION TRANSFORMING INTO A DIRECT PERCEPTION

Question: For sentient beings, is it  possible  for  a  mind  that  realises
emptiness through a  mental  image  to  be  transformed  into  a  mind  that
realises emptiness directly?  The  reason  I  am  asking  this  question  is
because I was unable to find the answer as to how the  transition  into  the
wisdom directly realising emptiness takes place.

Is it the case for sentient beings that the conceptual  mind  that  realises
emptiness through a mental image has to stop functioning temporarily  so  as
to allow the wisdom that directly realises emptiness to arise?

Answer: There are ordinary beings who realise emptiness but ordinary  beings
do not realise emptiness directly. If you remember  the  discussion  on  the
different  kinds  of   awareness   or   consciousness,   there   are   wrong
consciousness and doubt.

Doubt itself is divided into three:
1. Doubt tending to the non-factual
2. Equal doubt
3. Doubt tending towards the factual

After that, there are the correctly assuming consciousness, the  inferential
cogniser and the direct perceiver.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you remember or have you forgotten all of  this?  We  have
gone through all this in class.

Initially, one may have a wrong (or perverse) consciousness with  regard  to
the ultimate nature of reality. One  may  actually  deny  the  existence  of
emptiness, thinking that there is no such thing.

Let’s say, one hears teachings on emptiness. Then  one’s  strong  belief  in
the non-existence of emptiness breaks down a little  and  is  weakened.  But
one still has doubts after hearing the teachings. One may still  wonder  but
that mind is not as strong as a wrong consciousness.

 • Then one proceeds from a doubt tending towards the non-factual  to  equal
   doubt and one may be a little bit more open, “Maybe yes, maybe not. I  am
   not sure.”
 • Then by hearing more teachings and reflection, perhaps,  one  then  sides
   more with the possibility of  emptiness  though  one  remains  undecided,
   “Maybe it is true after all. Maybe things don’t exist inherently.”
 • Then by hearing more teachings and more reflection, one  may  come  to  a
   point when one believes strongly, “It has to be like that! It  cannot  be
   anything else.” It is a very strong belief but not an ascertainment yet.

Then the time comes when  one  understands  and  realises  emptiness  via  a
correct reason. It has to be a correct reason. In dependence upon a  correct
reason  or  reasons,  one  comes  to  realise  the  object,  in  this  case,
emptiness. That mind is called an inferential cogniser  realising  emptiness
and it is a conceptual mind.

After one has that inferential cognition  of  emptiness  through  a  correct
reason or reasons, one has to familiarise oneself over and over  again  with
that  understanding.  It  is  said  that  the  time  will  come  when   that
understanding or realisation is transformed into a direct perception.

On the path of accumulation and the path  of  preparation,  that  individual
primarily meditates on emptiness, but that meditation  always  involves  the
meaning generality of  emptiness.  That  realisation  is  a  realisation  of
emptiness via a meaning generality.

Essentially, if you think about the question that was just asked—“How do  we
explain the transformation of a  doubt  with  regard  to  emptiness  into  a
correct belief”—can there be such  a  transformation  in  the  first  place?
Likewise, how  do  you  progress  from  correct  belief  to  an  inferential
cognition? With regard to the inferential cognition of  emptiness,  can  the
entity of that mind transform into a  direct  perception?  If  you  were  to
really think about these points, they are very difficult to understand.

From the sutric point of view, essentially, with regard  to  the  mind  that
goes on to enlightenment, there is no option other than asserting  that  the
conceptual mind can transform in entity into a direct perceiver.

But if you were to explain it from the tantric point of view, then it  is  a
little bit easier. We start from the mind that moves from life to  life.  It
is the extremely subtle mind that moves at the time of  death  to  the  next
life and it is the extremely subtle mind that  moves  on  to  enlightenment.
All  the  coarser  levels  of  consciousnesses   cease   to   exist   before
enlightenment can happen.

When you look at this from the sutric point of view, you have no choice  but
to say that through familiarisation over a period of  time,  the  conceptual
mind realising emptiness can  be  transformed  in  entity  into  the  direct
perception of emptiness. Isn’t that the case? Don’t  we  end  up  having  to
saying that? There is no other option. First, before we  start  the  debate,
we have no choice but to say this.

Khen Rinpoche: What do you think?

Student 1: We were taught that there is a wisdom that arises  from  hearing.
This moves on to a wisdom that arises from reflection and  the  wisdom  that
realises emptiness directly.  I  have  this  premise  that  the  inferential
realisation of emptiness and the direct realisation  of  emptiness  are  two
different minds.

When we talk about the transition, it seems that the  conceptual  mind  that
realises emptiness through a mental image or a meaning generality has to  be
transformed into a direct perception. On the one hand,  it  seems  there  is
one entity by means of transformation and on the other hand, it  seems  that
there are two different minds—  an  inferential  cognition  and  the  direct
perception of emptiness.

Khen  Rinpoche:  An  inferential  cognition  of  emptiness  and  the  direct
perception  of  emptiness  are  necessarily  different  because   they   are
different minds. One is thought; the other is a direct perceiver.  There  is
nothing difficult about this point. They are  necessarily  different  minds.
It is clear that one is thought and one is direct perceiver.  That  is  easy
but that is not your question.  Your  question  is:  Does  that  inferential
cognition of emptiness transform in entity into a direct perceiver?

The main question is about the mind realising emptiness in the continuum  of
a person on the path of preparation. The mind  realising  emptiness  in  the
continuum of a person on the path of preparation is necessarily  conceptual.


Then the time comes when with repeated  familiarisation,  it  is  said  that
that person will see emptiness directly and he enters the path of seeing.

The  basic  question  then  is  this:  Does  the  inferential  cognition  of
emptiness in the continuum of a person on the path of preparation  transform
in entity into the direct perception of emptiness when he  enters  the  path
of seeing?

If you were to say no, then you have only one  other  option,  that  is,  in
order to achieve the path of seeing,  you  have  to  generate  a  completely
different mind—the mind that realises  emptiness  directly.  These  are  the
only two options.

I guess the better option would be the first one. You  probably  would  have
to say that the inferential cognition realising emptiness transforms into  a
direct perceiver.

What other option is  there?  If  you  were  to  say  that  the  inferential
cognition of emptiness does not  transform  into  a  direct  perceiver  upon
entering the path of seeing, then you  would  have  to  say  that  the  mind
directly perceiving emptiness is a newly arisen phenomenon. If it  is  newly
arisen, what is its prior moment?

If you say that it is  a  new  mind,  then  you  have  to  account  for  its
immediate  prior  moment  before  it  arises  as  a  direct  perceiver.  The
immediate prior moment is essentially a mind in the continuum  of  a  person
on the path of preparation. That  mind,  which  is  the  substantial  cause,
moves on to become a direct perceiver. Does that mind realise emptiness?

If you say that the wisdom realising emptiness upon  entering  the  path  of
seeing is a new mind, what is its former moment?  Is  its  former  moment  a
mind that realises emptiness? If you say yes, is that former moment of  mind
that realises emptiness a direct perceiver?

But if you take the first position—that the inferential cognition  realising
emptiness  in  the  continuum  of  a  person  on  the  path  of  preparation
transforms into the direct perception of emptiness upon achieving  the  path
of seeing—this position has less complications.

Khen Rinpoche: Don’t you think so? Shall I make it more  complicated?  Which
one are you going to choose? I think that there are only these two  options.


 • You can either say that the  inferential  cognition  realising  emptiness
   that is essentially a conceptuality or thought  ceases  at  the  time  of
   achieving the path of seeing or it doesn’t cease.
 • If it doesn’t cease, then it will carry on to the path of seeing and  the
   path of meditation. Those realisations of emptiness are  conceptual,  are
   all thoughts.

If the inferential cognition realising  emptiness  in  the  continuum  of  a
person on  the  path  of  preparation  does  not  transform  into  a  direct
perceiver upon achieving the path of seeing, that means it will continue  as
a thought (or conceptual mind) and that conceptual  mind  will  continue  on
the path of seeing all the way up to the end of the path of meditation.

Then even the mind that realises emptiness in the last moment as a  sentient
being would be a conceptual thought. Then what moves  on  to  enlightenment?
Does the continuum of a similar type move on to enlightenment?

Does the continuum of this conceptual thought  realising  emptiness  in  the
continuum of the person who is in his last moment as a sentient  being  move
on to enlightenment?

You have to account for all these questions.

There are more questions: Is the inferential cognition  realising  emptiness
in the continuum of a person on the path of preparation a buddha lineage  or
not?

That is the thing with these great treatises. If you don’t think about  them
in depth, that’s it. But if you do think more deeply, there is  so  much  to
think about and sometimes you end up with  many  unanswered  qualms.  Having
many qualms even though they may be unanswered is not a bad  thing  at  all.
In fact, it is a very good thing. It is absolutely not good to not have  any
qualms. If you are a buddha, you don’t need these qualms as you  won’t  have
qualms. Otherwise, you need qualms.

The essence of  the  answer  is  that  the  inferential  cogniser  realising
emptiness  in  the  continuum  of  a  person  on  the  path  of  preparation
transforms in entity into a direct  perceiver  when  he  realises  emptiness
directly.

What difficulty do you have if you take this to  be  the  answer?  Is  there
anything you are not happy about?

Khen Rinpoche (addressing Student 2 as he comes up to  pose  his  question):
You must understand the last question. The question now is: Do you find  any
difficulty in accepting the essential answer?

Student 2: I have a qualm regarding this. I think I would have to say it  is
transformed.
But I have a difficulty. If it is transformed, what happen  to  the  meaning
generality  when  it  becomes  a  direct  realisation?  Does  that   meaning
generality, the mental image, become a phenomenon source form?

Khen Rinpoche: What do you find so difficult?

Student 2:  What happens to the mental image if it is transformed?

Khen Rinpoche: The mental image disappears!

Student 2: I thought I heard in lorig that it becomes  a  phenomenon  source
form or something like that?

Khen Rinpoche: There can only be  a  meaning  generality  if  a  thought  is
involved. If  conceptuality  does  not  exist,  then  there  is  no  meaning
generality to talk of.

Student 2: Then what is a phenomenon source form?

Khen Rinpoche: Is that related to this discussion?

Are you finding any difficulty in accepting that  an  inferential  cognition
realising emptiness transforms into a direct perceiver?  What  is  bothering
you about this?

Student 1 (who posed the original question):  If it is a  consciousness,  it
is  necessarily  a  product.  We  understand  consciousness  in  term  of  a
continuum, i.e., it comes from the continuum of a similar type.

Let’s say, we talk about the first  moment  of  the  direct  realisation  of
emptiness. We take that to be  a  newly  created  phenomenon.  What  is  the
substantial cause of that wisdom that directly realises emptiness?  Must  it
be a conceptual realisation of emptiness that is a different mind?

Khen Rinpoche: They are definitely different minds.

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Ven Gyurme: What you are trying to say basically is that  a  thought  cannot
become a direct perceiver because there is no continuum of a  similar  type.
That means you didn’t accept the answer right from the beginning.
(Student’s response is inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche: There is a  continuity  of  similarity.  In  fact,  the  most
important similarity is that they both realise emptiness.

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche: (Addressing the class) Do you  have  any  qualms  about  this
explanation? Are you thinking or do you want to think? If you don’t want  to
think, then we will just stop here and continue with the text.

Question: I am always confused with this line in the Heart  Sutra,  which  I
think is related to our discussion: “There is no eye element and  so  on  up
to and including no mind element and no mental consciousness element.”  What
is a mental consciousness element and  how  is  it  related  to  the  direct
perception of emptiness?  If  we  understand  what  a  mental  consciousness
element is, will it help  us  to  understand  this  mind  that  is  able  to
transform?

Answer:  When  consciousness  is  divided  into   two,   there   are   sense
consciousnesses and  the  mental  consciousness.  The  mental  consciousness
primarily refers to the mental main mind.

The “mind element” would probably refer to the mental  consciousness,  i.e.,
the main mind, whereas the  “mental  consciousness  element”  would  include
both the main mind and the mental factors.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t remember exactly. It could be like  that.  I  am  not
sure.

Student 4: I refer to the qualm with  regard  to  the  inferential  cogniser
that transforms into a direct perceiver. Based on that  logic,  if  we  work
backwards, we would have to say  that  a  correctly  assuming  consciousness
will be transformed into an inferential cognizer.  And if we go back  again,
we will end up having to  say  that  ignorance  ultimately  transforms  into
wisdom. The object may be different but I think that is  where  one  of  the
qualms will end up.

Khen Rinpoche: That question will arise if you posit  that  the  inferential
cognition  realising  emptiness  can  transform  in  entity  into  a  direct
perception of emptiness.

If you work  that  argument  backwards,  is  the  inferential  cognition  of
emptiness the same continuum as the correct belief focussing  on  emptiness?
Then is that correct belief a continuation essentially  of  doubt  and  this
doubt is essentially a continuation of wrong consciousness?

If you think about it, can you argue that  through  listening  and  thinking
about things, a wrong consciousness in general becomes a  doubt?  Maybe  you
can argue in that way.

Let’s say you have a  wrong  (or  perverse)  consciousness  that  decisively
thinks that there is no such thing as a buddha, that there is no such  thing
as karma.

Then somehow by thinking about these points and based on  some  reason,  you
change your view and think, “Maybe, there is actually karma after  all.”  Is
that doubt a continuation of the wrong consciousness  from  before?  If  you
think about it, you may have to say that it is  a  continuation.  Otherwise,
what option do you have? If you say that wrong consciousness  can  transform
in entity into doubt or something else, what problems will there be?

Khen Rinpoche: Are there any problems? Or are there no problems?

That is why in the Tathagata Essence, there was  a  question  about  whether
the emptiness of the apprehension of true existence  is  buddha  lineage  or
not. If you accept what has been said so far, i.e., it can  transform,  then
you would probably have to end up saying that  it  is  buddha  lineage.   It
follows then that ignorance is buddha lineage!

Can’t a wrong consciousness  ever  change  into  something  better?  Can  it
become something like doubt that is much better than wrong view? It  is  not
possible that a wrong consciousness is  always  a  wrong  consciousness.  It
either changes into something else or it disappears.

Can a wrong consciousness transform in entity, for  instance,  can  a  wrong
consciousness become a doubting consciousness? Yes or no?

Students: Yes!

Khen Rinpoche: If you say yes, that means there is the continuation  of  the
apprehension of  true  existence  all  the  way  to  enlightenment.  Is  the
apprehension of true existence buddha lineage? If  wrong  consciousness  can
transform  in  entity  into  doubting  consciousness,  wouldn’t  that   make
ignorance buddha lineage?

You have to stand for what you believe in. You cannot take one position  one
minute and the next minute take another position!

Khen Rinpoche: Is your brain functioning?  Last time, you used to  say,  “No
pervasion!”

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

DISPARAGING KARMA AND ITS EFFECTS


      Verse 31
      When things get worse no matter what I do, it is the weapon of my  own
      evil  deeds  turned  upon  me  for  disparaging  moral  causality  and
      dependent origination. From now on I shall strive to accumulate merit.

“When things get worse no matter what I do”  could  be  in  terms  of  one’s
practice. One’s practice doesn’t succeed or it seems to  be  getting  worse.
It could also refer to one’s career or  business.  So  no  matter  what  one
does, one is not successful. Not  only  that,  but  things  actually  become
worse. It is said that it is the weapon of our own evil  deeds  turned  upon
us for disparaging karma and its effect. It is the ripening  effect  of  the
non-virtue that we accumulated in the  past  because  of  not  believing  in
karma and its effects and not being careful with living our lives  according
to the principles of karma.

The solution therefore is to “strive to accumulate merit.” There  are  other
editions that say, “From now on I shall strive to be patient.”

Essentially, whatever happens, the solution is not to  disparage  karma  and
to strive to live our lives according to the principles  of  karma  and  its
effects. When we live our lives in this way, there will  be  challenges  and
at times, it is not easy. But even if we  face  difficulties  in  trying  to
keep to our principles and our beliefs in karma, we would just have to  bear
and put up with them.

TURNING TO THE DARK QUARTER FOR HELP


      Verse 32
      When all the religious rites I perform go awry, it is the weapon of my
      own evil deeds turned upon me for looking  to  the  dark  quarter  for
      help. From now on I shall turn away from the dark quarter.

There are people who resort to pujas  or  religious  rites  when  things  go
wrong or they meet with obstacles or sicknesses. Sometimes, even  after  the
pujas have been performed, their situations do not improve and may even  get
worse. At such times, it is highly possible to develop wrong views  thinking
that all these pujas are invalid and do not work.

This is not true. It all depends on whether the person who is arranging  for
the pujas to be done has faith in the Dharma and the understanding  of  what
Dharma is. If one has faith in  the  Dharma,  it  doesn’t  matter  what  the
result of the pujas is. Even if the pujas don’t seem  to  be  helpful  in  a
particular situation, because of having faith in  and  an  understanding  of
the Dharma, one knows that once the cause has been created,  it  is  only  a
matter of time that its result will happen.  Even  if  that  doesn’t  happen
now, it would definitely ripen in the future.

But there are times when despite pujas  being  done,  things  may  get  even
worse. What is the cause of that scenario?  It is because the force  of  the
non-virtue that is behind the bad experiences is stronger. Therefore, it  is
ripening  now.  That  makes  it  look  as  if  the  pujas  are  useless   or
ineffective.

There are people who sponsor pujas but instead of the  problem  going  away,
the problem gets bigger. Then they think, “The pujas are  making  even  more
problems for me.” They blame the pujas and the rites, thinking  that  it  is
the pujas that are causing more problems to arise. But actually that is  not
the case. Because the strength of the  non-virtue  is  so  powerful,  it  is
ripening in the form of more and more problems.

“Looking to the dark quarter for help” means that in the past, we listen  to
people whose advice are basically non-Dharma. We have also done things  that
are completely opposite to the Dharma.
So if we do not desire such an outcome, the solution is that  from  now  on,
we should turn away from the dark quarter or the dark side, which means  not
engaging in non-Dharma. We should do things according to the Dharma.

NOT BELIEVING IN BUDDHAHOOD


      Verse 33
      When my prayers to the Three Jewels go unanswered, it is the weapon of
      my own evil deeds turned upon me for not believing in buddhahood. From
      now on I shall rely on the Three Jewels alone.

Many people who are solely concerned with the happiness of this  life  alone
would make prayers to the Three Jewels to  overcome  some  sickness,  spirit
harms or failures in their career or businesses. They want to be  free  from
such problems. At times, their prayers don’t succeed. At those times, it  is
quite normal for such people to think,  “I  made  such  strong  prayers  but
nothing happened. What is the use? The Three Jewels have no  power!”  It  is
really possible to have such wrong views.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: From the Buddha’s side, does  the  Buddha  have
the complete power to fulfil all your aims of this  life?  Does  the  Buddha
have the power to grant you whatever you like  for  the  happiness  of  this
life?

Khen Rinpoche: Some say yes. Some say no.  It is a simple question.

Does the Buddha have the power to free you  from  your  sickness?  Does  the
Buddha have the power to solve your business problems?

Khen Rinpoche: Does or doesn’t he have the power?

(Students’ responses are inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche: Does Tua Pek Kong[1] have power or not?

Student 1: I recall very clearly in one teaching  that  Lama  Zopa  Rinpoche
mentioned that the power of the Buddha’s enlightened activities is  50%  and
the power of sentient beings’ karma is 50%.

Khen Rinpoche: Why do you have doubt? What is so difficult  about  this?  If
you think yes, just say yes. If you think no, just say no.

What is so difficult about this? The Buddha can bring you to  enlightenment.
The Buddha can free sentient beings from samsara. And he cannot do this  one
small little thing?

The Buddha has the power to save you, protect you  from  the  sufferings  of
cyclic existence in general and also the sufferings  of  the  lower  realms.
That is the reason why you take refuge in him, isn’t it?

Do you all have an experience similar to what is  mentioned  in  the  verse?
Otherwise there is no reason for doubt to arise.

It happens that sometimes our prayers to the  Three  Jewels  concerning  the
affairs of  this  life  may  not  materialise.  When  that  happens,  it  is
important to avoid generating  the  wrong  view  thinking,  “The  Buddha  is
useless!  He  can’t  help  me.”   The  explanation  for  our   prayers   not
materialising is that, in the past, we  did  not  have  real  conviction  or
single-pointed trust in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. Or it could  be  that
in a past life or even in this life, we don’t really  believe  in  what  the
Buddha said. That is, we don’t have much trust and belief  in  the  Buddha’s
words.

It is said that no matter what happens to us in our lives, whether  good  or
bad, we should completely entrust ourselves to  the  Three  Jewels.  If  you
look at what refuge is, it is a mind, the faith of conviction in  the  Three
Jewels’ ability to protect us from the lower realms  and  from  samsara.  In
order to generate the mind of refuge there must be the two  causes,  one  of
which is the faith of  conviction  in  their  ability  to  protect  us  from
whatever suffering we are afraid of.

This faith of conviction in the  Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sangha’s  ability  to
protect us from the sufferings of samsara and the lower realms is  extremely
important. It is not easy. Even if you have thought about, it is really  not
so straightforward. It is said, “If  you  believe  and  have  the  faith  of
conviction in the power and ability of the  Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sangha  to
protect you from all  the  sufferings—the  sufferings  of  samsara  and  the
suffering of  the  lower  realms—you  will  definitely  be  protected.”  The
question then arises. How are you protected?

You have to think about this. Don’t you think this is so important? This  is
crucial for us for what will save us from the  lower  realms  is  supposedly
this trust and faith in the Buddha’s power and ability to protect  you  from
the lower realms. This is what is mentioned in  the  teachings—if  you  have
complete trust in the Buddha, i.e., you are convinced that  he  can  protect
you, it is guaranteed that you will not go to the lower realms. It  is  said
with so much confidence in the teachings that definitely you will  not  fall
to the lower realms. The question is how does this  work?  Don’t  you  think
that it is such an important thing to think about?



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] A worldly god popular with people in this part of the world.

