Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L22final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.508764
================================================================================


Transcript  of  the  oral  commentary  by  Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson     22                                                              6
October 2015


Taking on the suffering of others. The  root  text:  Verses  104—105.  Verse
104: Meaning of dependent arising. Verse 105: Life has no inner core.


TAKING ON THE SUFFERING OF OTHERS

Student 1: Last week, Khen  Rinpoche  asked  us  a  question  and  I  didn’t
understand the answer. My question  is:  Is  it  possible  to  take  on  the
suffering of others and to top  up  their  merit.  I  understand  that  this
practice is instrumental in developing bodhicitta but does it really work?

Khen Rinpoche: That was my question. What is your answer?

Student 1: I think that it is not possible. I think that  the  suffering  of
people comes from their own karma. So giving them  our  merit  is  good  for
developing bodhicitta but does it really work?

Khen Rinpoche: You should ask a different question instead of asking  me  my
own question! Maybe someone can give their idea. Then  after  that,  I  will
talk. The senior students, come and give an answer to that question. Let  us
hear your view on this subject.

Student 2: On the one hand, we are always told that we  have  to  experience
whatever karma we ourselves have created. This is similar to the point  that
he (Student 1) has brought up.

But I believe—just on a belief level, without any  reason—that  someone  who
is spiritually highly accomplished like our lamas are able to  take  on  our
sufferings. The reason I say this is because I remembered  when  Geshe  Lama
Konchog passed away, he had manifested suffering from stomach cancer. It  is
hard to reconcile how someone who is so pure could still have  this  remnant
karma of experiencing illness. Lama Konchog was  very  well  known  for  his
practice of Medicine Buddha. I believe that for someone who  is  spiritually
accomplished, which oneself currently is  not,  then  something  happens.  I
don’t know what happens but something happens.

Related to this question, I actually wanted to ask about tonglen. If we  are
not quite ready yet—we don’t have the strong compassion  and  bodhicitta  to
take on the suffering of others because our  self-cherishing  is  so  strong
and somehow there is an irrational part of our mind that thinks, “If I  take
on this suffering, will it really  happen  to  me?”—can  we  just  do  half-
tonglen for the time being? For instance, just doing the giving  part—giving
our good health, our merit to the person who  needs  it—until  our  mind  is
strong enough for us to do the taking part?

Khen Rinpoche: My question is: You may give but others do not  receive  what
you are giving. Then what is the point? That is the question at hand.

Student 2: But if you have a  very  powerful  karmic  connection  with  that
person, for example, the relationship we have with our parents, when  we  do
prayers for them, they will receive the benefit of those prayers.

Is it related to this or  are  we  just  talking  specifically  of  tonglen?
(Addressing Student 1). If we are talking about doing prayers and  so  forth
for our parents, because of our strong karmic connection,  they  do  receive
the merits of doing those practices. If not, what  is  the  point  of  doing
pujas?

Also, if we pray for the long life of our gurus, because  of  the  power  of
this guru-disciple relationship, Lama Zopa had said many times  before  that
there is definitely some benefit. Not because of the power of one’s  prayers
per se but because of the power of  the  nature  of  the  relationship.  The
prayers do have power but at our level, when we do them, they are  not  very
powerful.  But  definitely  because  of  the  karmic  connection,  there  is
certainly some kind of effect.

Khen Rinpoche, can you please answer my question as to  whether  we  can  do
half- tonglen until we are ready?

Khen Rinpoche: For the word tong, when you add the word  pa  behind  it,  it
becomes empty.

Student 3: I disagree with Student 2 because one of the  characteristics  of
karma is that you do not receive the results of what  you  did  not  create.
There is a verse that says that the Buddha does  not  wash  away  sins  with
water. The Buddha had so much merit and he could have given  that  merit  to
anyone but we are still suffering. So the buddhas didn’t take anything  away
and they didn’t give us their merit.

At end of the day, you have to explain how dedication works.  If  not,  then
you will have a problem between dedications and auspiciousness verses.

At the end of the day, I don’t think that we actually give  away  our  merit
per se. Maybe it is more like creating the condition for the other  person’s
own positive karma to ripen. Likewise, the taking  part  of  tonglen  causes
our own negative karma to ripen so that we could purify  them  more  quickly
or we create more merit because of that act of taking.  Maybe  that  is  why
suffering manifests when one takes on the suffering of  others.  It  is  not
due to one really taking on the suffering of other people per se.

Student 4: In Liberation in the Palm of Your hand, there is a  famous  story
of a lama who is a great practitioner. He was teaching in  a  hall.  Outside
the hall, a dog was beaten by someone. At that time, this lama was  actually
practising tonglen and he absorbed the pain of  the  dog.  This  is  what  I
understood from that story.

So my question is: How does tonglen benefit someone who is dying or is  very
sick? Let’s say that we  have  a  karmic  connection  with  this  particular
patient. If we are practising tonglen beside this person, I  think  that  at
that moment, this person will definitely feel the loving  kindness  and  the
positive energy you are exuding. It will definitely give  some  calmness  to
that person.

I agree with Student 3 who said that we are ripening the  person’s  positive
karma. Especially during the time when a person is passing away, if  we  are
able to practise tonglen,  that  will  help  the  dying  person  to  have  a
virtuous mind. With that virtuous state of mind, definitely it  will  induce
his positive karma to ripen.

Secondly, how would tonglen benefit a particular person when  we  are  using
it to practise bodhicitta? If we are using tonglen  to  practise  bodhicitta
with a particular person, at that time of our practice and in the long  run,
it will help us to achieve enlightenment. Even if in this lifetime  it  does
not benefit the person, definitely in future lifetimes,  it  will  create  a
connection for us to benefit that person in another time.

Khen Rinpoche (addressing Student 1): You got your answer?

Student 1: I would like to hear your answer.

Khen Rinpoche: I have no answer.

Recently I mentioned some of the prayers that bodhisattvas make. Because  of
their bodhicitta, they have so much courage  and  determination  to  benefit
sentient beings.

Even for the sake of one sentient being, they are willing  to  stay  in  the
hell realms for a very long period of time just  to  benefit  that  sentient
being. They make  extensive  prayers  to  achieve  that  but  these  prayers
somehow don’t work. They want to go to the lower realms to benefit even  one
sentient being. They pray to be able to achieve that but somehow  they  will
never ever be reborn in  the  lower  realms.  Instead  the  force  of  their
courage and determination to benefit sentient beings enable them to  achieve
enlightenment much more quickly.

Because of their courage  and  determination  to  benefit  sentient  beings,
everything the bodhisattvas do for sentient beings, including all the  merit
that they have accumulated, they always dedicate them for the  happiness  of
all sentient beings. When they make such prayers from the  depths  of  their
heart all the time, obviously it is going to make a difference in that  they
will achieve enlightenment more quickly.

So it is clear that through the practices of  taking  on  the  suffering  of
others and giving one’s happiness  and  virtue  to  them,  one  can  achieve
enlightenment  faster.  Likewise,  one  achieves  enlightenment  much   more
quickly when one dedicates sincerely all one’s  roots  of  virtue  to  other
sentient beings. This much is clear.

If you look at Amitabha’s pure land, Sukhavati, that is actually the  result
of Amitabha’s bodhicitta that he generated while he  was  on  the  path.  He
dedicated all the merit that he had accumulated for  the  creation  of  that
pure land. Sentient beings can also pray to be  reborn  in  Amitabha’s  pure
land, to create the cause to be reborn there. The fact that sentient  beings
can be reborn in Amitabha’s pure  land  is  the  result  of  the  dedication
prayers made by Amitabha himself when he was  on  the  path  before  he  was
enlightened.

In Lama Tsongkhapa’s treatise, The Great Treatise on the Stages of the  Path
to Enlightenment, in the section on karma, he mentioned that from  the  side
of the Buddha, he had created the cause for sentient  beings  to  experience
the results of whatever prayers they make. From sentient beings’  own  side,
they have to create  some  of  the  causes  in  order  to  experience  their
effects. Therefore, dedicating one’s merit to sentient beings and doing  the
practice of tonglen help one to achieve  enlightenment  more  quickly.  That
being the case, needless to say, this  will  all  be  of  great  benefit  to
sentient beings.

With regard to the practice  of  taking  on  the  suffering  of  others  and
whether that will actually happen in reality or not, if we  talk  about  the
bodhisattvas, because of their bodhicitta and the  force  of  their  courage
and determination, they really mean it!

When they make prayers of wanting to go  to  the  lowest  of  the  hells  to
benefit even just one sentient being, they will do it.  They  make  many  of
these prayers all the time from their heart but actually they won’t  end  up
there. In fact, because they make such prayers  out  of  their  very  strong
bodhicitta, it makes them achieve enlightenment even quicker.

So I think one would not experience the actual taking on of  the  sufferings
of others even if one does the  practice  by  visualising  taking  on  their
sufferings. Otherwise, we would have a difficult time reconciling this  with
the workings of karma as it is said that we cannot experience the result  of
actions that we didn’t create. What I have said is an answer in general.

With a good motivation and attitude of benefitting the  other  person,  when
one shows a pleasant demeanour and speak in a polite and pleasant manner  to
another person, the other  person  appreciates  this.  If  just  a  pleasant
demeanour and pleasant words can have such  a  positive  effect  on  another
person, maybe one can  also  say  that  by  having  a  good  heart,  a  good
motivation, a good attitude, and exuding  positive  energy  from  one’s  own
side, can  also  have  a  positive  effect  on  another  person.  They  will
definitely be the conditions for another person to transform their mind  and
generate a good heart.

I really wonder whether the dedication of merit means taking  our  merit  as
if it is something tangible, giving it to  another  person  with  the  other
person receiving it. Although it is difficult to explain, in general, it  is
certain that one can feel and experience the power of a  positive  intention
and the power of prayers. With  a  virtuous  intention  and  a  good  heart,
sincerely making prayers to benefit others, we can feel that  they  do  have
an effect on the beneficiary. They work but how they work is a big  question
but I  don’t  think  they  work  in  the  sense  that  the  merit  is  being
transferred to another person. I don’t think so.

Our sincere and virtuous prayers  to  benefit  another  person  act  as  the
conditions for that person to generate virtuous thoughts. Maybe we  can  say
that.  Even if we cannot accept the idea  of  taking  on  the  suffering  of
others, if we just want to do the giving part, there is  no  loss  but  only
profit. If we can really dedicate our merit  for  the  happiness  of  others
sincerely from the heart  with  the  intention  to  make  this  aspirational
prayer, “Due to my merit, may this happen,” then there is only  benefit  and
no loss. We can  send  our  good  wishes  and  dedication  by  praying,  for
example,  “Whatever  happiness  I  have  now,  such  as  good   health   and
enjoyments, may others also experience the same kind of happiness.” Or  when
we are experiencing a particular problem or  suffering,  we  can  also  wish
from the heart, “May others not experience what I am experiencing.”
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

MEANING OF DEPENDENT ARISING


      Verse 104
      Now hear this! Everything is dependently co-arisen. Being  dependently
      co-arisen, they are not independent. Changing this way and that,  they
      are false appearances and illusions; they are images that appear  like
      a whirling firebrand.

The ‘I’ is the  object  of  observation  of  self-grasping.  Self-cherishing
arises  from  that  self-grasping.  Similarly,  all  other   phenomena   are
dependently arisen.

The  Tibetan  word  tendrel  literally  means  dependently   related.   When
translated  as  dependently  arisen,  it  means  that  all   phenomena   are
dependently arisen. What does this  mean?  What  are  its  implications?  It
means that all phenomena are mere appearances. This  is  the  power  of  the
words, dependently arisen, as it is implying that  all  phenomena  are  mere
appearances and it means that all phenomena are empty of a self or empty  of
independent establishment.  The  words,  dependently  arisen,  lead  to  the
understanding that  there  isn’t  any  phenomenon  that  can  exist  without
depending on something else. This means that  all  phenomena  are  empty  of
self-establishment or independent establishment.

This is  the  power  of  the  words,  dependently  arisen.  They  mean  that
phenomena  are  empty  of  self-establishment  or   empty   of   independent
establishment. Everything is dependently  established,  dependently  arisen.
So  all  phenomena  are  just  mere  appearances.  They  do  not  exist   as
independently created or independently established phenomena.

“Appearance eliminates the extreme of existence”
Lama Tsongkhapa’s The Three Principles of  the  Path  states,  “Furthermore,
appearance eliminates the extreme of existence.”  This is according  to  the
view of the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS), the Prasangikas.
       The Particular Special Quality of the Prasangika View
      [13] Furthermore, appearance eliminates the extreme of existence
         And emptiness eliminates the extreme of non-existence.
         If you realize how emptiness manifests in the manner of cause  and
         effect
         Then you are not  captivated  by  wrong  notions  holding  extreme
         views.

The  words,  dependently  arisen,  means  that  there  is   no   independent
existence. Whatever exists exists  as  dependently  arisen  and  is  a  mere
appearance. As such, the words, dependently arisen, “eliminates the  extreme
of existence” in that it clears away the possibility of  phenomena  existing
from their own side. Lama Tsongkhapa is eliminating existence from  its  own
side.

In The Three Principles of the Path, two extremes are mentioned—the  extreme
of existence and the extreme of non-existence.

How do appearances clear away the extreme of existence? This is what we  are
talking about here.  Everything  that  exists  is  dependently  arisen.  The
words, dependently arisen, means that nothing exists on its own  independent
of other  factors.  There  is  no  such  self-establishment  or  independent
establishment.

Dependently arisen means empty  of  independent  establishment.  This  means
phenomena exist but they exist as dependently  arisen.  Phenomena  are  mere
appearances. If phenomena are mere appearances, this  means  that  phenomena
do not exist from their own side. They do not exist in  and  of  themselves.
This is how “appearance eliminates the extreme of existence.”

This is why the words,  dependent  arising  (also  translated  as  dependent
origination), are used and are emphasised in Lama Tsongkhapa’s  presentation
of the ultimate nature of reality. Instead of  using  the  word,  emptiness,
from the very beginning, he stressed  approaching  the  topic  of  emptiness
through the understanding of dependent arising. This is because if  we  were
to start off with just focussing on emptiness, many  people  will  make  the
mistake  of  thinking  that  emptiness  means  non-existence,  that  nothing
exists. This is why Lama Tsongkhapa  emphasised  seeking  the  view  through
dependent arising.

“Emptiness eliminates the extreme of non-existence”
The same verse in The Three Principles of the Path also  states,  “Emptiness
eliminates the extreme of non-existence.” The  word,  emptiness,  means  the
absence or the lack of self-establishment or independent  establishment.  If
‘empty’ means being empty of independent establishment—that is  there  isn’t
any phenomenon in existence that can exist independently  without  depending
on any other factor—what this implies is  that  everything  that  exists  is
dependently established, i.e., that there  is  dependent  establishment.  So
there is something there. Phenomena do  exist.  They  exist  as  dependently
established. This is why the correct understanding of emptiness  “eliminates
the extreme of non-existence” or the extreme of annihilation (or  nihilism).
It prevents one from generating the wrong view of  emptiness  to  mean  that
there is nothing there at all.
So this is the meaning of dependent arising. The word, tendrel,  dependently
arisen, means what I have just said.

Different levels of dependent arising
There  are  different  levels  of  meaning  behind  the  word,  tendrel,  or
dependent arising. There are coarse levels of meaning and there  are  subtle
levels of meaning.

 • The coarse meaning of dependent arising is found in the  explanations  of
   the Hinayana tenets, the Great Exposition  School  (GES)  and  the  Sutra
   School (SS). They explain dependent arising or dependent  origination  in
   terms of dependence on a cause.
 • The explanation of dependent arising becomes subtler  and  more  profound
   when we look at the presentation of the Mahayana  tenets.  There  is  the
   explanation of dependent arising in  terms  of  dependence  on  parts—the
   concept of the whole  being  dependent  on  its  parts,  how  parts  come
   together to constitute a whole and so forth.
 • The most profound explanation of dependent arising is found in  the  CMWS
   in that  phenomena  exist  in  mere  name,  i.e.,  they  are  dependently
   designated.  Phenomena  depend  on  their  basis  of   designation,   are
   dependently designated and exist in mere name.

Dependent arising means that there is no self-institution.  The  meaning  of
dependent arising cannot accommodate the meaning  of  self-institution.  The
most subtle meaning of dependent arising is that nothing can  exist  in  and
of itself. There is no self-establishment; things are  not  self-instituted.
This applies to everything that exists, including ourselves,  the  ‘I’,  the
self or the person.

But if we were to look  at  our  own  experience,  how  do  we  think  about
ourselves? How do we exist? We have the appearance and the belief  that  we,
the ‘I’, the self, the person, is able to stand on  its  own  two  feet,  is
created in and of itself. There is something there that  is  independent  of
anything else. This is the  self-instituted  ‘I’.  While  in  reality  there
isn’t such a phenomenon, nevertheless we  have  that  experience,  believing
that the ‘I’ is self-instituted, that it exists in and of itself.

Looking for the imputed object
Now we need to check whether we really  exist  in  that  way  or  not.   For
example, just looking at ourselves, we are human beings. Why do we  consider
ourselves to be human beings? The words, human being,  are  related  to  the
human body that we have. On the basis of  having  a  human  body  with  this
particular makeup of human flesh, skin,  blood  and  so  forth,  i.e.,  this
basis of designation, therefore, we designate ourselves to be human  beings.
But when we look for the human being in  this  body,  where  is  this  human
being? Obviously it is not the blood, not the flesh, not the bones  and  not
the skin.

We talk about the ‘I’, the person. In this lifetime, we  are  human  beings.
But this identity as  a  human  being,  this  specific  ‘I’,  this  specific
person, is only limited to this lifetime because it exists  in  relation  to
the human body that we have. Based on this human body, we  designate  ‘human
being’ and we have this identity as a human being. But  when  this  lifetime
comes to an end, this specific identity as a human being ceases to exist.

Does the part of us that is a human being go on to the next  life?  That  is
why  we  need  to  differentiate  between  the  specific  identity  of   one
particular lifetime and the person that pervades  all  the  lifetime,  i.e.,
the person that has existed from beginningless lifetimes.  Can you  see  the
difference?

There is an ‘I’ that goes to the hell realms and there is an ‘I’  that  goes
on  to  enlightenment.  The  specific  identity  related   to   a   specific
lifetime—such as ‘I’ being a human being,  being  a  specific  person  at  a
specific time related to this human body—ceases to exist when  the  specific
lifetime comes to an end.

For example, let’s take the situation that you  are  in  now.  You  are  now
sitting here and listening to  the  teachings.  There  is  an  ‘I’  that  is
listening to the Dharma but this ‘I’ will cease to exist later on  when  you
are not listening to the Dharma, when the class comes to an end.

The discussion here pertains to the  fact  that  the  ‘I’,  the  person  and
everything else— nothing is established from its own side. If you  look  for
the ‘I’ of this life, the person in this body, you will not be able to  find
it. The blood is not the ‘I’. The flesh is not the ‘I’. The  bones  are  not
the ‘I’. The skin is not the ‘I’. None of these things is the ‘I’.

This is very interesting. If you look  for  the  ‘I’  within  its  basis  of
designation, the body and mind, you cannot find the ‘I’  there.  You  cannot
find any part of it that is the ‘I’. Nor will you be able  to  find  an  ‘I’
that exists outside of the body and mind, that  is  of  a  different  entity
from the body and mind.  So it is not this and it is not that.

Although you cannot find the person, the ‘I’ within the  body  and  mind  or
outside of the body and mind, yet we  cannot  say  that  the  ‘I’  does  not
exist. If we were to say that, that would go against  common  knowledge  and
worldly convention. The ‘I’ does exist but it is not the body and  mind  nor
is it different from the body and mind.

Although you cannot find the ‘I’ within the  basis  of  designation  nor  is
there an ‘I’ that is separate from the body and  mind,  yet  you  know  that
there is an ‘I’. Obviously there is a person there.  The  person  definitely
exists. Therefore, the conclusion from the presentation of the CMWS is  that
while the ‘I’ does not exist from its own side,  the  ‘I’  does  exist.  How
does it exist? It exists in mere name,  as  something  that  is  dependently
designated, i.e., designated in dependence upon the basis of designation.

If you really think about this, this is about the only answer that  you  can
come up with. This is the reality. No matter how you think about this,  your
answer will not transcend this. This is what you  would  have  to  say.  But
this is the most difficult point and the most difficult thing to  understand
and to realise—this uncommon position of the CMWS that nothing  exists  from
its  own  side,  that  nothing  exists  from  the  side  of  the  basis   of
designation:
 • If you look within the basis of designation, you will not be able to find
   the imputed object.
 • Nor can you find it outside of the basis of designation.
 • Yet the thing exists. How does it exist?
 • It exists in mere name and is dependently designated in relation  to  the
   basis of designation.

All the other Buddhist tenets—starting from the Autonomy Middle  Way  School
(AMWS), the Mind Only School (MOS), the Sutra  School  (SS)  and  the  Great
Exposition School (GES)—say that there is definitely something that you  can
point to that is the ‘I’. Anything that  exists,  including  the  ‘I’,  must
exist by way of its own character. There is something  there  from  its  own
side. Basically what they are trying to say is that  if  you  look  for  the
imputed object, you will be able to find it among the basis of  designation.
 There is something among the basis of designation that you  can  point  to.
This is what everybody else says and believes in.

But the Prasangikas, the CMWS, assert, “No, it is not like that.” They  show
through their own reasoning why this cannot be the case.

When you hear the word, selflessness, you need to understand what  does  not
exist.  Selflessness is the lack of a self. What it means is that  the  self
that is apprehended by the apprehension  of  a  self,  that  self  does  not
exist.

We have this apprehension of a self, self-grasping. The object of this  mind
is the self. We must think  of  the  meaning  of  the  word,  self,  in  its
philosophical context, not the English term.  Selflessness  means  that  the
self that is apprehended by  self-grasping  does  not  exist.  For  example,
there  is  an  apprehension  of  a  self  of  person.  What  is  this   mind
apprehending? This mind is grasping at an inherently existent  person.  This
inherently existent person that is being grasped by self-grasping  does  not
exist.

We use these terms—the self, the person, the ‘I’. It  is  obvious  that  the
self exists,  the  person  exists,  the  ‘I’  exists.  It  is  important  to
understand that we exist and not to confuse this and mix this up  with  what
we think is the meaning of selflessness.

Usually, when people hear the word, selflessness, they think that  the  self
doesn’t exist, the person doesn’t exist, the ‘I’ doesn’t exist. But that  is
not what it means. The self exists, the person exists, the ‘I’  exists.  The
self in the word, selflessness, refers to the self or ‘I’  that  is  grasped
by our ignorance, ignorance being the apprehension of a  self,  i.e.,  self-
grasping. It is holding on to something and that thing that is  held  on  to
or grasped by ignorance is the self in the  word,  selflessness.  That  self
does not exist. This is what selflessness  means.  In  general,  it  doesn’t
mean that there is no self, no person, no ‘I’. The object of observation  of
self-grasping does exist. This is something we must be clear about.

What is the object of observation  of  ignorance?  There  is  this  mind—the
apprehension of a self. What is it focussing on? The object  of  observation
is the  ‘I’  that  exists.  The  conventionally  existent  ‘I’  does  exist.
Ignorance focusses on the conventionally existent  ‘I’,  but  it  apprehends
the conventionally existent ‘I’ to be inherently  existent,  i.e.,  existing
from its own side, when that ‘I’ does not exist in that way.


Another approach—the difference between self-cherishing and self-grasping
We need to think about the  difference  between  self-cherishing  and  self-
grasping. The object of observation of self-grasping is the ‘I’ that  exists
but it apprehends that ‘I’ to be inherently existent, to  exist  by  way  of
its own character or existing from its own side. This is self-grasping.

When  one  realises  emptiness  directly,  from  the  perspective  of   that
consciousness, it realises that there is no inherently existent  ‘I’,  i.e.,
it realises the emptiness of an inherently existent  ‘I’.  That  realisation
also induces the understanding that the ‘I’ does exist conventionally.

You will recall from our earlier discussions that  those  practitioners  who
have achieved liberation from cyclic existence and have become  arhats  have
eliminated  their  self-grasping.  But  they  still  have   self-cherishing.
Without self-grasping, as such, the arhat doesn’t have  the  self-cherishing
that apprehends the inherently existent self  as  the  basis,  holding  that
self to be the most important thing in the world.

The arhat has no more self-grasping, but he still  has  self-cherishing.  So
what  is  the  basis  for  his  self-cherishing?  He  is  focussing  on  the
conventionally existent ‘I’, the ‘I’ that does exist and considers that  ‘I’
to be the most important thing in the world, more important  than  everybody
else. If you think about it in this way, then you can have an  idea  of  how
arhats can still have self-cherishing.

Because nothing is self-instituted, therefore phenomena  do  undergo  change
like the verse says, “Changing this way and that.”

The talk of the town now is the haze.[1] How does the  haze  appear  to  us?
It appears as if it will never ever go away as it has been there for such  a
long time. This is what  we  believe.  But  weather  conditions  do  change.
Because of a change in wind direction, the haze  goes  away,  the  situation
improves and we see the clear sky again.

Then how do that nice weather and clear sky appear to us? Again they  appear
as if there is something there from their own side. They appear as  if  they
will always be like that. Whatever appears to us always  appears  as  if  it
will always be like that, that there is something right there from  its  own
side.

Air pollution and clear weather happen because of the sky  that  makes  them
possible. That sky, that space is the basis. What is being obscured?  It  is
the sky.

What is it that is clear? Again it is the sky itself.
What makes nice weather or a clear sky possible is the  nature  of  the  sky
itself. By nature the sky is clear. It is empty. It is a  vacuity.  This  is
the analogy. Likewise, phenomena do not exist inherently.
 • Because phenomena are empty of existing inherently, therefore, change  is
   possible.
 • Because things don’t exist in and  of  themselves,  therefore  change  is
   possible.
 • Because phenomena are dependently arisen,  they  are  empty  of  existing
   inherently.
 • Because things do not exist  inherently,  therefore  there  are  a  whole
   variety of appearances.

“They are images that appear like a  whirling  firebrand”:  If  you  take  a
stick, light it up and twirl it around very quickly, it looks  as  if  there
is this “whirling firebrand.” It looks like there is a spinning  wheel  that
is on  fire.  Although  in  reality  there  isn’t  any  spinning  firebrand,
nevertheless there is such an appearance. Likewise,  although  phenomena  do
not exist from their own side, phenomena appear to be truly existent.
Just  as  there  is  no  spinning  firebrand,  nevertheless,  there  is   an
appearance  of  a  spinning  firebrand.  Phenomena  exist  but  as  a   mere
appearance.


LIFE HAS NO INNER CORE


      Verse 105
      Like the plantain tree, life has no  inner  core.  Like  a  bubble,  a
      lifetime has no inner core. Like a  mist,  it  dissipates  upon  close
      examination. Like  a  mirage,  it  is  beautiful  from  afar.  Like  a
      reflection in a mirror, it seems as  if  it  were  really  true.  Like
      clouds and fog, it seems as if it were really stable.

“The plantain tree” looks very sturdy from the outside, as if it has a  very
solid core. It looks as if it will last forever. But you chop  it  down,  it
is actually hollow. There is nothing inside. Likewise,  although  our  life-
force appears to be very stable, as if we will live for a  very  long  time,
actually this is not the case. It  is  just  a  matter  of  some  conditions
coming together and we are dead.

Our life-force is also similar to “a bubble.” A bubble looks very  nice  and
it seems as if it can remain for a long time. But actually that is  not  the
case.

These analogies serve to illustrate the fact that there is nothing  concrete
about our existence, including the self, the person and  the  ‘I’.  Although
they appear to be truly existent and we believe them to be so,  in  reality,
that is not the case.

If you observe “a mist” or a  fog  from  afar,  it  looks  as  if  there  is
something there, but when you are in the midst  of  the  mist  or  fog,  you
won’t see them. Likewise, when we look at how the self, the person, the  ‘I’
appear to us—if we just look  at  it  from  the  level  of  mere  appearance
without further  analysis  or  investigation—there  is  this  appearance  of
something there, something real. But if we  were  to  check  in  detail  and
analyse further—what is this ‘I’ and where is it?—definitely, we won’t  find
it. What we believe to be so solid  earlier  on  dissipates.  We  lose  that
sense of concrete identity. When we look for the ‘I’, it cannot be found.

“A mirage” is created under certain weather conditions. Under extreme  heat,
sometimes we get this appearance of a body of water. While there  isn’t  any
body of water there, nevertheless there is this  appearance  of  a  body  of
water. Like a mirage, all phenomena arise from  causes  and  conditions.  We
then affix to them descriptions  such  as  beautiful  and  attractive.  Yes,
there are attractive, pleasant and  beautiful  objects  and  phenomena,  but
they are not inherently beautiful. They are not  beautiful  from  their  own
side. Rather the existence of  a  beautiful  object  is  only  dependent  on
causes and conditions. Like a mirage that does  not  exist  in  the  way  it
appears, likewise, although there are phenomena that  appear  to  us  to  be
beautiful, these are just mere appearances.  There  is  no  real  inherently
existent beauty in them.

                                  ~~~~~~~~~

EXAMINATION FOR THIS MODULE

Khen Rinpoche: If you want the exam after the new year, please put  up  your
hand. Do you want the exam this Sunday or after the new year?

For those who really want to study, the best time is after new year.

If you don’t want to study, then it is this Sunday.

(Majority of students vote for after new year).

You win. It is very good that you want to take the exam after the new  year.
That is wonderful.

The whole point is that you want to study. It is not postponing the exam  to
a later date. I don’t think so. That is very good. So we will  do  it  after
the new year.



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong


-----------------------
[1] This is referring to the haze caused by the burning  of  peat  fires  in
Indonesia.

