Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/BP2 M07 L17final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.557399
================================================================================


Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on
Dharmarakshita’s Wheel-Weapon Mind Training

Root verses: Excerpt from Peacock in the Poison Grove:  Two  Buddhist  Texts
on Training the Mind, translation Geshe Lhundub Sopa with Michael Sweet  and
Leonard Zwilling. © Wisdom Publications with permission granted for  use  in
the FPMT Basic Program by Wisdom Publications.

Lesson 17                                                 17 September 2015


Self-cherishing on the paths and grounds. Listening to lojong teachings.
The root text: Verses 63—62. Verse 63: Scant learning, empty verbiage.
Verse 64: Unreliable companions and underlings. Verse 65: Holding titles
but lacking in qualities. Verse 66: One’s view is lofty, one’s conduct is
low.


(Student 1’s question not recorded).

Khen Rinpoche: There are certain instances of  self-cherishing  that  brings
us to the hells and there are  also  certain  instances  of  self-cherishing
that can lead us to liberation. As such, we cannot  say  self-cherishing  is
virtuous nor can we say that self-cherishing is non-virtuous.[1]

SELF-CHERISHING ON THE PATHS AND GROUNDS

Student 2: How do we abandon the self-cherishing that  leads  to  suffering?
We know that on the path of the ten grounds,  there  is  no  self-cherishing
because  bodhisattvas  have  bodhicitta.  This  text  cannot  be   for   the
bodhisattvas since they do  not  have  the  self-cherishing  that  leads  to
suffering, am I right?

Does it come through the  wisdom  directly  perceiving  emptiness,  constant
meditation, the sevenfold instructions, or tonglen?

My question is how. First of all, I think  all  Buddhists,  both  Mahayanist
and Hinayanist, should abandon the self-cherishing that leads to  suffering.
To me, abandon means to have the bodhicitta that diminishes  self-cherishing
since self-cherishing leads to suffering.

Then the question is, if it is to  be  abandoned,  how  do  we  do  it?  The
bodhisattvas on the grounds already have  bodhicitta.  They  start  on  this
path because they have the  direct  perception  of  wisdom.  I’m  trying  to
connect the wisdom part.  Does it play a role in the  abandonment  of  self-
cherishing?
And if you are not a bodhisattva, as a Buddhist, how do  you  abandon  self-
cherishing? It is not an affliction to be abandoned, it is not  a  knowledge
obscuration to be abandoned but it has to be abandoned. This is my  dilemma.


Khen Rinpoche: I think I have given the answer to this question before.

Of the many verses that we have read so far, they all end with:

      Roar and thunder on the head of  the  destroyer,  false  construction!
      Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

These two lines are repeated in many of the  verses.  This  shows  that  the
solution to overcoming self-grasping and self-cherishing is to generate  the
conventional bodhicitta and ultimate bodhicitta.

“Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy.”  In  the  context
here, the “enemy” means self-cherishing and self-grasping. The  antidote—the
slayer of this enemy—is conventional bodhicitta and ultimate bodhicitta.
 • How is self-cherishing destroyed? It is destroyed by bodhicitta.
 • How is self-grasping destroyed? It is destroyed by the  wisdom  realising
   selflessness.

One trains in either the sevenfold cause  and  effect  instructions  or  the
instructions of exchanging self and others  to  generate  bodhicitta.  Comes
the time when one generates  the  mind  of  enlightenment,  bodhicitta,  one
enters the Mahayana path  and  one  achieves  the  Mahayana  small  path  of
accumulation.

We have gone through this in class before—that  there  are  bodhisattvas  on
the small path of  accumulation  who  fall  back  into  the  Hinayana.  That
happens when  they  lose  their  bodhicitta,  i.e.,  when  their  bodhicitta
degenerates.  These  bodhisattvas  had  realised  bodhicitta  before   their
bodhicitta degenerated but still  their  self-cherishing  manifested  again.
Because of the arising of self-cherishing, they fell into the Hinayana.

There is a historical  account  related  to  Shariputra.  It  is  said  that
Shariputra had generated bodhicitta. One day, he met someone who  asked  for
his right arm. Shariputra used his left hand to chop off his right  arm.  He
then used his left hand to pick up the chopped arm and  offered  it  to  the
recipient. The recipient then asked him, “How can you  give  me  your  right
arm with your left hand?  That  is  so  disrespectful!”  It  was  culturally
disrespectful to offer things with the left hand.  Shariputra  thought,  “Oh
my goodness! Sentient beings are hopeless. Forget it.” So  he  gave  up  his
bodhicitta and fell back into the Hinayana.

You can train your mind to generate bodhicitta either through the  sevenfold
cause and effect instructions or the exchanging self and others. At the  end
of that training, when you generate  uncontrived  bodhicitta,  that  is  the
fully qualified actual bodhicitta. Simultaneously, you  enter  the  Mahayana
path and achieve the Mahayana small path of accumulation. But  it  is  still
possible for your bodhicitta at that level to  degenerate.  From  this,  you
can see it is very clear that even after having actualised bodhicitta  while
on the Mahayana small path of accumulation, one hasn’t gotten rid  of  one’s
self-cherishing to the point where it will never arise again.
It is said in the great  treatises  that  when  one  achieves  the  Mahayana
middle path of  accumulation,  the  bodhisattva’s  bodhicitta  becomes  very
stable. His mind generation is called the mind generation like gold  because
gold always remains constant and does not change into something else. It  is
said that regardless of the conditions that this bodhisattva may  encounter,
his mind generation will never degenerate.

While it is not clear in the treatises, I think that  by  this  time,  i.e.,
the Mahayana  middle  path  of  accumulation,  the  bodhisattva  would  have
realised emptiness. That could be the reason why his  mind  generation  will
never degenerate henceforth. There must be a reason for  this  and  I  think
that reason must be that the bodhisattva would have  realized  emptiness  by
then.

It is clear that you have to say that on the  great  path  of  accumulation,
one has calm-abiding observing emptiness. In order  to  enter  the  Mahayana
path of preparation, one needs  the  special  insight  observing  emptiness.
Therefore, prior to entering the Mahayana  path  of  preparation,  prior  to
achieving the special insight  observing  emptiness,  one  must  first  have
achieved calm-abiding observing emptiness.

As such, you will probably  have  to  say  that  definitely  one  must  have
realised emptiness by the Mahayana middle path of accumulation.  Before  one
can actualise the calm-abiding focussing on emptiness that occurs latest  by
the Mahayana great path  of  accumulation,  first  one  must  have  realised
emptiness.

As to whether one will have necessarily realised  emptiness  by  the  middle
path of accumulation, when I think about it, I think I  would  have  to  say
yes. But I’m not saying definitely this is so  because  it  is  not  clearly
mentioned in the treatises. This can be a subject  for  further  discussion.
The  issue  of  whether  the  bodhisattva  definitely  would  have  realised
emptiness by the middle path of accumulation has to be analysed further.

But it is very clear that on the  small  path  of  accumulation,  there  are
instances  of  both  bodhisattvas  who  have  not  realised  emptiness   and
bodhisattvas  who  have  realised  emptiness  already.  The  sharp-facultied
trainees enter the Mahayana path with the realisation of  emptiness  whereas
the dull-facultied  trainees  do  not  enter  the  Mahayana  path  with  the
realisation of emptiness. As such, on the small path of accumulation,  there
are both bodhisattvas who have realised emptiness and bodhisattvas who  have
yet to realise emptiness. That is quite clear. As such, I would  think  that
from the middle path  of  accumulation,  self-cherishing  will  never  arise
henceforth.

How do you overcome self-cherishing? Likewise, how  do  you  overcome  self-
grasping? The general procedure is the same. Both self-cherishing and  self-
grasping have their own modes of apprehension, i.e.,  their  own  manner  of
apprehending their objects.

Overcoming self-grasping
In order to overcome self-grasping,  the  apprehension  of  true  existence,
which is its mode of apprehension, one has to generate  another  mind  whose
mode of apprehension is the direct opposite of the mode of  apprehension  of
self-grasping.

Overcoming self-cherishing
Likewise, self-cherishing has a  particular  mode  of  apprehension.  So  to
overcome  self-cherishing,  one  has  to  generate  a  mind  whose  mode  of
apprehension completely opposes that of the mode of  apprehension  of  self-
cherishing.

To counteract self-cherishing, we have to generate the mind  that  cherishes
others, i.e.,  its  mode  of  apprehension  is  cherishing  others.  Through
training gradually, one then comes  to  develop  bodhicitta.  When  one  has
bodhicitta, one has the mind that can counteract self-cherishing.

Simultaneous with the generation of  bodhicitta,  one  enters  the  Mahayana
path and achieves the small path  of  accumulation.  When  one  reaches  the
middle path of accumulation, I guess we can say that henceforth,  from  then
on, self-cherishing will not arise again.

Training in the paths of the three scopes
The text that we are studying here is a text on Mahayana mind training.  The
subject matter is the practices of the path of a person of  great  capacity.
It is an instruction for generating the mind of enlightenment, bodhicitta.

When we talk about lojong  or  mind  training,  it  specifically  means  the
Mahayana mind training, which strives to develop bodhicitta. After  one  has
developed bodhicitta, one needs to increase the  bodhicitta  that  has  been
generated. The word lojong specifically means that.

Lojong in English is mind training, which in  the  general  sense  literally
means developing the mind. There is training the  mind  in  the  path  of  a
person of small capacity, in the path of a person of medium capacity and  in
the path the person of great capacity. But lojong mainly refers to  Mahayana
mind training.

Before we can even begin to engage in training our mind in the path  of  the
person of great capacity, first we must have trained our mind  in  the  path
that is shared with the person of small capacity and the  person  of  medium
capacity. This is explained very clearly in  the  lam-rim  literature.  Only
after that is one then really qualified to  train  in  the  practices  of  a
person of great capacity.

What is the main obstacle for someone aspiring  to  be  a  person  of  great
capacity? The biggest obstacle is self-cherishing. That is  why  a  detailed
explanation of the faults of self-cherishing is given to such a  person.  In
such an explanation, there is  no  mention  of  anything  good  about  self-
cherishing. It points out everything  that  is  bad  about  self-cherishing.
That is the primary focus.

As you can see for yourself, in this text, from beginning to  end,  it  just
talks about how bad self-cherishing is. So these are  the  instructions  for
the person who is about to train his mind in the Mahayana.  This  person  is
someone who has fully completed training the  mind  in  the  paths  that  is
shared with the person of small capacity and the person of medium  capacity.


If we look at the path that is shared with the  person  of  small  capacity,
there is no discussion whatsoever of how bad self-cherishing is.  But  there
is the discussion on death and impermanence,  karma  and  its  effects.   At
that point in time, the whole emphasis is on reversing and overcoming  one’s
attachment to the happiness of this life.

After one has gotten rid of one’s attachment to this life’s  happiness,  one
can then start to train the mind in the path that is shared with the  person
of medium capacity. But if one looks at the instructions for that period  of
training, again, there is no discussion on the  faults  of  self-cherishing.
Instead, there is an  extensive  explanation  of  the  suffering  of  cyclic
existence and  how  one  circles  around  in  samsara.  Then  there  is  the
presentation of the four noble truths. All these are aimed at producing  the
thought for liberation.

 • For the person on the path that  is  shared  with  the  person  of  small
   capacity, the emphasis is to overcome one’s attachment to  the  happiness
   of this life.
 • On the path that is shared  with  the  person  of  medium  capacity,  the
   emphasis is to overcome attachment to the happiness of future  lives.  It
   is the whole explanation of how one really has to achieve liberation from
   samsara.

As such, there shouldn’t be any confusion as to whether  self-cherishing  is
good or bad or when it is good, when it is bad. If you understand the  whole
structure of the path, then it is very clear.

Khen Rinpoche: Did you understand the answer?

Student 3: I  clearly  understand  the  explanation.  If  you  could  please
explain or give an example of what is virtuous  self-  cherishing  and  non-
virtuous self-cherishing? I don’t  understand  the  difference  between  the
two.

Khen Rinpoche: Somebody come up and give the examples he is asking for.

Student 4: An example of virtuous self-cherishing is the  thought,  “I  want
to attain nirvana to get out of samsara first to achieve  lasting  happiness
for myself alone.” I think that is considered  virtuous  self-cherishing.  I
think non-virtuous self-cherishing is all the ones we have in this life.

Khen Rinpoche: Is the mind seeking the happiness of future lives a  virtuous
mind? Is the mind seeking rebirth as a human or god virtuous? Or is it self-
cherishing?

Student 4: It is self-cherishing.

Khen Rinpoche: Is it virtuous?

Student 4: It is virtuous if ...

Khen Rinpoche: No, no, no! It is  either  virtuous  or  non-virtuous.  Don’t
explain now. I will ask you.

Student 4: Virtuous.

Khen Rinpoche: It is virtuous because …?

Student 4: Because before you can attain nirvana or enlightenment, you  need
to fulfil the short-term aim,  which  is  a  higher  rebirth.  You  have  to
achieve good conditions in order to practise the path.  Therefore,  you  aim
for higher rebirths.

Khen Rinpoche: There is a wish to live a long time now. Is  that  not  self-
cherishing? It is, right?  Is it virtuous?

Student 4: Depends on what you want to use your long life for.

Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, extrapolating from what you  have  just  said,  it
follows that the mind wishing for the happiness of a future life  as  a  god
or human being is not necessarily virtuous. By virtue of what you have  just
said, it would also depend.

Student 4: I wanted to say that but you stopped me.

Khen Rinpoche: The point is, there is no pervasion, right?

Student 4: I would have to say yes.

Khen Rinpoche: It is not certain that the mind looking for  a  good  rebirth
is necessarily virtuous.

Student 4: Yes. You can just want it for  its  own  end,  to  have  a  god’s
rebirth. That’s all. You don’t want to use the higher rebirth for  a  higher
purpose like nirvana.

Ven Gyurme: So you are saying that just wishing to get a  good  rebirth  for
the sake of a good rebirth is definitely not virtuous?

Student 4: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: We practise generosity  or  ethical  discipline  looking  for
something in our future lives. Maybe we want a good rebirth, a good body  or
we want possession or wealth in future lives. That  is  the  reason  why  we
practise ethics and generosity.  The karma that is  created  will  ripen  in
the form of a  good  rebirth  and  enjoyments.  Is  this  karma  necessarily
virtuous or not?

Student 4: I think it is virtuous.

Khen Rinpoche: Necessarily virtuous?

Student 4: It doesn’t produce suffering so it has to be virtuous.

Khen Rinpoche: If that is the case, then the mind that seeks  good  rebirths
in future lives and the mind that seeks the happiness of  future  lives  are
necessarily virtuous, isn’t it?
Student 4: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: So then there is no “It depends …”?

Student 4: Yes, correct.

Khen Rinpoche: You don’t just go correct, correct, correct like that.

Student 4: Higher rebirths do not produce suffering on their own. The  karma
is not non-virtuous so a higher rebirth is virtuous.

Khen Rinpoche: So, achieving nirvana is not suffering?

Student 4: At least there is no obvious suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: So you don’t have obvious suffering.

The mind looking for the happiness of future lives is  nothing  but  virtue.
It is virtuous, right?

Student 4: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: The wish to live very  long  in  this  life.  That  is  self-
cherishing. Is it virtuous or not?

Khen Rinpoche: Don’t say again, “It depends”!

Student 4: I supposed it is virtuous.

Khen Rinpoche: You have to think before you respond. Don’t just say, “It  is
virtuous,” without thinking.

Isn’t sponsoring pujas for  the  happiness  of  this  life  virtuous?  Isn’t
reciting mantras for the happiness of this life virtuous?  Don’t  they  have
to be virtuous? Are the results virtuous?

Khen Rinpoche: Say something!

Student 4: I have no choice but to say they are virtuous.

Khen Rinpoche: Is practising generosity looking for  wealth  and  prosperity
in this life virtuous?

Student 4: That sounds like the eight worldly concerns. Praying  for  things
in this life is non-Dharma.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you have an answer? Yes or no?

So doing pujas and reciting mantras just for the happiness of this life  are
virtuous?
Student 4: Seems like they are not. They are the eight worldly dharmas.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know.

Student 4: At which point does an arhat  enter  the  Mahayana  path?  Is  it
right at the beginning at the small path of accumulation?

Khen Rinpoche: What makes  you  ask  this  question?  Are  you  looking  for
something? The answer is straightforward. It is  very  easy.  But  the  more
important thing is: What makes you ask  the  question?  Obviously  you  must
have some doubt.

Student 4: He has the direct realisation of emptiness. In this case, he  has
generated bodhicitta to enter the Mahayana path. He  can’t  be  entering  at
the point of the path of  seeing  can  he?  I  don’t  know  how  strong  his
bodhicitta is, whether it can still degenerate. If that is  the  case,  then
maybe he enters at the small path of accumulation?

Khen Rinpoche: An arhat doesn’t have bodhicitta, does he?

Student 4: If he has first generated bodhicitta,  at  which  point  does  he
enter the Mahayana path?

Khen Rinpoche: The moment the  arhat  generates  bodhicitta,  he  becomes  a
bodhisattva. He then enters the path of accumulation.

Student 4: The small path of accumulation?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes. There is no other point of entry.

Student 4: Does he then accelerate  very  quickly  to  the  path  of  seeing
compared to the rest because  he  already  has  the  direct  realisation  of
emptiness and moreover, has gotten rid of all his afflictive obscurations?

Ven Gyurme: Are you saying that he accumulates only the collection of  merit
and not the collection of wisdom?

Student 4: Is that the case?

Khen Rinpoche: OK. I think we need to read the text also but it is  good  to
ask questions.

It is good to have such questions. When questions are  raised,  it  is  very
important  to  pay  attention  to  the  discussion  because  we  can  really
understand a lot of  things  just  by  participating  in  the  question  and
answer. It is useful.

LISTENING TO LOJONG TEACHINGS

The text that we are going through is not intellectually difficult as it  is
meant for practical application right away. In that sense, there  is  really
nothing much to say about it. When we listen to the  teachings  of  Mahayana
mind training, when we read them, there are  times  we  may  feel  hurt  and
uncomfortable. That is actually a good  sign  because  it  is  a  sign  that
something has poked at our own self-cherishing and hurt it.

If  you  know  how  to  listen  to  these  Mahayana  teachings  in  general,
especially lojong, you will feel hurt  and  uncomfortable  because  you  are
supposed to be reflecting on your own state of mind. It is not meant  to  be
the description of what other people are doing or not doing.  If  we  listen
to the teachings, thinking that they point at somebody else,  then  they  do
not touch the heart. But if we listen and learn these  things  properly,  it
should be about looking at our own mistakes and faults.  If  it  leaves  you
feeling uncomfortable at that time, then that is actually a good sign.

It is said that one can receive blessings when listening to  the  teachings.
When we  hear  somebody’s  teaching  about  the  faults  of  our  own  self-
cherishing, we feel uncomfortable as we feel exposed. That is  a  sign  that
the blessings of the Dharma have entered our heart.

If we don’t have self-cherishing, then it is a completely  different  thing.
Then whether you feel anything or not, it is fine because if you don’t  have
self-cherishing, there is nothing to say. But this teaching is just  talking
about the faults of our own self-cherishing. We only feel  hurt  because  we
have self-cherishing. If there is no self-cherishing then we will  not  feel
offended, hurt or uncomfortable. So, when we study and listen to these  mind
training teachings and we don’t feel  anything,  then  there  are  only  two
possibilities—either we don’t have self-cherishing  or  we  really  have  no
idea how to listen to and use the teachings.

Khen Rinpoche: So which one applies to you?

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

SCANT LEARNING, EMPTY VERBIAGE


      Verse 63
      Although my learning is scant,  my  penchant  for  empty  verbiage  is
      great. Although the extent of my religious instructions is  slight,  I
      pretend to understand everything. Roar and thunder on the head of  the
      destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at  the  heart  of  the
      butcher, the enemy, Ego!

Our understanding of the  Dharma  is  limited  as  we  have  not  done  much
learning and reflection.  But  we  pretend  to  be  very  knowledgeable.  We
pretend to be a meditator or  great  practitioner.  This  verse  is  talking
about such people.

Suddenly when somebody asks us a Dharma question,  because  of  our  limited
understanding, experience or knowledge, we do not  have  much  to  say.  But
pressed to say something, we may say, “There is no need to know so much  and
study so much. You just need to examine the mind as  everything  is  in  the
nature of emptiness.” We just leave it at that.  Such  things  happen  again
and again due to our self-cherishing.


When  we  have  extensive  learning,  extensive  knowledge   and   extensive
understanding, then it doesn’t matter what questions people may pose to  us.
We will be able to answer  them  or  at  least  eliminate  their  qualms  by
employing reasons and scriptural sources.  We can offer a reasonable  answer
by  employing  scriptural  authority,  quoting  citations   and   lines   of
reasoning. We can at least help the other party to gain  some  understanding
or to eliminate his qualms.

If our understanding is limited, yet we want to talk  about  the  Dharma  to
others, when they ask questions, what we can say is very limited  since  our
understanding is limited. But due to our self-cherishing,  we  do  not  stop
there. We proceed to fabricate answers, make up stories and tell  all  sorts
of lies and half-truths in order to come out with some answers. This is  the
result of our self-cherishing.

We may know a few words from the sutras or a few sentences from  some  texts
but we don’t actually have any real  understanding.  But  when  we  talk  to
people, it is as if the few sentences we know represent  the  entire  Dharma
and that is the emphasis. We will repeatedly tell  people  about  those  few
sentences, talking about the same thing over and over again. We  create  the
impression and emphasise that they are  the  most  important  parts  of  the
Dharma and are the real thing! We try to convey to  others  that  we  really
know a lot while in reality we do not really  know  anything.  We  are  only
pretending. Again, this is the fault of our self-cherishing.

When we are asked a question, just be honest. If we know  the  answer,  just
share what we know. But if we really don’t know the answer,  as  we  haven’t
reflected or studied well, then we should just say, “Sorry, I  really  don’t
know” and leave it at that.
If you are a graduate of the Basic Program or  you  are  going  to  graduate
from the Basic Program, if somebody asks you a question and you don’t  know,
then just say “I don’t know,” and don’t pretend to know.

UNRELIABLE COMPANIONS AND UNDERLINGS


      Verse 64
      Although my  companions  and  underlings  are  numerous,  not  one  is
      dependable. Although I have  many  masters,  not  one  is  a  reliable
      protector. Roar and thunder  on  the  head  of  the  destroyer,  false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!


HOLDING TITLES BUT LACKING IN QUALITIES


      Verse 65
      Although I have high status, my merit is less than an  evil  spirit’s.
      Although I am a great religious teacher, my passions are grosser  than
      a demon’s. Roar and thunder  on  the  head  of  the  destroyer,  false
      construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the  enemy,
      Ego!

“My merit” can  also  be  understood  to  refer  to  one’s  qualities  while
“passions” refer to one’s attachment and anger.
If one has a high status or position with the qualities that  can  make  one
beneficial to others and one has the intention to benefit others, then  that
is very useful. Otherwise, just having power or authority  and  being  in  a
high position alone don’t necessarily bring benefit  to  others.  There  are
different qualities: external qualities  and  internal  qualities.  Internal
qualities are mental qualities that are positive aspects of the mind.

It doesn’t help just having a title such as being a lama, a Geshe or  Dharma
teacher. One must have the requisite qualities  and  engage  in  appropriate
conduct and behaviour. However, if one’s conduct  is  motivated  excessively
by anger or attachment or one has not worked with one’s anger or  attachment
to the point where the mind is fairly  stable,  then  just  having  a  title
alone doesn’t help. In fact, the teachings say that there  are  people  like
that—who have titles but have no quality and  whose  behaviour  and  actions
are worse than the maras, spirits or ghosts. Such people  may  also  have  a
lot of jealousy and are competitive in a negative way. All  of  these  again
are said to be the manifestation or the result of self-cherishing.

ONE’S VIEW IS LOFTY, ONE’S CONDUCT IS LOW


      Verse 66
      Although my view is lofty, my behavior is worse than a dog’s. Although
      my good qualities are many, their basis is carried off  by  the  wind.
      Roar and thunder on the head of  the  destroyer,  false  construction!
      Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

“Although my view is lofty” refers to  the  fact  that  one  may  have  some
understanding of the view of reality, emptiness. One’s understanding may  be
small but one behaves as if one  has  a  very  correct,  profound  and  high
understanding of emptiness. At the same  time,  one’s  actual  behaviour  or
conduct may actually be “worse than a dog’s.”

In reality, the person who has the correct  and  profound  understanding  of
emptiness is someone who guards his  vows  and  samaya  carefully.  He  will
never deprecate karma and its effects. But for those with lofty views,  they
talk about emptiness, they claim to think about emptiness, yet at  the  same
time, they do not pay any attention to guarding their vows  and  samaya.  In
fact, they may even despise,  deprecate  or  look  down  on  karma  and  its
effects. This again is the result of self-cherishing.

Whether one’s view of emptiness is lofty or not, the point is that  one  has
to abide by the ethics that one has adopted.  For  instance,  there  may  be
ordained people who talk about emptiness but are  not  careful  about  their
ethical conduct.

An ordained person is supposed to be celibate and not  partake  of  alcohol.
In the case of my village or home  town,  I  have  seen  with  my  own  eyes
ordained monks drinking so much that they get drunk and vomit. I  have  seen
them drinking during pujas. Then half-way through the puja, they have to  go
out and vomit. I have seen this with my own eyes. This  is  what  is  called
the conduct or behaviour that is “worse than a dog’s.”

The practice of ethics is said to be the foundation  of  all  qualities.  As
such, it is important to practise ethical discipline. There is  a  verse  by
the fifth Dalai Lama that says, “Although tantra is said to be  very  secret
and profound, first one must have trained  the  mind  in  the  shared  paths
before attempting the practice of tantra. Otherwise, it will be like  riding
an untamed elephant and in the end, you will destroy yourself.”

Do you understand the meaning of that verse, what it is trying  to  say  and
what it implies?

What it is saying is that one shouldn’t act in  any  way  one  pleases  just
because one says one is practising tantra. The practice of  the  foundation,
ethical discipline, is important.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] There was a recording malfunction at the beginning  of  this  lesson  so
the question that Khen Rinpoche was answering was not recorded.

