Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson10.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.902326
================================================================================


Verse 21
When I am deeply troubled over my lack of success, it is the weapon of my
own evil deeds turned upon me for hindering the work of the holy ones. From
now on I shall renounce all hindering.
‘Lack of success’ here can mean different things. If we look at it in term
of dharma practice, having lack of success in dharma practice is a kind of
lack of success. One may claim to be practicing dharma or want to practice
dharma and actually go about doing it but somehow it doesn’t really become
a practice and one may just end up only accumulating negativities. As a
result of that, the mind gets disturbed. So this is a kind of lack of
success.
Then in terms of worldly activities, for example, if you want to do
business in order to acquire wealth and when things don’t turn up the way
you want it to be or things doesn’t go as plan, then that is a lack of
success.
In terms of dharma practice, lack of success could mean one’s mind becoming
harder instead of becoming more subdued and more discipline. I don’t think
we start practicing dharma with the intention of making a loss, isn’t it?
But somehow, even though when we engage in dharma practice, the mind didn’t
get subdued. Perhaps one may get involves in more negativity. If that
happens, this is lack of success. When that happens, one then has to
remember that this is the ripening effect of the negativities accumulated
in the past.
When one encounters such a lack of success, one may wonder “What is the
reason for that?” Verse 21 says “It is the weapon of my own evil deeds
turned upon me for hindering the work of the holy ones”. This could be the
result of causing obstacles to those holy beings, or when people are giving
teachings, you cause interruption or problems for them, or when there are
people who are engaging in virtue such as when they are doing their daily
recitation or are doing their studies or are doing meditation, and you
interrupt their practice and causing problems for them. If we cause
obstacles for their practice, then we become a condition for them to turn
towards non-virtue. So these kinds of negative karma will ripen in the
experience of having lack of success for oneself.
There are people who put the blame on the dharma for their lack of success
such as when they encounter problems then they put the blame on the dharma
thinking “The dharma doesn’t benefit me. It is the fault of the dharma.”
We must remember that it is not the fault of the dharma, but rather it is
our own fault because we have accumulated the cause for the lack of success
in the past.
In whatever mind training instructions such as advice from lojong and so
forth, it is the spirit of the mind training instructions to not look for
the problem or the fault outside. In all the mind training instructions,
they all says that for whatever problems that one is experiencing, the
culprit is we ourselves; nobody else. The fault lied in us. Instead of
looking outside for the cause of the problem, we should reflect on the
working of karma and its effect, and to conclude and realize that we
ourselves are at faults. So whatever problem we may be experiencing, it is
we ourselves have created the cause. Then based on the understanding of the
working of cause and effect (karma and its effect) we make the
determination to give up causing obstacles to others when they engage in
virtue. On top of refraining from causing obstacles to others in their
practice of virtue, ideally we should rejoice sincerely and really feel
from the heart and actually also praise their practice of virtue. Based on
such an understanding then we makes a pledge to renounce hindering others
practice of virtue and to live by the pledge. If we do live by the pledge
then we actually accumulate the virtue; which then becomes a cause for our
own success in the future.
Verse 22
When my guru is displeased with me no matter what I do, it is the weapon of
my own evil deeds turned upon me for acting duplicitously toward the holy
Dharma. From now on I shall reduce my duplicity toward the Dharma.
[Merriam-Webster Dictionary: duplicitous = deceptive]
Sometimes due to lack of skillfulness, one may end up doing things that
displeased the virtuous friend. When the guru is displeased, sometimes
people get upset, worried, or depressed. When their mind get disturbed,
they may end up having wrong views, negative thoughts and they may lose
their faith or devotion towards the virtue friend. When this happens, one
has to remember not to point the finger at the virtuous friend. According
to the verse, the cause for that is because we have acted in pretense in
the past for acting duplicitously toward the dharma.
What does duplicity here means?  For example, in the presence of others,
one put on the appearance or one gives people the appearance that one is
holy, peaceful, calm, and subdued. But when one is not in the presence of
others, one then act in the completely different way such as having bad
conduct, just engaging in negativities and so forth.
For example, your guru tells you to not do this and that, you should
abandon doing this and that and you should do this and that, you then tell
the guru “Yes” and make the promise “Yes, I will do it”. But you actually
don’t do that. After you have made the promise and when the guru is not
around, you act in ways that are contradictory to the promise. Instead of
abandoning what you should abandon and cultivating what you should
cultivate, you just engage in non-virtue and negativities. That is acting
with duplicity.
When the karma ripened as the experience that is mentioned in this verse,
then doesn’t matter what you do the guru will be displeased. Upon realizing
that, one then makes a promise to not act duplicitously towards the dharma
henceforth. The teaching is telling us that it is important not to act with
duplicity, that is, what you look like at the outside must actually accord
with who you really are on the inside. An example of a piece of fruit is
used. A fruit look ripe on the outside and should be also ripe on the
inside. Let’s say you have a piece of fruit. If it is ripe on both the
outside and inside then it is well and good. Even it doesn’t look ripe on
the outside but is actually ripe inside, it is still perfectly alright. So,
as a practitioner, if one has the substance on the inside, that’s all the
matters, even one doesn’t have the look to have any substance from the
outside. It is the worst if the one is unripe both inside and outside. The
point is that if one is unripe both inside and outside, then there is not
much point in saying that one is practicing the dharma because that hasn’t
been any benefit, isn’t it?
Even if one’s external behavior is not so pleasant but is peaceful, calm
and happy from the inside, then that is alright, isn’t it? Of course that
is not the ideal. The best is if one is ripened both on the outside and
inside. Besides being happy and calm on the inside and one’s external
conduct is also pleasant, then that would be perfect.
We cannot tell what is happening in people’s mind and people cannot really
tell what is happening in our mind. Generally, our external conduct is
important especially if we consider ourselves to be a practitioner or, in
particular, a follower of the Mahayana teachings.
I think one of the earlier verses mentioned that our behavior or conduct
ideally should not be a condition for others to accumulate non-virtue or
should not be a condition for others to be upset. So the external conduct
is still important. There is a saying in Tibetan which goes something like
this “Even if your realization is equal to the gods and your conduct or
behavior should accord with mankind”. So, even if one has realization but
that doesn’t mean one can go around saying all kinds of things because
external conduct is still considered to be important.
Verse 23
When everyone contradicts me, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned
upon me for belittling shame and modesty. From now on, I shall avoid rough
behavior.
In a situation when you get contradicted like when everyone seem to be
against you,  even though you did not do anything in this life but somehow
people criticizing you or putting you down, then what should you think when
that happen?
When such a situation arises actually there is nothing else to think other
than it being the result of our own karma. The best thing to think is the
result of our own karma.
What kind of karma did we accumulate in order to have everyone
contradicting us or criticizing us even if we didn’t do anything in this
life? It is said it is the weapon of our own evil deeds turned upon us for
belittling or disregarding shame and embarrassment in relation to our
teachers, our parents, our loved ones and relatives and so forth in the
past.
It is said that because of disregarding shame and embarrassment then we
engaged in all kinds of non-virtue.
What is lack of embarrassment or lack of shame? Shame and embarrassment are
two different things. We have covered this in Lorig. There are shame and
embarrassment, lack of shame and lack of embarrassment.
The lack of shame is the mind that does not refrain from committing non-
virtue on account of oneself.
What is shame? For example, you have taken the lay vow of abstaining from
alcohol. Somehow you find yourself in a situation whereby alcohol is
present and if you want to, you could actually choose to drink it. But
because of having taken the lay vow of abstaining from alcohol and you
remember that you have taken that vows and thinking “I have made the
promise not to drink. Since I have taken the vow, I should not drink”. Then
you restrain yourself from drinking. This is an example of the mind that
abstains from drinking alcohol on the account of having taken the lay vow.
That is shame.
You must not think of it in term of English because in English, shame is a
bad thing. But here shame is a good thing because shame is a mind that
causes you to abstain from a particular non-virtue on the account of
yourself. So, that is the mental factor of shame.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Shame is a good thing or a bad thing? So, no
shame is good?
Ven Gyurme: Shame is good, right? We say it is very shameful but actually
it is good, right? Shameless.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Shameless is bad. Shame is good.  I think so.
Any way I have no idea.
If you have taken the vow of no killing and when you find yourself in a
situation whereby you could kill if you want to but nevertheless you
abstain from killing on account of having taken the vow of not killing. So,
that is having shame. If you don’t feel shameful, you could choose to kill.

Embarrassment is abstaining from non-virtue on account of others.
Let’s say there is an opportunity whereby you could drink or kill if you
wanted to but nevertheless you abstain on the account of others. So,
embarrassment is the mind which abstains from non-virtue on account of
others.
For example, if you have taken the lay vow of abstaining from alcohol or
the lay vow of not killing and you find yourself in a situation whereby you
could drink or kill if you chose to but nevertheless you decide not to. For
example, you abstain from that non-virtue on the account of the guru as you
remember “I have taken this vow from my teacher.” Or you remember the
Buddha and think “If I drink or if I kill, he will know for sure”.  Hence
it is on the account of others, whether it is the guru or the Buddha or
somebody else. Therefore, embarrassment is the mind that abstains from non-
virtue on the account of others.
So remembering that our past disregard for shame and embarrassment is the
cause for experiencing criticisms and blames from others then we make a
pledge “Henceforth, I shall avoid rough behavior”.
“Rough behavior” (as mentioned in the verse) is essentially an action that
is not in accord with the dharma - non-dharmic action. Here making a pledge
to avoid non-dharmic action and also to have both shame and embarrassment.
The point is henceforth with shame and embarrassment then one abstains from
non-dharmic actions.
Verse 24
When there is disagreement as soon as my companions gather, it is the
weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me for peddling my discontent and
evil disposition everywhere. From now on without any ulterior motive, I
shall behave well toward all.
Here it is translated as “companions”, maybe that is politically correct.
“Kor???” in Tibetan literally means entourage, including people who work
for you. The commentary says that if you have gathered many people who work
for you or people who help you but somehow they don’t stay long and leave
you even though you have succeeded in bringing them into your fold. These
things do happen. People may have gathered a big following and bringing
them into their fold to work for them but not for long people will just
leave. That is said to be a result of bad conduct that caused people to be
in disharmony or causing people to disagree or to split in the past.
In general, if our own conduct and behavior is not up to the mark, then
people will not stay with us for a long time. So, the solution is to have a
pleasant disposition and to be honest and truthful. One makes the pledge to
have a pleasant disposition and to behave properly, be straightforward,
truthful and honest. The essence is to have a pleasant disposition and
behave well, and not having unpleasant disposition and not to be nasty. The
result will be that we will have many helpers and friends in the future and
they will stay with us for a long time.
Verse 25
When all my kin become my enemies, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds
turned upon me for harboring evil thoughts. From now on I shall reduce my
deceit and guile.
When we become distanced from the virtuous friend or when our loved ones,
friends, and companions become enemies, we may become unhappy and suffer.
At that time, we have to remember karma.
When the people who are matter to us and close to us become our enemies, it
is said that is the result of having harmed them in the past or have
harbored from the depths of our hearts the thoughts of malice towards them
even we did not directly harm them in the past.
If you remember our past discussions, just by harboring malicious thoughts
or thoughts of wanting to harm others or having strong grudge and
resentment is enough to accumulate karma which will then ripen in the form
of suffering experience in the future.
It is possible for people to think “I didn’t actually harm them directly. I
just have the thoughts of harming them but I didn’t actually do anything
bad to them. That is alright.” But actually that is not the case. If we
have harbored malicious thoughts in our minds for a long time and if it is
very strong resentment or holding on to a grudge, that itself will
motivates the accumulation of karma already. We will have to experience the
result of suffering. So from now on, we make the pledge that “I shall
reduce my deceit and guile”.
Here are two mental factors: deceit and guild. These were covered in the
Mind and Mental Factors.
Deceit is the mind that purposely or intentionally hides one’s faults from
others motivated by desire to get some material object, praise and good
reputation.
Guile is the mind that puts up a false front and pretending to have
qualities that one actually does not possess which is motivated by a desire
or attachment to material gain, respect and reputation and so forth.
So guile is putting up a false front and pretending to have qualities that
one doesn’t have whereas deceit is also putting up a false front but
intentionally hides one’s faults from others.
Having said this, what is the relationship between the pledge reducing our
deceit and guile and the experience of our loved ones becoming enemies that
is said to be the result of us harboring evil thoughts?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You see any connection? I’m not sure how they
are connected together.
Verse 26
When I am sick with consumption or edema, it is the weapon of my own evil
deeds turned upon me for unlawfully and indiscriminately stealing others’
wealth. From now on I shall renounce plundering others’ wealth.
I guess there may be different versions of the root text. In my commentary,
it says that we are beset with obstacles and sicknesses. When practicing
the Dharma, we may meet with interferences from both humans and non-humans.
We may also fall sick whether it is tuberculosis (TB) or cancer. Whatever
the sickness may be, the end result is we become very frail and physically
weak to the point that we cannot actually do much practice.
Here it is translated as “unlawfully and indiscriminately stealing others’
wealth” but in Tibetan, it means taking the possessions of the Three
Jewels, such as taking things belonging to the Buddha and using them.
“Unlawfully” means that an ordained person who has committed a defeat of
the pratimoksha and in reality is no longer an ordained but still live in
the monastic environment and use the possessions of the Sangha community
such as the abode, food and so forth. As says here that would be unlawful
but actually is unethical because that person already does not have the
vows but still using the possessions of the Sangha community. Or one could
partake those possessions indiscriminately without any guidelines or rules
or any consideration for whether a particular action is virtuous or non-
virtuous with care less attitude.
“From now on I shall renounce plundering others’ wealth” – taking and using
the possessions of the Three Jewels
(Ven Gyurme: I haven’t heard of an English equivalent translation.
Verse 27
When my body is suddenly struck by contagious disease, it is the weapon of
my own evil deeds turned upon me for committing acts that corrupted my
vows. From now on I shall renounce non-virtuous acts.
A person who is suddenly being inflicted by contagious diseases is said to
be the result of having transgressed samaya in the past. “Taksik???” in
Tibetan means pledge or samaya, whether it is a spiritual commitment, vow,
precept or promise. If one keeps to the samaya, the pledge and promise,
then one becomes good, excellent, and holy. If one transgresses the samaya,
then one will fall to the lower realms and suffer. As such, one makes the
pledge to henceforth abandon non-virtue.

Qualms from the Tathagata Essence.
Q1: I have a qualm about the quality of spontaneity of buddha. This quality
is uncompounded. I’m not very sure if I fully understand this. The quality
of spontaneous enlightened activity is to help all sentient beings.  Thus,
in a way it is dependent on the existence of sentient beings. If so, why is
it uncompounded? On the other hand, it is also not correct to say it is
compounded because that would mean that effort and cause is required to
perform actions to benefit sentient beings; which is not the case.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You understand the qualm?  Better don’t answer
if you don’t understand the qualm.
Of the eight qualities of the Buddha Jewel that were mentioned in the
tathagata essence, what is the second quality and is that quality
compounded or uncompounded?
What is the second quality? Spontaneity
Is it compounded or uncompounded?
How does the Buddha’s effortless and spontaneous enlightened activity come
about?
What makes that possible for the Buddha’s enlightened activity to be
spontaneous and effortless?
That is made possible by the abandonment of the two obscurations. This
quality of acting effortlessly and spontaneously without needing to depend
on thought is a quality of the Buddhas only, and it does not exist on
sentient beings ground.
Why sentient beings are not able to do things without thinking and effort?
Why? Because it is said that we have not yet abandon the two obscurations.
So it was said, the Buddhas can do it because they have abandoned the two
obscurations,
First, we need to get an idea of what is non-abiding nirvana, what is
enlightenment or what is nirvana. That is an important point. When we talk
about non-abiding nirvana or enlightenment, what exactly do they mean?
Essentially, what is enlightenment? That is crucial to understanding the
question.
Like what Nagarjuna says “What is liberation?”
Liberation is the extinction or exhaustion of karma and afflictions.
Into what karma and afflictions get exhausted?
Essentially, the sphere of reality is that into which all karma and
afflictions are ceased, and where all elaborations are ceased. Essentially
that is what liberation is.
Prior to talking about this, we first have to know how suffering and
samsara comes about. In essence, the root of samsara is ignorance, the
apprehension of true existence, the mind that actively believe that each
and everything that exist, exist from their own side.
Whatever that appears to us appears as being established or existing from
their own side (existing inherently). First, there is that appearance of
true existence. Inside us there is a mind that assent to the appearance and
believe that that is how things exist. That mind is called the apprehension
of true existence.
With that as the basis, incorrect mental attention comes into play.
In reality, whether the object in question is good or bad, it is just a
projection of the mind, a mere imputation by the mind.  But that is not how
things appear to the mind and that is not what we believe.
Whether the object in question is a good or bad phenomena, if we think that
is a good object or good person, that object or person will appears as
completely good from its own side and appears to have qualities over and
above what the object actually possess; but we don’t realize that. We
exaggerate the attributes of the object - if the object is good, then
everything is 100% good from its own side or if the object is bad, then
everything is 100% bad from its own side and it has nothing to do with our
perception. It is just right there coming from the side of the object. When
based on that kind of appearance and belief, then very strong anger arises
towards the things and we find it inherently repulsive. We then develop
very strong attachment for the things that we find inherently pleasant or
attractive. Based on that we engage in all kinds of actions in which we
accumulate karma and the result is continuous suffering and problems.
When we say that liberation is the state of emptiness, sphere of reality,
into which all elaborations dissolve into. The word “elaborations” may mean
a couple of things but essentially the fundamental elaboration here is the
elaboration of true existence. It refers to ignorance, the apprehension of
true existence. While things do not exist from their own side, the
apprehension of true existence conceives of things to exist from their own
side. So that is actually an elaboration because in reality there is no
true existence but the apprehension of true existence, the mind elaborates,
exaggerates or imputes inherent existence onto things and events.
This elaboration, this apprehension of true existence, is a wrong
consciousness from which all the problems and suffering arise. Since it is
a false elaboration of reality, and if we apply the antidote which is the
understanding that there has never been any true existence and will never
be, it can weaken the apprehension of true existence. In so doing, we can
then also remove this apprehension of true existence.
Come the day when we generate the wisdom, the mind that directly sees
emptiness, that mind becomes an antidote powerful enough to start
overcoming ignorance, the apprehension of true existence.
If you ask “When you generate the wisdom realizing emptiness, where does
the apprehension of true existence go?”  Then there is nothing else to say
other than emptiness. Into what does the apprehension of true existence is
ceased? It is ceased in its sphere of reality. It is ceased in the reality
of the mind, suchness of the mind.
The mind is accompanied with defilements. When the suchness with
defilements is separated from the defilements what is left is the suchness
of the mind, and that is liberation. There is nothing else to point to. It
is final sphere of reality.
It is the same thing with the non-abiding nirvana. When the two
obscurations are abandoned, what is left is that suchness, and that is the
non-abiding nirvana - the suchness that is not accompanied by the two
obscurations.  That is the second quality of spontaneity, the non-abiding
nirvana.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Are you getting it?
This non-abiding nirvana is uncompounded. Nirvana is just the emptiness of
the mind (the suchness of the mind), that has been separated from the two
obscurations. That is what non-abiding nirvana is.
The emptiness of the mind has always been there. It is just that along the
way, it acquires different names. When it is accompanied with the
defilements, it is called suchness with defilements. When it is not
accompanied with defilements i.e. when the two obscurations have been
removed, it is called non-abiding nirvana.
As the mind acquires different names, maybe people may think that at
certain times it is uncompounded and then at other times it is compounded.
It is not like that. When we talk about the final ultimate nature of the
mind, the suchness of the mind, it is uncompounded. It has always been
uncompounded and it will always remain as uncompounded. That is the
quality, the suchness of the mind.
If you think about it, the emptiness or the suchness of the mind is the
basis from which samsara arises. It is that same suchness of the mind which
makes nirvana possible.
It is challenging and it is not easy when you hear how all things are the
elaborations of emptiness, how all things are the play of emptiness, how
everything is in the nature of emptiness.
Because the mind is empty of existing inherently, the suchness of the mind,
there is samsara and there is nirvana. If that is not the final nature of
the mind, there is no way for samsara and nirvana to exist.  If the mind
exists inherently, then making a presentation of samsara and nirvana would
be untenable, not feasible and not possible.
If the mind exists inherently, why there cannot be nirvana and there cannot
be samsara?
Samsara is established from within the emptiness of the mind, so is
nirvana. With that as the basis, the non-abiding nirvana which is
essentially uncompounded, suchness of the mind, then the Buddha is
spontaneous. Because of that the Buddha’s enlightened activities are
spontaneous and effortless. But when you talk about the Buddha’s
enlightened activities themselves, then they are not uncompounded, they are
compounded. Therefore Buddha’s’ enlightened activities are compounded.
