Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson16_rev.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.461401
================================================================================


Student 1: With regards to the object of abandonments, we were taught there
are afflictive obscurations and knowledge obscurations. Are these two
exhaustive i.e. are they the only objects of abandonment or are there
object of abandonment that is neither of the two?
Maybe I just explained why I am asking this. An arhat has abandoned self-
grasping but still has self-cherishing, whereas bodhisattva on the Middle
Path of Accumulation does not have self-cherishing. I have no idea self-
cherishing comes under which object of abandonment?
Khen Rinpoche:  What about you try to answer this question first “Is there
a common locus between self-cherishing and path?  Is there something both a
self-cherishing and path?”
Student: What is path?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Where people walk and that is called path. Is
possible or not possible?
Student 1: I think there is another problem. What exactly is the definition
of self-cherishing? Even if I were to recite prayer, even Mahayana mind-
generation, there is an element of acting for one’s own welfare per se.
There is both part - one’s welfare and other’s welfare.
Ven Gyurme: You are saying aspiration for enlightenment is for own welfare.
Student 1: As well for other welfare. There is sentient being that needs to
be cherished as well. If I can’t even cherish myself, what more can I say
about cherishing others?  So what exactly is this self-cherishing we are
talking about?  Is it to say that I take other people as a priority in
comparison to myself, but not totally not cherish myself per se? Because
after this is a sentient being.
I find it hypocritical to say that I cherish others more than myself, and I
totally don’t cherish myself at all. Because I don’t even think this
sentient being is worth cherishing. In the first place, the definition of
self-cherishing could be not so clear.
Ven Gyurme: So you want the definition of self-cherishing and the
definition of path. So you are answering the question with two questions.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I want my answer too.
Khen Rinpoche:  It is said that we must discard the self-cherishing in
order for the mind of enlightenment (bodhicitta) to arise. When the
bodhicitta is generated, the power of the self-cherishing decreases, and
gradually it will come a point where it will be eliminated.
In the case for the attitude of cherishing others, I don’t think there is
the element of disregarding or discarding oneself. Usually self-cherishing
means we prioritize ourselves over others, in that we are more important
than others. Therefore, cherishing others has to be the opposite of that.
It is not that you discard yourself but rather, in the view of cherishing
others, others become more important and more precious than oneself.  I
don’t think there is an element of neglecting or discarding ourselves when
we have the attitude of cherishing others.
Ordinary bodhisattvas are forbidden from giving their bodies to others. It
is said that ordinary bodhisattva should not give away any parts of their
body such as eyes and so forth to others because the time for that has not
come. When we talk about object of abandonment, we usually talk about the
two obscurations:
   1. Afflictive obscuration
   2. Knowledge obscuration
I would think that if it is an object of abandonment, it would have to be
included in these two. It might be difficult to posit otherwise.
An object of abandonment is something that has abandoned by an
uninterrupted path; which is its antidote. So that is what an object of
abandonment is.
Having said this, now back to your question: Whether self-cherishing is an
object of abandonment or not? Going by what we have said so far, it seems
that we would have to say that it is not. If it is an object of
abandonment, it would have to be either an afflictive obscuration or
knowledge obscuration.
When one trains the mind in the path of the person of medium capacity, for
example, and through that training, one comes to develop renunciation in
that one wishes to abandon cyclic existence for oneself. Primarily; we are
seeking our own nirvana (liberation).
The thought seeking personal liberation (seeking nirvana for oneself)
becomes something like self-cherishing. Then that becomes object of
abandonment.
So in the normal sense of the word, self-cherishing is not an object of
abandonment. If it is an object of abandonment, it has to be either Path of
Seeing abandonment or Path of Meditation abandonment. But it is something
to be discarded.
If you speaking from the perspective of the Mahayana, it is something to be
discarded but is not something to be discarded in general, for example, the
mind wishing to achieve liberation for oneself. That is a virtuous mind. If
it is virtue, then it has to be something that is to be adopted and not to
be discarded. But from the perspective of the Mahayana, it is something to
be discarded.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  You got it? You understand what I am
answering? Or no?
If you ask “Is self-cherishing necessarily an object to be discarded? If it
is virtue, is it necessarily something that is to be adopted?
Students answers inaudible.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You have to say something. If you say
something, then I have to say something. Otherwise, I have nothing to say.
Either you say yes and say what you think, or you say no then say
something. Doesn’t matter, according to your knowledge, idea, with answer.
Khen Rinpoche: If it is virtue, is it necessarily something that is to be
adopted? If you say “not necessarily”, then right away you should be able
to give me some examples which are virtues but is something that I don’t
really need.
Ven Gyurme: What? Renunciation is it? Everybody wants good heart, but don’t
want renunciation.
Khen Rinpoche: When I tell you something, if you don’t understand then I
will give you more questions. The whole purpose of giving more questions is
so that you can respond. Through that would makes thing clearer for you.
But if you don’t participate then I will not be able to make things clearer
for you.
Let’s deal with it one by one. Self-cherishing is not necessarily an object
of abandonment, yes or no?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  You want to participate or you don’t want to
participate? If you are not participating, I just make simple sentence
there, okay?
Khen Rinpoche: In order to be an object of abandonment, it has to be either
an afflictive obscuration or a knowledge obscuration and it is something
that has to be abandoned by an uninterrupted path. As such, self-cherishing
is not an object of abandonment.
Self-cherishing is not an object to be discarded in general. But if you are
looking at it from the Mahayana perspective, it is an object to be
discarded. But in general, self-cherishing is not an object to be
discarded.
Why? Because there is a common locus between self-cherishing and a path.
There is something that is self-cherishing and path. There is something
that is self-cherishing and virtuous mind. Therefore self-cherishing is not
an object to be discarded.
However, if it is a path, it is necessarily virtue. If it is virtue, it is
necessarily an object to be adopted.
If you have anything you should bring it up right away.
Khen Rinpoche: You agree or you not agree?
Student 1: I do not agree. Not necessarily.
Ven Gyurme: So there are virtues that are not necessarily to be adopted.
Khen Rinpoche: If it is a path, isn’t it necessarily an object to be
adopted?
Student 1: If it a path, not necessarily I must adopt.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  That is not the question. You must listen what
is the question. Must answer according to the question.
Khen Rinpoche: If it is a path, isn’t it necessarily an object to be
adopted?
Student 1: Yes. No problem, because I didn’t say that all the paths must be
cultivated by a single person. It is not an issue. If it is a path, yes it
is necessarily to be cultivated,  but it is not necessarily to be
cultivated by one person.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Nobody asking that question.
Student 1: There is no contradiction.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Nobody asking that question. That one I know,
that is why I don’t ask.
Khen Rinpoche: I have said earlier that self-cherishing is not something to
be discarded on the Hinayana path. Bodhisattvas don’t need it.
Bodhisattvas don’t want it, and they chuck it away.
A path is necessarily virtue. A virtue is something to be cultivated. As
such self-cherishing is not necessarily an object to be discarded.
Student 1: The whole text is telling us that the enemy is self-cherishing,
and it list out all the karmas etc. Arhats also won’t have duplicities, and
won’t have all these negative karmas. So why would self-cherishing be a
problem to an arhat?  The enemy is not necessarily self-cherishing as it
can be self-grasping. From the different context of looking at the text at
different motivation, the enemy is actually self-grasping.
Ven Gyurme: So basically you are saying “How self-cherishing in the arhat’s
continuum harms him?”
Student 1: Yes
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  You say self-cherishing doesn’t harm the
arhats?
Student 1: Yes, because all the verses is talking about karma.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I heard something self-cherishing doesn’t hurt
the arhat? You said something like that?
Student 1: What I meant is that the whole text is talking about all
different karmas. Then it kind of saying that self-cherishing is the cause
for us to create all these karma. But from the perspective of an arhat who
does not have any self-grasping but has self-cherishing, they won’t go on
create these karma. Then if you want to convince an arhat using this text,
it would be a bit difficult because they won’t even create the karma.
Ven Gyurme: Are you saying even the Buddha can’t do much?
Student 1: I think so. The arhat won’t create these karmas because they
don’t even have self-grasping
Ven Gyurme: Are you saying that the reasoning in this text won’t work for
arhats.
Student 1: Yes, it won’t work for arhat. Unless they have this thinking: “I
may not create this karma but other sentient beings can create karma
because of their self-cherishing.” Maybe that will work. Based on this
text, how to convince an arhat?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  I don’t know what you talking about. I have no
idea. We just read from the text.
Verse 54
Approach, great tutelary deity Yamantaka. I beseech you at this very moment
to rip to shreds this leather sack of actions and the five poisonous
afflictions that mire me in the mud of worldly action.
In the preceding verses there were some verses of making requests to the
deity Yamantaka to destroy our self-grasping and self-cherishing. Likewise,
this verse is making another request.
Here, one is making further request to the deity Yamantaka. Just like a
very dirty place that is filled with all kind of filthy substances,
likewise samsara is filled with the filth of karma and afflictions. This is
the creation of our self-cherishing. So it is our self-cherishing that
caused us to fall into the mud of samsara. One is making a request to the
deity Yamantaka to quickly destroy our self-cherishing right away.
Verse 55
Although it has brought me suffering in the three wretched states of
existence, not knowing enough to fear it, I rush to its cause. Roar and
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike
at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme: “The destroyer, false construction” means this thought of self-
cherishing.
It says that all of us have already suffered the terrible sufferings of the
lower realms in the past due to our self-cherishing. Although we have
suffered for a long period of times in the lower realms, but now we seemed
to have forgotten all those sufferings. We seemed to be not afraid of those
sufferings and again we accumulate many causes to go back to the lower
realms under the control of the power of our own self-cherishing
By seeing how the self-cherishing is the cause of our sufferings and, in
this case, how self-cherishing was the cause of us going to the lower
realms and is still the cause of us accumulating the karma to be born in
the lower realms again, then the last two sentences come into play: “Roar
and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction “- this evil
thought or conception is our self-cherishing.
“Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!”  -  As I
have said in the last lesson, the “enemy” refers to both our self-
cherishing and self-grasping. We should strike at the heart of this enemy.
The “heart” here means the mode of apprehension of self-cherishing and self-
grasping.
How do we overcome the self-cherishing and self-grasping? We target the
self-cherishing and self-grasping way of apprehending phenomena i.e. we
strike at the mode of apprehension.
In Tibetan edition, many verses end in “maraya” which mean to kill or
mortally strike taking the life in Sanskrit.
Ven Gyurme: There are different Tibetan editions of the text. Our version
has one verse missing. I remembered there is one verse missing from the
last BP. This might be the one.
Verse 56
Although my desire for comfort is great, I don’t accumulate its causes.
Although my tolerance for suffering is small, my desire and greed are
great. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction!
Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
What does “desire for comfort” mean? There are times in which life is
pretty smooth, we don’t have any problems at hand, things are going well,
we just hang around, and we feel that it is wonderful and nice. But
actually we are not particularly aware that we need happiness and peace not
just for a day, but we need them for months and years and even beyond this
lifetime and for lifetimes to come.
If we want to have a similar standard of living on whatever happiness that
we have, and we want to experience that for the rest of the life and for
all the future lives to come then we need to accumulate merit which is the
cause of such happiness. It is better if we were to think of the wish for
ourselves to have the happiness of future lives, the happiness of
liberation and the happiness of enlightenment than just to think of the
happiness of this life, out of concern for ourselves.

In many things that we do in our life, whether it is our work, our job,
studying the Dharma, doing our daily recitations, doing retreats or
whatever, and when we meet with some challenges and difficulties, we just
give up. We will just procrastinate, “Not now, forget it. I’ll do it next
time”.  Generally, we don’t think of future life’s happiness but we just
focus primarily on this life’s happiness. We work so hard and everything we
do is to achieve happiness for this life alone.
If we investigate what is cause of us not having long term view but only
having a short view of on everything we do and not really looking beyond
this life, in which we just focus on here and now and for this life, I
think all these comes back to our self-cherishing attitude.
When it comes to earning money, our greed is amazing. We are so greedy.
Whether it is work or studies, we always aim to be the richest or to have
the highest position. Here the advice is that all these problems arise from
our self-cherishing. As such, there is a need to eradicate our self-
cherishing.
Verse 57
Although that which I desire is near at hand, my effort to achieve it is
small. Although my projects are many, none of them are completed. Roar and
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike
at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Self!
Ven Gyurme: “Projects” are activities or plans. “False construction” are
evil or bad thoughts
The order of the text is reversed [verse 57 should be before verse 56]
[BP1 Module 6: The Tibetan meaning is quite different from the
translation’s first line: in Tibetan, it means expecting ‘quick results’.
For example, when we are doing a retreat, the moment we start, we expect to
gain realizations. When we study, we study here and there a bit, and we
expect to know everything. So, although we expect quick results, our effort
to achieve our goals is small. The measure of small effort, according this
text, is doing things for one month or one year. If we do something like
that for a period of time, and then we leave it, we will stop because we
get tired.
Similarly, for “although my projects are many”, maybe we can choose words
that can be more generally applied, such as “although my activities are
many”, “the things I want to do”, “things that I have to do”. In this case,
of course we can take them to be anything. For example, our studies: at the
beginning we study one text and one topic; we get very excited and really
study. After a while, maybe we think there is something else out there and
maybe we should investigate as well. We switch to another subject and
another text. If we study in this way, a little bit here and a little bit
there, at the end we will not learn anything.
Similarly, when it comes to relying on gurus or looking for spiritual
masters, we tend to look for one, see some faults and move to another, one
after another.
Similarly for our Dharma practice. We can start by reflecting on death and
impermanence. After a while we get bored and we think we think we should
meditate on bodhicitta. After a while we think we should try meditating on
a deity. We do that for some time, then we get tired and we give up
everything.
All of this happens because we have too many things to do, too many
projects, too many activities, the wish list is too long. Therefore nothing
gets done. Thus, though we have too many things to do, our effort to
achieve them is too small, yet we hold very unrealistic expectations,
expecting to see results instantaneously. What is responsible for all these
different kinds of attitudes? Again, it boils down to the self-cherishing
and self-grasping that we all have. This self-cherishing and self-grasping
has entered into the innermost, deepest recesses of our heart. We hold
these two attitudes, self-cherishing and self-grasping, to be the “I” and
we obediently follow all the orders and commands given by self-cherishing
and self-grasping.
In the last two lines of verse 50, it says that there is the need to
destroy self-cherishing and self-grasping, which are the causes of our
downfall.]
Verse 58
Although I have many new friendships, my modesty and friendships are of
short duration. Although I freeload off of others, I eagerly pursue those
who pilfer. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false
construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
One of the earlier verses talked about the new friendships, basically
establishing relationships with friends or gurus.  The point here is not to
rush into things. In the case of taking on somebody as guru, one should not
rush into it right away but should think and examine very carefully before
one rely or take someone as the guru. If you don’t examine and rush into
it, then there is a danger of forsaking or giving up the guru later. As
mentioned before, then one decides to switch guru and it will never stop.
In the Lamrim Chenmo, in the Great Treatises of the Stages of the Path, the
section on correctly relying on the virtuous friend, it mentioned that when
it comes to the number of gurus that one should have, two examples were
given. There was one lama by the name of Sangphuwa who had many gurus.
Whoever gives teachings, he would regard that person as guru and then take
the teachings. Whereas it was said that the great master Dromtonpa had only
five gurus in his life. Basically these are different approaches. Then
there was a discussion between Kadampa Geshe Potowa and Gompa Rinchen. In
their discussion, Geshe Potowa was asked “Which approach is better? Is it
better to be like Sangphuwa who took on many gurus or it is better to take
the approach of Dromtonpa?” Geshe Potowa  said: “When your mind is still
untrained and when you tend to see faults in others easily, then you will
generate non-faith easily. When your mind is at that level, then it is
better to have fewer gurus. Then it is better to take the approach of
Dromtonpa.”
In the section on correctly devoting to the virtuous friend in the Lamrim,
the Stages of the Path literature, there is an extensive explanation on the
eight benefits of correctly relying on the virtuous friend and the eight
faults or disadvantages of relying incorrectly after one has taken on
somebody as guru. There are a lot of details and explanations on these. The
point is that if you do not know how to rely properly on your virtuous
friend after you have taken him as your guru, then there is no profit for
you but only great loss as a disciple. Therefore, it is extremely important
to know and understand this and to find out more from the Lamrim.
There are people who go around taking gurus. They take one person as guru,
and after that they start to see faults and get upset and criticize the
guru. They then switch guru with the hope that the next one would be
better. But the same thing happens and the same story repeats over and over
again. All of these are the result of self-cherishing.
When one has great desires, one will find it difficult to be generous to
make offerings to accumulate merit. Although that is what we need to do, we
need to develop generous heart and accumulate merit by making offerings,
but when we have great desire, we don’t do all of those things. In fact,
maybe we end up hankering after the wealth of others, stealing, robbing and
deceiving others. Again, these actions are the result of self-cherishing.
Verse 59
Although I am skilled at flattery and asking for things indirectly, my
despair is great. Although I assiduously amass things, miserliness binds
me. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction!
Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Here flattery and hinting (asking for things indirectly) are mentioned.
These are part of the five types of wrong livelihood that is mentioned in
the Lamrim.
1. Flattery: Out of wanting to acquire some material goods, one may put on
a show in front of others such as acting holy and maybe flattering others.
2. Hinting: One is asking for things indirectly. If it is motivated by
desire to acquire an object or some material possessions, one then hints
and say “I do have this particular object but I don’t have enough of it”.
Saying things like that is hinting if the motivation for saying those
things is actually to get something from the person you are talking to.
However, if one doesn’t have that intention but just making a plain honest
statement with no intention whatsoever, “I have it, but it is not enough.”,
 That is fine as it is not hinting.
3. The use of force or pressuring others: Sometimes the person doesn’t want
to give you something but motivated by desire to acquire that object, then
you say or do things that make it difficult for the person to say no.
4. Baiting: You put out bait and want something bigger in return. Basically
we give something small to somebody and hoping that the person gives you
something bigger or more than what you have given in return.
5. Hypocrisy: Acting holy by putting up a front but in reality we are not
disciplined or subdued. In order to get something in return from somebody,
we put up this false front or show.
It is said that all of these are results of our self-cherishing, and
motivated by our self-cherishing.
Again, due to our self-cherishing, we become so stingy and miserly. We are
unable to give to others. We are unable to make offerings, and we may even
end up being unable to even use the things for ourselves. As we are so
stingy and miserly, we cannot even bear to use something for ourselves. All
of these again are said to be the fault of our self-cherishing.
Then going back to the question: “How does self-cherishing harm the
arhats?” Actually that is the arhat’s business. Our business is to see
whether the self-cherishing harms us like that or not. We have to see,
investigate and analyze for ourselves whether are we actually harmed by our
own self-cherishing based on the numerous examples given in the text.
We all have to think for ourselves individually whether all the numerous
examples cited in the teachings about the faults of self-cherishing are
indeed true or not. We have to think for ourselves. But I guess if we
really think about it, it is pretty obvious and evident.
Verse 60
Although whatever I have done has been insignificant, I am swollen with
pride. Although I have no reputation, my hunger for it is great. Roar and
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike
at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
“Although whatever I have done has been insignificant, I am swollen with
pride” - the meaning has to do more with qualities. Although I do not have
any qualities, there is really nothing good about myself, but yet I have
desire for many things, I want this and I want that.
“Although whatever I have done has been insignificant” - we may have done
something and actually it is not a big deal but we make such a big deal out
of it as if we have done a lot. For example, “I offered great service to my
lama! I offered service to the Sangha community! I did so much for the
Dharma centre!” We did something but are of insignificant but we make a big
deal out of it. It is like going around saying “I did this, I did that”.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Not boasting.
Ven Gyurme: If you have something to boast, but here there is nothing to
boast. But still boasting.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Self-pity maybe? Some people feel you pity them
after telling them.
Ven Gyurme: Want some attention “You poor thing.”
It happens at times, whether we did something for the guru or the center,
then we say “I did this”.
Student response inaudible.
Ven Gyurme: Want attention, want acknowledgment, want recognition. I think
sayang covers all the meanings.
When it comes to offering service to the guru, offering service to a Dharma
centre and so forth, if the motivation is really just to do something good
or to accumulate merit and to purify the mind, then no matter how much one
does, there is no need to even mentioned “I did this, I did that”. Anyway,
we do this because of our self-cherishing.
If we look from the Dharma point of view, we have actually no
accomplishments, no knowledge, and no understanding. Nothing! Even from the
worldly point of view, actually we don’t have anything significant or
worthwhile to be mentioned. Actually we are pretty much nothing. If we are
like that but yet at the same time we have very high aspirations to be
famous, to be powerful, or to attain very high status in the organization
or society. All of these are manifestations of our self-cherishing.
Verse 61
Although my preceptors are many, my ability to keep my vows is small.
Although my disciples are many, I give little time to help and look after
them. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction!
Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Again back to the issue of relying on the guru, one may have many gurus. We
may be going around taking gurus all over the place, but we may not pay
attention to keeping the samaya between the guru and disciple pure. When we
take someone as a guru, it is extremely important to maintain a pure bond,
pure samaya and good relationship. Although we may have many gurus, but we
don’t pay attention to maintaining a pure bond, in fact we let it
degenerate. Again, this is a result of self-cherishing.
Here is the advice for taking on students. Before we take on any student,
we have to check and see whether it is right and beneficial to do so. After
you have taken on the student or disciple, we have to make sure to help
them to the end, to give them both Dharma advice and advice on how to deal
with daily life.
The bond of the guru-disciple relationship is extremely important. Before
taking on anybody as a guru, it is important to check carefully. Once you
have taken on someone as your guru, it is important from your own side to
not let your samaya and bond with your guru degenerate. Likewise, for those
people who have students, it is important to take care of the students both
materially and spiritually.
Verse 62
Although my promises are many, my practical assistance is minimal. Although
my fame is great, if it were examined, the gods and demons would put me to
shame. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction!
Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
In this context it is translated literally as “promises”, but what the
Tibetan word means is vows and commitments. As such we cannot say “my
practical assistance is minimal” but should say “although my promises (vows
and samaya) are many, my practice is minimal.
“Although my fame is great, if it were examined, the gods and demons would
put me to shame” - This is referring to all of us. We are all guilty of
this. When it comes to taking on vows, all of us have taken on the three
classes of vows – the tantric vows, the bodhisattva vows and the different
kinds of pratimoksha vow.  All of us have taken these vows. These are not
promises that were made lightly. These are great promises in that when we
took on those vows, who were our witnesses? The witnesses were the gurus
and all the Buddhas and bodhisattvas, and in their presence, we voluntarily
accepted the vows.
We have taken all kinds of vows and commitments and promises. If we
actually we sit down and honestly examine the purity of our vows, I don’t
think we will be able to point to any vow that we have kept purely, and not
even once.
When we sit down and examine carefully, all we would find is “I’ve
degenerate this. I have broken this and that”. That is all we will find. We
will not find any purity of the vows. That is what is meant by “my practice
is minimal”.
“Although my fame is great” - it could be a famous teacher or one may be
famous for whatever reason. If  we do actually sit down and honestly
examine ourselves, our behavior, our conduct, and our way of thinking would
even embarrass the ghosts or the spirits. If even the spirits or the ghosts
are embarrassed by our conduct and behavior, then there is no need to
mention what the worldly gods will think.
 Whatever has been said so far in the text is basically talking about us.
We are all like that. All of these are the results of our self-cherishing.











