Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson05.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.941407
================================================================================


There are two systems for cultivating the mind of enlightenment,
bodhicitta:
   1. The sevenfold cause and effect instructions
   2. Exchanging self and others
The tradition of the sevenfold cause and effect instructions are for those
of the duller faculties.
The system of exchanging self and others are meant for those of sharp
faculties.
The text that we are going to look at is “Wheel Weapon Mind Training” and
that comes under the system of exchanging self and others. The lineage came
through Lama Serlinpa who then transmitted it to Lama Atisha.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You have the text with you? Have? Where? In the
ipad? Wah! I think I need to put my text in the ipad also. But I cannot
imagine reading my text in the ipad. It is really complicating. I try to
read some but this going back and forth (swiping of fingers) My own text
much easier for me. Anyway, maybe you are used to it then easier too.

Homage to the Three Jewels.
The text starts with paying homage to the Three Jewels, and I think it is
the practice of going for refuge to the Three Jewels. It is said that
whatever activities we undertake, we should start that activity with
refuge.
What exactly is refuge? It becomes very important to know what refuge is.
In order to have refuge, in order to entrust ourselves to the Three Jewels,
we must first have very strong fear of suffering. For instance, it could be
a strong fear of the suffering that we will have to experience in the lower
realms. And we need a very strong conviction that the Three Jewels can
protect us from that suffering. The faith that is engendered through these
two factors is refuge.
Essentially it is a faith engendered by knowledge. It is a faith that
arises through knowing. In order to have refuge, on one hand we need the
real fear of suffering; whether it is the suffering of the lower realm
and/or the suffering of cyclic existence (samsara). We also need the
conviction that the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha have the capacity and the
power to protect us from the sufferings of the lower realms and cyclic
existence. In order to produce that kind of conviction, that certain
knowledge in us, we must know what the Three Jewels are and what their
qualities are. As such, in the previous module we have looked at what are
the three objects of refuge, what kind of qualities they possess and so
forth.  In order for the real refuge to arise in our heart, there must be
that conviction and certainty that we are so damn sure that the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha have the power to protect us from the sufferings of the
lower realms and cyclic existence.
As I have mentioned quite a couple of times, one of the reasons for
studying and learning about these different aspects of the Buddha, Dharma
and Sangha is to help us to develop refuge in our heart. For example, in
the previous module, one of the reasons why we study the Tathagata Essence,
the lineage, is to get a better idea of the Three Jewels, our objects of
refuge. So the topic of lineage (Buddha nature) is very important. Even if
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha possess the power and the capacity to free us
from our sufferings, but if from our side we don’t possess whatever that
can make us to become the Three Jewels, or if there is nothing in us that
enable us to actualize the Three Jewels from our side, or if we lack the
crucial ingredients that makes possible for us to become the Three Jewels,
then the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha is just that. That is why understanding
the lineage is very important. On the basis of understanding the lineage,
we see for ourselves that we can actualize the state of the Three Jewels.
When you see all these points, then an aspiration to actualize the Three
Jewels will arise in you. So that is refuge for you.
What is posited as a refuge? What exactly is the refuge entity? It is the
faith of conviction in the Three Jewels’ capacity and power to protect us
from the sufferings of the lower realms and cyclic existence. That is the
entity of refuge. When we reflect on the sufferings that we ourselves will
have to endure in the hell realms as a hungry ghost or as an animal, we
will develop the fear. Base on that fear, if we are convinced that the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha can protect us from that particular fear then we
will have the refuge of a person of small capacity.
We must know this. If somebody were to ask you “What is the refuge of the
person of small capacity?” You must be able to answer this. In the case of
a refuge of a person of small capacity, the object of refuge that he
entrust to is the same – the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. What qualifies that
person’s refuge as a refuge of a person of small capacity is from his own
perspective. The difference doesn’t come from the side of the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha. The difference comes from the practitioner’s side, and
in this case it is that person’s type of fear.
Let’s say we come down with a very serious illness. Usually people will get
quite frighten and fearful with it. If motivated by that fear, then we
entrust ourselves to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, does that become refuge
or not?
Let’s say you are very confident that the Buddha can protect you from your
particular sickness, a terrible sickness in this life, and you are so sure
that the Buddha can definitely protect you, is that refuge or not? Is it
virtue or not?
That is our kind of refuge. That is our kind of practice, isn’t it? We are
practical and realistic people and it is difficult for us to conceive the
future suffering. “I got problem. Buddha, please protect me.” We do seek
Buddha’s protection for these things, is that not refuge? Is that not
virtue? Sometime people are so stressed when they could not find job. Then
they take refuge so that they can find a job, isn’t that refuge? That is
not virtue?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): We are beginner.
It is refuge or not? Can you all answer the second question: Is it virtue
or not? Is it dharma or not? This kind of refuge, is it a cause of
suffering or a cause of happiness?
So we really need to sit down and think what exactly refuge is. We also
have to look within ourselves and examine whether we have refuge or not. We
have to really think about this. We are not obliged to take refuge, isn’t
it? The question is “Why should I entrust myself under the care of the
Three Jewels?” What’s the purpose? What’s the point? What’s in for me? We
really need to ask the question “What if I don’t entrust ourselves to the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha and what if I don’t take refuge in them. What
will happen?”
When we go for refuge, there must be a reason. There must be a purpose for
entrusting ourselves to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha and take refuge in
them. There must be a reason. It has to be a reason. Otherwise, if we say
we go for refuge but we cannot answer to others or ourselves of why exactly
we are doing that and we are not sure then it is mere words. If we say that
we believe in the Buddha, we take refuge in the Buddha, we entrust
ourselves to the Buddha. We take refuge in the Buddha because we want to be
free of sickness and we want to have a smooth and successful life. If we
say that, then the question comes “Why do you need the Buddha to do that
for you? We can pray to the worldly gods. There are so many entities out
there such as nagas, landlord spirits, and worldly gods. They do actually
have the power to grant us some of our wishes and to solve some of our
problems. So if they can help us with that, then that is enough. But why do
we want to choose the Buddha? Is it because he is more powerful? This is
what we think, isn’t it.
If we say that we take refuge in the Buddha because we want to be free of a
certain sickness, wouldn’t it be better if we direct our single-pointed
faith towards the doctor and taking refuge in the doctor. That is what we
are supposed to do, by believing in the doctor and follow the doctor’s
advice, we can also recover. So there is no need for the Buddha.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Not something but must know what I’m driving
at?
These reasons alone are not sufficient to explain why we choose Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha as our object of refuge. We really have to think hard.
The entry level of refuge or the minimum reason for us to take refuge in
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha is the real fear of the suffering that we
will experience in the lower realms when we are born there. In order for
that fear to arise, first we must have an understanding and some conviction
in karma and its effects. We must have conviction that we will definitely
experience the results of the actions that we have already done. We must
have that understanding and conviction. It is only upon that conviction
then when we will think about all the things that we have done in this life
and in the past and how that certain to ripen as an experience in the lower
realms. Only then real fear will arises. So there are quite a lot of things
to sort out and that is from our side. We must also have the conviction
that the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha possess the power to protect us from the
fear of the suffering in the lower realms. In order to have that
conviction, we must think about many things. How do we come to such a
conclusion? Why do we believe that the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha actually
possess the power to protect us from those suffering? Anyway this is the
entry level refuge and that is the minimum to qualify as refuge. That is
the refuge of a person of small capacity.
What about the refuge of the person of medium capacity?  For a person of
middling capacity, that person’s fear is the fear of the suffering of
cyclic existence (samsara). The person has the faith of conviction that the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha can protect him from that fear. So this is the
refuge of a person of middling capacity.
In order for such a refuge to arise, one must have a very good
understanding of the Four Noble Truths.
Then the refuge of a person of great capacity:
    - is a mind that is unable to bear the suffering that the sentient
      beings are experiencing in samsara
    - is a mind that wishes to free all sentient beings from those
      sufferings.
Motivated by that, we can trust ourselves with faith of conviction in the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
In order to have the refuge of a person of middling capacity, one must
definitely have renunciation, the determination to be free, or the mind of
definite emergence.  Such an attitude is indispensable. It is definitely
needed in the practice of refuge of a person of great capacity. In fact,
the renunciation or the determination to be free of a person of great
capacity must be even stronger than the renunciation that a person of
middling capacity has. A person of great capacity not only is determined to
free himself from suffering but that person really wants all sentient
beings to be free from those sufferings. In that sense, for the sake of
sentient beings, that person’s determination to be free, the renunciation
or, the attitude of definite emergence is even stronger than a person of
middling capacity. That is the refuge of a person of great capacity.
The Mahayana (the great vehicle) is divided into two:
   1. The Paramitayana (Perfection vehicle)
   2. The Mantrayana (Mantra vehicle)
Both practitioners of Mahayana Paramitayana and Mantrayana are the same in
having the mind that is unable to bear the suffering of all sentient
beings. Both practitioners go for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha
with that kind of mind. So they are similar in that way.
While both are similar in not being able to bear with the suffering of all
sentient beings but the practitioner of Mantrayana has greater compassion
in that he is unable to bear that sentient beings have to wait so long for
them to achieve enlightenment. He cannot bear the fact that he has to
accumulate the collections over a very long period of time of over three
countless great eons. That practitioner of Mantrayana cannot bear the fact
of having to take so long to achieve enlightenment. He wants to achieve
enlightenment quicker and faster than that.  In fact, some of them think “I
want to achieve enlightenment in one lifetime in this one particular body.”
It is with that kind of attitude that they go for refuge to the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha.
Now we can see that the refuge of the person of small capacity, the person
of medium capacity, and the person of great capacity and within that, the
practitioner of the perfection vehicle and the practitioner of the mantra
vehicle, they all are the same in entrusting themselves to the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha. But yet their mind of refuge is different. The
difference comes from their own side and their reasons for taking refuge.
The quality of the refuge of the practitioners becomes increasingly
profound as it moves up the hierarchy. The attitude of renunciation and the
attitude of being unable to bear the particular suffering become
increasingly more powerful as we move through the different persons.
So just from this explanation, we can see that whether enlightenment is
fast or not does depends primarily on the level of mind. If the mind is
more powerful, stronger, more courageous and with a wider perspective, then
that person can achieves enlightenment much quicker. That is why the mantra
path is so much quicker. But the speed doesn’t come from the outside, the
speed comes from the level of the person’s mind.
Within the Mantrayana, there are four levels of tantra. The three lower
classes of tantra do talk about achieving enlightenment in one life and in
one body. That necessitates the practice and the achievement of
immortality. Having that realization then one is able to extend the
lifespan for a long time. Within that long life one achieves enlightenment.
This is in accordance with what is being espoused in the three lower
classes of tantra.
In the Highest Yoga Tantra, it talks about achieving enlightenment in one
life and in one body. What it means is the potential to achieve
enlightenment in one lifetime in this degenerate age in this one body. So
it is more profound and quicker. The difference in the speed of achieving
enlightenment is due to the level of the practitioner’s mind. The more
developed and more advanced one’s mind then the quicker the result will be.

One of thing that you need to take note is the different levels of refuge:
   1. The refuge of the person of small capacity
   2. The refuge of the person of middling capacity
   3. The refuge of the person of great capacity
Within the refuge of the person of great capacity, there is also the refuge
of someone who is of the mantra vehicle - Mantrayana. The different levels
of refuge come primarily because of the difference in the level of mind of
the person that is going for refuge.
Another thing to take notes of is the importance of the attitude of
renunciation or the determination to be freed or the mind of definite
emergence. It is needed for the refuge of the person of middling capacity,
the person of great capacity and even for the person of Mantrayana.
The other thing to know is that although the attitude of renunciation is
needed for those three levels of refuge but the attitude of renunciation,
the strength, and the quality do differs. If we understand these different
levels of refuge, so whatever we do even when we take refuge right from the
beginning, we kind of know where we stand and where we are heading to. In
the first place, do we have refuge or not? If we do have refuge then what
kind of level of refuge?  From there we will know that in order to get to a
particular destination, what kind of causes we need based on what we have
briefly discussed so far.
Whatever practice we do, especially prayers and rituals, it always starts
with refuge. We have to keep this in mind as it is very important. Every
time we do something, we go for refuge. We must bring to mind why and what
are we doing it? Sometimes if we are asked ‘What is the refuge of the
person of small capacity, the person of middling capacity and the person of
great capacity?’ Sometimes we get stuck and are not able to give the answer
immediately. So, you must ensure that you can answer if you are asked such
a question.

The Wheel-Weapon That Strikes at the Enemy’s Vital Spot
The name or the title of this text is ‘The Wheel-Weapon That Strikes at the
Enemy’s Vital Spot’.
In the ordinary sense, the word ‘enemy’ is the external enemy, the one that
causes problem. Let’s say we want to annihilate i.e. in order to wipe the
person from the face of the earth, we need a reasonable and powerful
weapon. In the ordinary sense of the word ‘enemy’, that is what an enemy
is.
But the ‘enemy’ that is mentioned in this title is our own self-cherishing
attitude. It is said that our own self-cherishing attitude has been our
enemy in the past that causes us all the problems and suffering. It is also
causing us problems and suffering now. Our own self-cherishing attitude
will also cause us problems and suffering in the future. So right from the
beginning we are to delineate carefully and accurately what the enemy is.
It is our self-cherishing. All the verses that make up the rest of this
text are like the wheel of sharp weapon that is used to annihilate this
self-cherishing attitude.
In the case of a skilled professional in the world, such as being skilled
in repairing machinery, he knows very well how a particular machine works
and functions. When that machine has problem, because of his expertise and
knowledge, the skilled professional is able to very quickly pinpoint the
problem and fix it right away. Likewise, all the verses that make up this
text can correctly and quickly identifying how our self-cherishing attitude
is the source of the problem and how it has no benefit. Through that it
helps the practitioner to uproot the self-cherishing attitude.
The text says that in order to defeat the enemy we have to know the enemy
well. If we know our enemy well, we know exactly how to defeat the enemy.
So if we know all these, then we will be able to defeat the enemy.

I bow down to the Great wrathful One, Yamantaka.
This is tantric stuff.  In English, Yamantaka is the opponent or the
antidote to Yama. This is what the Yamantaka means.
There are definitive Yamantaka and interpretive Yamantaka.
    • The definitive Yamantaka is the non-dual wisdom of bliss and
      emptiness.
    • This non-dual wisdom of bliss and emptiness takes on the aspect of a
      peaceful or wrathful deity. So the aspect that it takes on either
      peaceful or wrathful is the interpretive Yamantaka.
You will find an explanation of the similar nature in Sutra. In the Sutra
tradition, we talk about the inner virtuous friend (inner guru) and the
outer virtuous friend (outer guru).
    • The inner guru (inner virtuous friend) is our own positive mental
      qualities like having a good heart or virtuous positive mind.
    • The outer guru (outer virtuous friend) is the person who shows us the
      way how to actualize those inner qualities.
Going along this line of thought, you can talk about inner refuge and outer
refuge.
    • The inner refuge (inner protection) is our virtuous thought (virtue
      state of mind).
    • The outer refuge (outer protection) is the usual objects of refuge
      that we talk about; which is something external.
Yamantaka displays itself in a wrathful aspect; very very wrathful. The
wrath of this particular aspect is always continually directed at the self-
cherishing attitude in the continuum of all sentient beings.
If we were ask “Why is there Buddha in the wrathful aspect?”
The only answer must be this: They are wrathful, and their wrath is
directed at the afflictions of all sentient beings; in particular the wrath
is directed at the self-cherishing in the continuum of all sentient beings.
    • The wrathful one, Yamantaka - the wrathful one can refer to the
      ordinary bodhisattvas who are wrathful to the self-cherishing
      attitude.
    • Then “The Great wrathful one” can refer to the bodhisattva superiors.
    • The ultimate (final) Great wrathful one can only exist in the Buddha
      ground. In this context here, the ultimate (final) Great wrathful one
      is the Yamantaka in both interpretive and definitive sense. It is to
      this Yamantaka we pay homage.
Q&A
Student: As mentioned in the class, in the Mantrayana path one is able to
achieve enlightenment within one lifetime in a single body during this
degenerate time. We are always being told about the story of Milarepa of
how he met his guru and how hard he practiced. It always seems to me that
when they say this in the tantric tradition, are they talking about someone
who starts from literally ground zero and achieve enlightenment in one
lifetime? I suspect that Milarepa must have tremendous imprints from the
past to even generate that level of guru devotion that he has and has
mental determination to put up with whatever he has to put up. To me, it
doesn’t seem that he achieved enlightenment in a single lifetime. There
will always be a point where one will have a lifetime to achieve the full
enlightenment. He didn’t achieve enlightenment in the duration of a single
lifetime.
Khen Rinpoche: Put aside that. First, you think about this. If from the day
you meet your virtuous friend, your own guru, and you practice exactly what
he tells you, do you think you can achieve enlightenment in that life?
You practice every single thing that he tells you. Do you think you can
achieve enlightenment in that life?
I make the question easier. From the day you meet the virtuous friend and
you practice exactly as what he has advised, do you think in this life you
can perceive emptiness directly or not?
If you say “Yes” that means this life you definitely achieve Path of
Seeing, isn’t it?
If we talk about it from the Highest Yoga Tantra point of view, if you
practice exactly then you definitely can achieve the illusory body in this
life, isn’t it? If you say you can achieve the illusory body, definitely it
confirms that you will achieve enlightenment in that life. So, I answer
your question, right?
You say that if you practice exactly (as advised by your guru) you can see
emptiness directly, right?
Student: Yes, I completely agreed with that if we practice exactly
according to what our guru tells us. But the issue is that even for me to
be able to meet the guru, even for me to be able to have the ability and
determination to practice exactly according to his advices, that ability
does not come from this life time. My connection with my guru does not come
from this lifetime alone. In that sense, the ability to achieve
enlightenment does not happen in the single lifetime. Obviously there must
be a lifetime in which I will achieve enlightenment.
Ven Gyurme: We accept that. The question here is ‘Do you think you can or
not?’
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Asking you.
Student: It is possible. Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Then that is. You said “Yes”, then that is it.
Student: But my point is that it is not in one lifetime?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That means you have so many good karmas in the
past, isn’t it?
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yourself have tremendous karma like Milarepa,
isn’t it? You are saying that? If you say ‘Yes’ that means you have so much
good karma in the past. So, there is no difference from Milarepa.
Student: The tantric position said that one can achieves enlightenment in
one lifetime during this degenerate time. This gives the beginner the
impression that someone from ground zero can achieve enlightenment in a
single lifetime. Like Milarepa (who achieved enlightenment in single
lifetime), but it is not in a single lifetime because he must have
tremendous imprints from the past.
Khen Rinpoche: My point here is: if you practice you will achieve
enlightenment in one lifetime, right?
Student: Yes, but not me personally.
Ven Gyurme: So you cannot achieve enlightenment in one lifetime?
Khen Rinpoche: The question is that if you do, then you can achieve
enlightenment, right?
Student: Can.
Khen Rinpoche: You say you will achieve enlightenment in one lifetime. But
it follows that you won’t achieve enlightenment in one lifetime because you
asserted that you worked hard in all your past lives. So, it is not this
lifetime. So, you are not going to achieve enlightenment in one lifetime.
So, it is the same as Milarepa.
Student: Yes, not achieving enlightenment in one lifetime.
Ven Gyurme: So, there is no achievement of enlightenment in one lifetime.
Student: Yes, to me not achieving enlightenment in one lifetime.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You already accepted, can. Then why do you
say…..?
Ven Gyurme: You see the reasoning or not?
Khen Rinpoche: In order to practice the path, whatever it is, first we must
have some level of intelligence and wisdom. That is the necessary basis.
Without which there is no way to achieve realization. In the first place,
having something there or lack of something there is the result of whatever
we did in the past or we didn’t do in the past. So it is always related to
the past. We all do possess the human life of eight freedoms and ten
endowments. This is a necessarily the result of much hard works in the
past, presumably we work very hard in the past. In order to get a human
life of freedoms and endowments, the foundation is pure ethical discipline
complemented by the practice of perfection of generosity and so forth and
we must connect these practices to the result with stainless prayers. We
must have accumulated a lot of merits. That is why we have this human life
of freedoms and endowments. Does that means we work very hard in the past?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): That means no difference from Milarepa. So, we
are the same as Milarepa. That is no difference. You agree with that?
Khen Rinpoche: You have everything that Milarepa had. You have some level
of intelligence and wisdom and this human body. You have the external
condition of the virtuous friends.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Maybe haven’t met Marpa. I think only that is
missing. Joking
Khen Rinpoche: So you have everything setup to achieve enlightenment in one
lifetime. What is better than the human life of freedoms and endowments?
The Lamrim never say anything better than that, right? It is the best,
right? In the first place, there is no reason to ask the question of
whether we can or cannot (achieve enlightenment in one lifetime).
Everything is setup for us. If we practice, we can definitely see emptiness
directly in this life, we can definitely generate bodhicitta, we can
definitely traverse the generation stage or completion stage of Highest
Yoga Tantra, and then achieve unification, full enlightenment, in one
lifetime. So there is no problem as everything is already setup. It is not
difficult and we definitely can (achieve enlightenment in one lifetime).
Why not?  Are you saying there something more precious than the precious
human rebirth? Why cannot achieve enlightenment in one lifetime? What is
missing?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Why cannot?
Ven Gyurme: But you worked very hard to get to here. There is no result
similar to the cause?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You are missing what? Effort? Can you make it?
Too tired?
Khen Rinpoche: If the practice is done with joyous perseverance, then there
is nothing to stop the achievement of enlightenment.  As there are
different levels of refuge, then there is nothing to stop one from
developing the mind that is unable to bear the sufferings of all sentient
beings and want to achieve enlightenment quickly. With that one enters the
tantric path. So, there is nothing to stop the achievement of
enlightenment, isn’t it? We need to have that determination. With
determination, there is nothing that is blocking the attainment. Do you see
the point where the crux of the method lies? It is relatively much easier
to defeat the inner enemy than defeating the outer enemy if you know where
the crux of the method lies and you know exactly what to do.
When we talk about Milarepa, we don’t have to worry what he did in the
past. It is the same that we don’t really have to worry what we did in the
past. The point here is if everything is there and the conditions are all
setup in this life, there is nothing to stop the attainment of
enlightenment.
If we were ask “If you work hard, will you be able to develop bodhicitta?”
You really have nothing to say except yes. If you work hard enough, can you
achieve calm-abiding? You have to say yes. There is no space or reason to
say “I cannot do it” or “I will not be able to achieve it.” There is no
valid reason. Therefore if one asks “Is enlightenment is possible in one
lifetime in one body?” then the answer has to be yes. What if we shorten
the time frame to one day, can enlightenment be achieved in one day?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You know what I am talking.
By having eight freedoms and ten endowments that characterized our human
life and if we work at it correctly, then the answer has to be yes, it can
be achieved. There is no need to mention how hard we have already worked in
the past or how much merits we have already accumulated in the past lives
to get where we are now. There is no need to talk about it. It is
understood. We all have the fortune to access to the dharma teachings. We
always have the freedoms and the opportunities to listen to the teachings
and to learn the dharma. This is the ripening result of the hard work that
we have done in the past lives. We are experiencing the fruits of the
ripening of our merits. Even if we compare ourselves with Milarepa,
whatever we have now is what Milarepa had. He was a human and we are human.
The conditions are there. He did it because he worked hard. So, if we work
hard then there is no real valid reason to say why we will not achieve it.
All of us are still stuck here and not going anywhere because we always
think that people like Milarepa was better than us or he did this and that
in his past lives!
Exam briefing
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Please pass back the exam paper that you wrote
to me tonight because I need to keep the record. At the very beginning of
the class, I did mention that those who want to take final exam must take
each of the module exams. Also I did mention you must attend about eighty
percent of the class. That’s the requirement to take the final exam. I did
mention that at the very beginning time. I think this is third time I’m
mentioning this to you. So that’s why I need your exam paper back. This one
is challenging to give the marks. There are some people who wrote a lot,
some people write less, but nevertheless, even you wrote something just two
lines, pass it back. I need to keep the record for those who wish to take
final exam. But if you really do not want to take final exam, then each
module exam whether you give or not is up to you. You can give, you don’t
give is your own choice. So coming class is your own choice. You want to
learn, you can come listen, and don’t have to be stressed. But according to
FPMT, the rule is that you must complete all the module exams and also must
attend eighty percent of the class. After that, must do three years
retreat. No, not three years, three months. I think master program supposed
to be three years then become shorten to one year. The basic program is
three months. So I have to remind you again, if you really want to
participate in the final exam, then must do this. Otherwise, never mind,
you can come and listen; you can give during exam, if you don’t also never
mind. So you can take easy. As I have mentioned before that sometimes you
need to push yourself, otherwise you don’t reach anywhere. Sometimes exam
is important. Only then push you a little bit.

