Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson09.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.531952
================================================================================


Shantideva said in his “Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds”:
 All the happiness in this world comes from cherishing others.
 All the problems and sufferings in this world come from cherishing
 oneself.
Perhaps we can use this verse as the basis for continual reflection on:
- How all happiness comes from cherishing others and
- How all the problems and sufferings come from cherishing oneself.
If we do sit down and reflect on those times that:
- when we felt hurt by somebody saying something unpleasant to us and
- how we felt very disturbed when we meet with some challenges; maybe even
small challenges and difficulties in our life.
If we think about it, it is evident that the feeling of being hurt, or the
mind feel very uneasy and disturbed are actually due to us holding to this
‘I’ as being very important and cherishing the ‘I’ so much.
Conversely, if we were to reverse our attitudes i.e. if we custom to
thinking of the happiness of others rather than emphasizing on our own
happiness and viewing others as more important than us, even though we may
have received the same criticism from others and the words may be the same,
but because of the difference in the attitude, we are not so disturbed.
This is due to thinking more of others. With the same words but we
experience much less disturbance and sufferings. If you think about it, it
is quite clear.
We have to investigate and see for ourselves by looking at our own
experience whether this is true or not. We suffer more when we are over-
obsessed with our own happiness than if we don’t prioritize our happiness
over others.  I think this is very clear if we check on it.
When we believe we are very precious and are the most important person in
the world, and by having the attitude of holding on to this ‘I’ as being
more important than others, then even if we do face with very small
problem, it become very difficult for us to bear and to tolerate them
because of that very strong self-cherishing attitude.
Besides the happiness of this life which comes from cherishing others, the
happiness of the future lives of having good rebirths as human or celestial
beings that we aim for comes from taking care and cherishing others. So
cherishing others results in the happiness of future lives. How is this so?
We have to understand how that is so.
The cause of good rebirth to be born as a human being or a celestial being
is the practice of ethical discipline, which is intentionally refraining
from harming others. By not harming others, we are in a way taking care of
others and cherishing others. Due to that, we get a good rebirth in cyclic
existence as a human or as a celestial being.
Having a pleasant physical demeanor or appearance, having good helpers, and
having people who help us in life is the result of having practiced
patience.
Having wealth and prosperity is the result of having practiced generosity.
So the practice of generosity and patience can only be accomplished in
dependence on taking care of sentient beings, cherishing them and not
harming them.
The opposite of that would be not caring about the happiness or welfare of
others but just emphasizing on our own happiness and following the self-
cherishing thought. In the absence of cherishing others, we disregard
others and end up creating many different kinds of negativities such as
taking the lives of others, taking things belonging to others by stealing,
and not giving or practice generosity because of miserliness. Therefore, so
many kinds of negativities are created because of disregarding others,
which comes from neglecting the welfare or happiness of others. By
depending on the severity and the weight of the negativities in question,
one will be reborn as hell being, hungry ghost or animal.
If we take care of others and cherish others, then we will help others
through giving and refraining from harming them. We will offer service to
others and also respect others. The results of all these virtuous actions
will be experienced by ourselves in the future.
If we follow the self-cherishing thought and disregard others, then we feel
disconnected with others and feel that there is no relation between us and
others. That could make us feel arrogant, look down on others and also
disregard others. The ripening result of those actions will have to be
experienced by none others than ourselves. Because of having disregarded
the welfare of others and having put others down, from life to life we will
experience the similar result - people will look down on us, despise us,
and disregard us.
It is emphasized in the mind training literatures and also in the Stages of
the Path to Enlightenment that we have to reflect well through various
angles on the faults and disadvantages of self-cherishing and we have to
reflect from many angles on the advantages and benefits of cherishing
others. This particular reflection is very important and critical.
On the basis of having the understanding that cherishing others is the
source of happiness which has to be reflected in our daily lives and doing
something practical that is within one’s mean and ability such as giving
material gifts and dharma to others. Then continually relying on
mindfulness and vigilance to check on our body, speech and mind especially
refraining one’s thought and action from harming others. If we really can
feel and understand the benefits and advantages of cherishing others then
in our interactions with others, we can see and feel that sentient being,
whoever the person in question is, is a merit-field. On the basis of having
love and compassion, sentient being is a merit-field for us and is an
opportunity for us to accumulate merits.
It is said that with the understanding of the benefits and advantages of
cherishing others, then one looks at sentient beings with affection.
Because of that view, one is able to respect that.
It is said in the teachings that if we can look upon sentient beings with
love, affection and compassion, then that really pleases the buddhas and
bodhisattvas.
It is also said that by looking at sentient beings with love, affection and
compassion, and when that thought arises, that becomes a supreme offering
to the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
It is also said that if we look at sentient beings with the thought of
wanting to harm them, or if we look at sentient beings with the attitude of
disregarding them, then it is of no difference in meaning from disregarding
the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
It is said that if we really want to please the buddhas and bodhisattvas
and we really want to make them happy, then we should look upon sentient
beings with affection and love and to benefit them. Then this becomes the
supreme offering. This is also an offering of practice.
It is said in the teaching that if one makes a small offering to the
buddhas and bodhisattvas motivated by love and compassion for sentient
beings, even though that physical offering maybe something insignificant,
but the amount of the benefits is vast as the merits created is so much
greater than in the making huge amount of offerings not motivated by love
and compassion for others.
It is also mentioned in the teachings that if we analyze well, the guru,
our special meditational deities, and sentient beings, are all similar in
being the one who grants us the common and supreme realizations.
We must understand where the crux of the matters is when we talk about the
mind training. The most important essential point to get is how self-
cherishing results in all the problems and faults.
We have to reflect until we gain certainty at how cherishing others are the
source of all happiness. Once we get this, then we can talk about mind-
training, all the other visualizations and mind training techniques that
come with whatever mind training texts including this one. On the basis of
having realized that first, then we can talk about the practice of tonglen,
taking in the suffering of others and giving your happiness to others.
The practice of taking on the sufferings of others and giving one’s
happiness to others is a method to further enhance one’s love and
compassion :-
    • Through giving our happiness to others, that is meant to enhance and
      strengthen love.
    • Through the practice of taking on the suffering of others is to
      develop, enhance and strengthen compassion.
After having develop well in one’s love and compassion, and through the
visualization of taking on the sufferings of others and giving one’s
happiness to others, only then will whole-hearted resolve be possible. It
is with this whole-hearted resolve that we can talk about the result -
bodhicitta, generating the mind of enlightenment.
Verse 15
When I am reborn into an impure land, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds
turned upon me for always cultivating impure vision. From now on, I shall
cultivate only pure vision.
“Impure land” refers to the environment of cyclic existence (samsaric),
essentially a place where we live and spend our lives. Samsaric environment
is such that it doesn’t matter who we make friend or interact with, every
single relationship is only a cause for problem, and in reality is just
suffering. Whatever we see is a cause for problems and sufferings as well.
If we think of the formation or establishment of such impure land, does
that impure land or samsaric environment exists from its own side? If we
think about it, actually it does not exists from its own side but it is a
projection of our own distorted (mistaken) mind. It is a result of that.
Due to the force of our distorted (mistaken) mind, we accumulate
contaminated (impure) karma. Through the force of that, we have the view of
the samsaric environment or the impure world. The impure world did not come
into existence from its own side.
In our earlier lessons of this module, we saw how those heroes, the
bodhisattva superiors, who purposely take rebirths in cyclic existence to
benefits sentient beings. Although they may be present in the same impure
world as us, their experience is radically different from ours. Everything
for us in cyclic existence is a cause of suffering and I don’t think they
experience that because their experience is radically very different.
Whatever they see or experience in that samsaric environment does not cause
suffering or problem to them. Unlike us, whatever we see is a cause of
problem. Whatever the environment presents itself to us is a cause for our
problems. These heroes, the bodhisattvas, in particular the bodhisattva
superiors, may be in the same physical world, samsaric environment, as us
but what they experience is radically different from ours. Ours is one that
is full of distortions, problems and sufferings, whereas theirs is not like
that. Why is there such a big difference? The difference is because they
only have the thoughts of cherishing others, while we only have self-
cherishing. Even though we are all in the same world, but our experiences
are radically different. The difference in the type of experience is
essentially due to having or not having self-cherishing. This also shows
that the world that we know is not self-established and it does not exist
on its own accord and from its own side.
The reasons why we are born in the impure land, the reason why we have
impure appearances and the reason why impure appearances appear to us and
the reason why we experience impure appearances are because we have always
cultivated impure vision. Since our being born in an impure land, there are
impure appearances appearing to us. That experience of impure appearance is
due to always cultivating an impure vision. Henceforth, from now, we make
an oath and pledge to cultivate only pure vision.
What are the ways in which one can cultivate a pure vision?  The teachings
give examples such as when we meet with a person who harms us, we can use
the experience of having received that harm as a means to exhaust our
negativities. We can think “That person is here to exhaust my negativities.
That person is a manifestation of the buddhas or bodhisattvas who are in
the aspect to help exhaust my negativities.” If we can entertain that
thought and really think that the person who is harming us is a
manifestation of Buddha or bodhisattva for the sole purpose of purifying
and exhausting our negativities, then that will make the experience more
bearable. Likewise, if there are people who are asking us for money or
begging from us, or even if people who always asking us for this and that
and if we can think of that person as a manifestation of buddhas or
bodhisattvas who are in that aspect to help us overcome our miserliness,
and to help us finish the accumulation of merits, then we won’t feel
disturbed.
Whatever big or small problems or difficulties that we experience in life,
it is the result of our own negative karma. Even the existence of a harm
doer who harms us is the result of our own negative karma. Nobody else is
responsible and is just ourselves. Whether we see that person as a Buddha
or bodhisattva who is helping us to exhaust our negative karma, or even if
we just look at the person as someone to exhaust our negative karma, the
fact is that he is there to exhaust our negative karma. Anyway that is what
the gurus, the meditational deities and the buddhas are supposed to do.  If
we think about it, whether it is the guru, the buddha, or the deity or the
harm giver, in that respect they are same as their job is just to exhaust
our negative karma.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I think it used to say that when you go to Wu
Tai Shan for the first time, the first person you see there is the
manifestation of Manjushri. You go to the mountain there the first time,
the first person you see there could be Manjushri. When you go there the
first time you see some beggar can be harming you, or can be seen in
different form maybe worker or driver. Your mind is set in the very
beginning that the first person you see must be manifestation of Manjushri
then you have different respect for whatever he does. So that is the same
idea. That time I saw one man, and I thought he is Manjushri. After that I
didn’t see him anymore. There are many stories like that. Reality he could
be Manjushri, or maybe not Manjushri, but it doesn’t matter. But it really
helps your mind when you set your mind like that. So same thing, the one
harming you could be the manifestation of Manjushri, buddhas, gurus and
there is less problem in your mind and you don’t become angry so much, get
upset or become mad. That is how your mind plays in your brain in different
way.
Our usual attitude is that when we are harmed, we consider ourselves to be
the poor victim and the harm-doer as the aggressor thinking “that person is
completely at fault, there is nothing to do with me. I’m the victim and
that person is the harm-doer”. We hold on to that that the person is the
harm-doer. Then psychologically what will happen? We get very upset, right?
As long as we hold on very strongly “That person is a harm-doer”, then we
get upset and we are not at peace with ourselves. We are not just upset but
we are always upset and the mind is just being disturbed. Then it is pretty
much meaningless. There is no benefit. That is really a problem. On top of
that, we give ourselves more problems because we continually get upset. We
accumulate negativities. As such, the verse says “from now on, I shall
cultivate only pure vision”, is like you promise yourself.
We will find infinite advice in the teachings of telling us that we should
not focus on the faults of others but rather to concentrate on their
qualities. We also find statements like “regard all sentient beings like
the Buddha”. The import and the meaning is the same.
Verse 16
When I am separated from helpful and loving friends, it is the weapon of my
own evil deeds turned upon me for luring away others’ companions. From now
on I shall not separate others from their companions.
What should we think when we experience separation from people that we feel
emotionally very close to? What should we think or do when we are separated
from people who have been very helpful to us? These things do happen in
life and they happen quite often. When it does happens, generally people
get very hurt and they feel great loss and disturbed. What should we do
when we experience this?
When such things do happen to us in life, it is very useful to think of
those practices or instructions for the person of small capacity such as
impermanence. We think of impermanence, we think of how everything is in
the nature of change and that there is no real stability in life. By
thinking on these points, it would be very helpful for the mind.
But just having intellectual knowledge and understanding of impermanence
and how things are in the nature of change is useless on its own because
even if we have the intellectual knowledge and we know how to say
impermanence and even can explain this are in the nature of change and so
forth, it is not helpful at all when the problems come. It doesn’t help at
all whether we tell ourselves this is impermanence or somebody comes along
and tells us that this is impermanence and so forth. Therefore, mere
intellectual knowledge and understanding doesn’t help at all. Without the
feeling or experience that come from the continual reflection and expect
ourselves to feel comforted by the word “impermanence” when problems come,
then nothing much can happen. It is only on the basis of having continually
thought about impermanence and how things are unstable and so forth and
really have some feeling in the heart, and when problems come, because of
having that experience already and we remember that experience and recreate
the experience and understanding, then it is helpful. As such, it is
extremely important to meditate consistently and continually on
impermanence. So when we experience things like separation from helpful and
loving friends, we can also then remind ourselves that we are experiencing
the ripening results of the similar actions that we have done in the past,
because some time in the past, we lured away the companions of others or we
caused others to be separated from their companions and not necessarily
luring to ourselves, or we caused a split or division amongst people.
Since those unpleasant experiences are the result of our own negative
karma, so from now we promise ourselves that we will not do these to
others, we will not cause others to be separated from their companions or
love ones and we will not lure and cause people to not to love the other
person but to love you only. Essentially, it is not to cause disunity
amongst people who are harmonious, and  not to cause disharmony when there
is harmony.
[BP1: When we are separated from helpful and loving friends because they
move away or die, we experience mental anguish. This is the result of
‘luring away other’s companions’ in our past lives such as having caused,
for example, teacher and disciple or boss and employee to go their separate
ways. People were getting along harmoniously but we purposely instigate
disharmony among them.

Sometimes this happens to us. For no apparent or some very minor reason,
someone leaves us. We then feel very upset and experience a lot of mental
suffering. At that time, it is important to remember that this is the karma
of having created such actions in our past lives. From this moment on, we
should stop such actions if we are doing them. We should not separate
teachers and disciples or bosses and employees and so forth.]
Verse 17
When all the holy ones are displeased with me, it is the weapon of my own
evil deeds turned upon me for casting them aside and resorting to bad
companions. From now on I shall renounce bad companions.
“When the holy ones are displeased with me” - the holy ones could be our
own gurus or those extraordinary beings who are just different and special.
So when these holy ones are displeased or upset for whatever reason, then
some people become very upset and their mind are disturbed.  Let’s say that
you may be very devoted to a special being or your teacher, and you are
very devoted, respectful and have a lot of faith but somehow the virtuous
friend or guru may not reciprocate and still are unhappy and displeased no
matter what you do. When that happens, generally most people cannot take it
and then their minds are very disturbed. Some even get upset and have wrong
views and become very negative.
When such thing does happen, the teachings say that the solution is not to
point the finger at the holy being but to point the finger at ourselves. We
have to take responsibility as this is the weapon of our own evil deeds
that turn upon us because in the past even if we have met with real
virtuous friends or holy beings, we did not follow their advice, we didn’t
follow after them but instead we rely on bad companions. In this context,
bad companions are those who just work for their own happiness, who are
just concerned about their own happiness and who act in the ways that are
opposite to the Dharma.
When something like that happens to us, from our side we may feel we have
been respectful and devoted, but how come he is still not happy with us and
is still upset and displeased with us. When we experience that then we
become unhappy. We cannot take it and we don’t like it. In the first place
why do we feel unhappy when the holy beings are displeased with us? The
answer is the same: it is just our own self-cherishing. The point is that
the problem doesn’t lie with the holy being.
This is something that everybody has experienced and will experience. It
cannot be the case that the virtuous friend or holy being is always looking
at us with a smile. Then when he doesn’t smile we think something is wrong.
We think something is wrong, but the problem doesn’t lie with the teacher
or the virtuous friend or the holy being as they cannot be smiling all the
time. But we don’t like it when they don’t smile or we become unhappy when
we think that they are unhappy with us. The problem is our own self-
cherishing. In essence, the advice is always about looking inside and not
pointing the finger outside and it is always about “What did I do? What is
my role in this?”
[BP 1] “From now on I shall renounce bad companions” - such renunciation is
not done on the mental level because we must never give up or abandon love
and compassion for any sentient being. But since they are obstacles to our
Dharma practice, only offering conditions for us to create more negative
karma, we have to physically distance ourselves from them.
Such Buddhist teachings may appear contradictory: on the one  hand,  we  are
told to love all sentient beings, on the other, we are exhorted to  renounce
some of them.  We have to understand that there is no contradiction at  all.
No one is being renounced at a mental  level.  But  if  our  friends  are  a
negative influence on us then, we have to physically stay away from them.
Verse18
When others sin against me by exaggeration or deprecation, it is the weapon
of my own evil deeds turned upon me for reviling the holy ones. From now on
I shall not revile others by exaggeration or deprecation.
[Ven Gyurme translated reviling as despising]
Verse 19
When my material necessities waste away, it is the weapon of my own evil
deeds turned upon me for scorning others’ necessities. From now on I shall
provide for others’ necessities.
[BP 1] We become stressed and unhappy when our material necessities are
being exhausted. If we can do something to stop this from happening, that
is fine. But when we have tried everything and nothing works, then the best
thing to do is to think about karma: ‘This is the negative karma of
scorning the necessities of others in my past lives. I had forcefully taken
others’ possessions and I had envied the material abundance enjoyed by
others, thinking, “How wonderful it would be I could have all this! May
they be separated from their possessions. May I have them all.” These are
the causes for my own material necessities to waste away.  This is the
weapon of my own evil deeds coming back upon me.’ From now on, if we can,
we should provide what others need and, if we are unable to do so, at
least, we can mentally visualize offering them such necessities.
Verse 20
When my mind is unclear and my heart is sad, it is the weapon of my own
evil deeds turned upon me for causing others to sin. From now on I shall
renounce contributing to others’ sinning.
Sometimes when people feel sad for no apparent reason or they feel their
minds are just very unclear, and when they meditate, there is nothing but
just pitch black darkness and is just very foggy. Then they think it is due
to spirit harm or some non-human is disturbing them. Here the verse is
saying that is not due to spirit harm. The answer is that because in the
past we did not cultivate virtue but rather we were always engaging in non-
virtue. This is the weapon of our own negative karma returning to haunt us.
As such, we make a promise to train and practice to not become a condition
for others to sin.
If we proclaim ourselves as a practitioner or present ourselves as a
practitioner in particular “I am practicing the Mahayana dharma”, but if in
our daily life conduct we don’t carry ourselves well in our bodily conduct
and then we speak all kinds of harsh words which put others off and cause
them to create negativities, that become a condition for this to happen. So
the verse says “from now on I shall renounce or give up contributing to
others’sinning”
This is something which we should reflect for ourselves. We should look at
ourselves in these points on whether we are carrying ourselves well or when
we do say something, we have to check whether whatever we are going to say
will be a cause for others to be upset or not. Many times people get upset
or disappointed when they see our behavior and think “Buddhists are like
that” or “these so-called Mahayana practitioners are like that.”  Based on
what people see us doing or saying, and due to our actions, they may get a
bad impression of us as the practitioners who follow the Mahayana
tradition. So we have to check to see whether we are contributing to others
creating negative karma or not. We have to be careful to check ourselves
and not to become a condition for others to create negativities.
[BP1] ‘My heart is sad,’ refers to when, for no apparent reason, our minds
become depressed or unhappy and we experience a lot of sufferings. ‘When
the mind is unclear,’ may refer to a lack of clarity in our meditation. For
example, when we try to meditate on the deity, no matter how hard we try,
we see nothing but darkness. Sometimes, this may be due to spirit harm.
Such things can act as conditions. But the main cause is our own negative
karma that was motivated by our self-cherishing attitude in the past.
Because of self-cherishing, we had not engaged in any beneficial or
virtuous activities, only accumulating negativities instead. Furthermore,
we also encouraged others to engage in negative actions. Because of that,
we are now experiencing the effects of such behavior in the form of mental
fogginess and so forth. From now on, we must ‘renounce contributing to
others’ sinning.’
Now we will just look at some of the qualms that some of you have raise in
the previous module.
Q1: Of the nine defilements, the number one to four defilements (the first
three are the dormant forms of the three poisons and the fourth is the
strong arousal of those three) are those that accumulate fresh projecting
karma, and those who abandon the Path of Seeing abandonments do not
accumulate fresh projecting karma, are the defilements number one to four
actually the same as the Path of Seeing abandonments?
Q2: Since Superiors who have abandoned intellectually acquired apprehension
of true existence do not accumulate fresh projecting karma, does that mean
that the intellectually acquired afflictions are the cause for accumulating
projecting karma while innate afflictions are those that actualize those
projecting karma?
The first question essentially is: Are the first four of the nine
defilements mentioned in the tathagata essence the Path of Seeing
abandonments or not?
The second question essentially is: Is the intellectually acquired
apprehension of true existence that which motivates the accumulation of
projecting karma? Is the innate affliction that which nourishes the karmic
seed?
Answer: The thing that motivates the accumulation of projecting karma is
the innate afflictions, not the intellectually acquired ones.
The ignorance that is the ignorance belonging to the twelve links of
dependent origination is posited as the innate afflictions. As such, the
thing that motivates the accumulation of projecting karma for cyclic
existence has to be the innate afflictions and not the intellectually
acquired afflictions. While it is true that when one achieves the Path of
Seeing, the intellectually acquired afflictions are abandoned, and one does
not accumulate fresh projecting karma. That is not the result of having
abandoned the intellectually acquired afflictions. When one achieves the
Path of Seeing, one will not accumulate fresh projecting karma because one
has seen the truth directly and one has realized selflessness directly.
Because of that direct realization of selflessness, that particular wisdom
can harm the ignorance.  Henceforth from then, ignorance becomes weakened
to the point that it cannot motivate the fresh accumulation of projecting
karma.
So it is not that the intellectually acquired afflictions motivate the
accumulation of fresh projecting karma and the innate afflictions only
nourish the karmic seeds. The thing that motivates the accumulation of
projecting karma is the innate afflictions.
You cannot establish that the first four defilements are necessarily the
Path of Seeing abandonments. Why? Because they are the innate forms of the
first four defilements. As such, if it is any of the first four
defilements, they are not necessarily Path of Seeing abandonments because
the Path of Seeing abandonments is the intellectually acquired afflictions.
As such, the first four defilements are not necessarily Path of Seeing
abandonments.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Think about that. There are so many questions
and I can’t finish everything. May be from time to time I read that when I
though if you feel bored. I will put five to ten minutes to answer these
questions.
[BP1: Question: How do we cultivate pure view?
Answer: Let us look at cultivating pure view through the seven-fold cause
and effect instructions for developing bodhicitta.
When we first train our minds in developing bodhicitta according to this
method, we seek to develop the realization of how all sentient beings have
been our mothers before. While they were our mothers, they had sustained
and kept us alive. By reflecting on the kindness they had showered upon us,
we develop the wish to repay this kindness.
When we have trained our minds in such a way, we generate the kind of love
that sees all sentient beings as being very pleasant and precious. When we
train our minds in this way, we will definitely be able to achieve this
For us, when we look at a person who is harming us, we tend to see that
person as very unpleasant and as an enemy. At such a time, we should try to
see this irritating person as a manifestation of the buddhas and
bodhisattvas.
We should think that the buddhas and bodhisattvas are specifically
manifesting in this way to help us practise patience. There is actually
such an instruction. When we do this, it is possible that we can actually
see that person as a manifestation of the buddhas and bodhisattvas. When we
are able to see that person in such a way, then we will no longer see that
person as unpleasant; we will regard the person as useful and beneficial.
There is also the training in pure view according to the practice of
highest yoga tantra where one sees everything as the display of great
bliss, in the nature of emptiness.
So, pure view can be developed through the initial steps in the seven-fold
cause and effect instruction.
One can also develop pure view by reflecting on the kindness of sentient
beings.
Another way of cultivating pure view, perhaps, is to reflect on how all
sentient beings possess buddha-nature.
Yet another method would be to look at how the buddhas see sentient beings.
When the buddhas look at sentient beings, they never see them as irritating
or unpleasant; they only see sentient beings as being very pleasant.
It is very difficult to attain pure view. Nevertheless, if we reflect on
the first couple of points of the seven-fold cause and effect instruction
and try to see sentient beings as manifestations of the buddhas and
bodhisattvas, then it may be possible.












































