Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson20.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.472986
================================================================================


Student 1: Can you clarify about ultimate bodhicitta? Few weeks ago we
talked about positing someone who has achieved the middle Path of
Accumulation and who might have already realized emptiness, and therefore
his bodhicitta is very stable.
According to the Mahayana path and ground chart, the point where a
bodhisattva who has directly realized emptiness is said to have generated
ultimate bodhicitta. You mentioned that up to the 7th ground, the
bodhisattva still has self-grasping. I would like to have a more detailed
explanation about what is a fully qualified ultimate bodhicitta because the
bodhisattva who has entered the Path of Seeing is said to have generated
bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche also proposed that there is a possibility for a bodhisattva
who has realized emptiness on the Path of Accumulation already has
conventional bodhicitta.
Please elaborate more about ultimate bodhicitta? What is a fully qualified
ultimate bodhicitta? And that ultimate bodhicitta that is generated in the
mind of the bodhisattva who has just attained the Path of Seeing compare to
that on the 7th ground.
[pic]
Khen Rinpoche: Bodhicitta (mind of enlightenment) is usually divided into
two:
   1. Conventional bodhicitta
   2. Ultimate bodhicitta
Having said that, when the word bodhicitta is used, it usually refers to
the conventional bodhicitta (mind of enlightenment). So in the common usage
of the word bodhicitta, it refers to the conventional bodhicitta.
Bodhicitta has two divisions:
   1. Aspirational bodhicitta
   2. Engaged bodhicitta
Those two are divisions of conventional bodhicitta, or just bodhicitta.
When we talk about the method and wisdom aspects of the path, conventional
bodhicitta is the method.
In the great treatises, the definition of ultimate bodhicitta is: A mind in
which all dualistic appearances with regards to the final mode of abiding
of full enlightenment, have subsided; which is included in the category of
special wisdom in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.
Essentially it is an exalted knower in the continuum of a Mahayana superior
in which all dualistic appearances with regards to the final mode of full
enlightenment have subsided and it is included in the type of a special
wisdom type realizer.
The definition is long but essentially it is a mind directly perceiving
emptiness, and in this case in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.
In essence what the definition is saying –ultimate bodhicitta is an exalted
knower in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.
What does it realizes? It realizes emptiness directly.
Is it included in the class of method realizer or wisdom realizer? It is
included under wisdom realizer.
I don’t remember where I read this expression, but I remember reading the
reason why the bodhisattva superiors are called the ultimate sangha because
they have this ultimate bodhicitta. I seem to remember it being in some of
the Middle Way texts.
Therefore, ultimate bodhicitta is not attained until one achieves the
Mahayana Path of Seeing.
As to what I have said about the bodhisattva necessarily realizing
emptiness by the middle Path of Accumulation was just my personal opinion.
As I have said the bodhisattva on the middle Path of Accumulation would
never degenerate henceforth, i.e. he would never lose his bodhicitta as his
bodhicitta becomes very stable. I think perhaps this may be due to it being
conjoined with the realization of emptiness. As such, I said that perhaps
by the middle Path of Accumulation the bodhisattva would definitely have
realized emptiness. Anyway that was a personal opinion.
According to the Middle Way Consequence School (CMWS), whether it is an
apprehension of a self of person or an apprehension of a self of phenomena,
they are all necessarily afflictive obscurations.
Afflictive obscurations are of two kinds:
   1. Artificial (intellectually acquired)
   2. Innate
The artificial afflictive obscurations are abandoned on the Path of Seeing.
After the artificial afflictive obscurations are abandoned, then the
process of abandoning the innate afflictive obscurations happens on the end
of the 1st ground till the 7th ground. The innate afflictive obscurations
are completely abandoned on the 8th ground.
According to the CMWS, whether it is an apprehension of a self of person or
apprehension of a self of phenomena, these two have the same object of
negation.
According to the CMWS, these two apprehensions are not differentiated by
object of negation but rather by the basis of emptiness.
According the CMWS, the innate conception or the apprehension of true
existence has two forms:
   1. Apprehension of self of person
   2. Apprehension of self of phenomena
 • The apprehension of a person as truly existent is the apprehension of a
   self of person.
 • The apprehension of the aggregates as truly existence is the
   apprehension of a self of phenomena.
These two are not abandoned until the 8th ground. This means that there are
instances of it all the way up to the 7th ground.
We have gone through this when we were looking at the paths and grounds.
The process of abandoning the different levels of the innate afflictive
obscurations happened over a period of time, starting from the end of the
1st ground up to the 7th ground. There are different levels of the innate
afflictive obscurations, some more coarse than others.
Whether it is the apprehension of a self of person or apprehension of a
self of phenomena, the subtlest form of both are abandoned by the
uninterrupted path of last moment of the 7th ground. So the uninterrupted
path during the last moment of the 7th ground is the direct antidote to the
subtlest forms of the apprehension of a self of person and apprehension of
a self of phenomena. When those two are abandoned, then one achieves the
path of release on the 8th ground.

Wheel- Weapon Mind Training
Verse 86
Never studying, I despise the vast teaching. Never relying on a guru, I
revile religious instruction. Roar and thunder on the head of the
destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher,
the enemy, Ego!
I did say something about verse 86. That is why it is often said that we
should engage in extensive learning. Many times people accumulate the heavy
karma of abandoning the Dharma because they haven’t studied extensively the
Buddha’s teachings. There is one text which summarizes Lama Tsongkhapa’s
life story. In that text, he said:
 “At the beginning I strove to learn extensively, in the middle all the
great treatises appeared as instructions and as something to be practiced
and in the end, I practice day and night. All the merits that I accumulate
from all these, I dedicate it for the flourishing of Buddha’s teachings.”
This basically encapsulates Lama Tsongkhapa’s practice and his whole life
story.
If you look at the Stages of the Path, Lamrim, it talks about the four
greatnesses of Lamrim itself.
   1. The greatness of enabling one to know that all the teachings are free
      of contradiction.
   2.  The greatness of enabling one to understand that all of the
      scriptures are instructions for practice
   3. The greatness of enabling one to easily to find the Conqueror’s intent
   4. The greatness of enabling one to refrain automatically from great
      wrong doing
One of which is that if you understand the Stages of the Path literature,
the whole path structure, you would realize that all the teachings of
Buddha are not contradictory. That is one of the great advantages of
knowing the Stages of the Path, the Lamrim. The fourth greatness is that
one will automatically refrain from great misdeeds. Here the great misdeed
refers to the very heavy negative karma of abandoning the teachings. So if
one has learned the entire Buddha’s teachings well, then one will
automatically be protected from this heavy great misdeed of abandoning the
Buddha’s teachings.
Even these days there are people who still hold the views of some parts of
the teachings of the Buddha being good and some parts are not as good. In
fact, there are some who believe and say that the Mahayana teachings are no
good and the real teachings of the Buddha are the Pali canon, the Hinayana
teaching. Then there are some who say “The Mahayana teachings are the best.
If you practice the Mahayana then you don’t have to bother about the
teachings of the Pali canon, the Hinayana teachings”. People make such
statements because out of a lack of understanding and they themselves don’t
understand the teachings. What they are saying is basically there are some
teachings of the Buddha which are no good. This is the extremely heavy
negative karma of abandoning the teachings of the Buddha.
As in verse 86: “Never studying, I despise the vast teaching” - this
negative karma of abandoning the Buddha’s teachings happens due to lack of
learning and lack of understanding. Therefore, we should try as much as
possible to follow after the example of Lama Tsongkhapa, where he said “At
the beginning I sought after extensive learning”.
[BP1 Module 6: ‘Never relying on a guru, I revile religious instruction’:
This refers to someone who does not rely on his teacher or the texts and
instructions. Instead, he relies on his own so-called wisdom, which is
faulty wisdom not based on the valid sources of a teacher, texts or
instructions, which he puts down and criticizes.]
Verse 87
Instead of explaining the scriptures, I falsely set up my own system. Not
having mastered pure vision, I curse and yell. Roar and thunder on the head
of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the
butcher, the enemy, Ego!
“Instead of explaining the scriptures, I falsely set up my own system” -
whenever we explain or teach the teachings of the Buddha, whatever we say
must accord with the intent of the three scriptural collections.
This verse is saying that there are people who wants to teach, and because
of not having extensive learning and not knowing what to say and yet have
to say something, they sometimes make things up based on their own limited
experiences on what had happened to them or what they saw in their
meditation and dreams. They basically just making up as it go along. That
happens because of self-cherishing.
In the beginning of his great treatise on the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment, Lamrim Chenmo, Lama Tsongkhapa talked about the
qualification of someone who wants to be a guru to others. The purpose of
being a guru is to subdue, to pacify and to discipline the minds of others.
But before one can play the role as a guru, one’s own mind must be
disciplined and be subdued first.
Lama Tsongkhapa said this very clearly in the Lamrim Chenmo; “If you want
to be a guru to others, yourself must be disciplined and be subdued first”.

Then he continued, “If that is case, what is the manner of disciplining the
mind? How should one’s mind be subdued?”
He said: “The manner of subduing the mind is not simply just ascribing the
term realization to any kind of experience that you may have gained from by
just doing any kind of practices.”
As people might have their own idea of how to subdue the mind, so Lama
Tsongkhapa said “You cannot just ascribe the term realization to just any
experience that you may have gained from just doing any kind of practices”.
The manner of subduing and disciplining the mind must accord with the
general procedure of the buddhadharma. Lama Tsongkhapa stated this very
clearly at the beginning of the Lamrim Chenmo.
The method of subduing and disciplining the mind must be something that
accords with the general procedure of the buddhadharma. What exactly does
that mean? It means that one’s mind must be subdued through the practice of
the three higher trainings:
   1. Higher trainings in ethical discipline
   2. Higher training in concentration,
   3. Higher training in wisdom
This is the answer. So in just these few sentences, Lama Tsongkhapa packed
very important topics into these few sentences.
What verse 87 is saying that, in reality if one is teaching or explaining
the buddhadharma, the explanation must accord with what is in the three
scriptural collections, the three pitakas.
“Not having mastered pure vision” - the whole point of the teaching is to
help the listeners to gain an understanding of the dharma. But instead of
doing that, one may use the dharma teaching as an indirect way of scolding
or criticizing people; i.e. as a means to hurt people. That also happens
due to self-cherishing.
Verse 88
Without condemning sacrilegious activities, I launch numerous criticisms
against all the Buddha’s words. Roar and thunder on the head of the
destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher,
the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme’s translation: Without condemning non-dharmic activities, I
launch criticisms against all the good explanations. Roar and thunder on
the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart
of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
In reality, we should condemn non-dharmic activities and non-virtues. That
is what we should do. But we don’t do that. In fact, we actually
voluntarily take on non-virtues and non-dharmic activities.
Here the teachings is telling us that it is due to our self-cherishing we
voluntarily engage in non-virtues and  in non-dharmic activities.
There are many excellence explanations on the Buddha’s teachings which are
in accord with the Buddha’s intent. This is something we should take on and
learn. Instead of that, we may end up criticizing these excellent teachings
or explanations. That happens again due to our self-cherishing.
Verse 89
Having no shame about things I should be ashamed of, I am perversely
ashamed of the Dharma, which is not something shameful. Roar and thunder on
the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart
of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
In reality we should be ashamed of engaging in non-virtue but however we
are not ashamed. Many times we voluntarily and happily engage in non-
virtue. People choose to live a simple and contented life through
practicing the dharma. In reality these are occasions in which we should
really rejoice. But instead of rejoicing we feel sorry to them and think
that is not a good thing. We regard them as failure of society as they are
not capable. That is the reason why they are like that.
Verse 90
No matter what I do, it is never done right; everything I do is
inappropriate. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false
construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme’s translation: I never engage in even one of the many things
that are appropriate to be engaged in. So we don’t do all things that are
appropriate to be done, but instead we do everything that is inappropriate.
This verse is like a concluding summary of what has been said so far. All
the things that are appropriate that we should do, we don’t do. All the
things that are inappropriate and shouldn’t be done, we do all of that.
What we actually want is real permanent everlasting happiness. The cause of
that is essentially has to be virtue. However, we have never done even a
single virtue.
What we need and what we actually want is real permanent everlasting
happiness. Such kind of bliss and happiness is only possible if we achieve
either liberation from cyclic existence or the achievement of full
enlightenment. Without which there is no real everlasting happiness to
speak of. In order to achieve liberation, whatever action that we do,
especially the actions to achieve liberation, must be conjoined with
renunciation before it becomes a cause for liberation, which is a form of
everlasting highest happiness. In order for our actions including our
virtue to be a cause for the everlasting happiness of full enlightenment,
our actions must be motivated by the mind of enlightenment (bodhicitta). If
we really sit down and look at our own minds, to be honest, we have not
accumulated a single virtue so far that will enable us to achieve
liberation or enlightenment.
The verse that we always recite in the beginning of class “Do not commit
non-virtue, engage in perfect virtue”, so in order for virtue to be
qualified as a perfect virtue, all our actions must not be motivated by an
attachment to this life’s happiness and it must not be motivated by an
attachment to future life’s happiness. The minimum entry level of
qualification for virtue to be perfect has to be renunciation. So the
activity must be motivated by the realization of renunciation.  As such, we
don’t have any perfect virtue.
If we are honest with ourselves, if we analyze and check, there is really
nothing that we can point to that we can say “That is a perfect virtue,
which is a cause for my liberation or enlightenment”. Why are we in such a
state? Again it is because of our self-cherishing.
We have to check for ourselves to see whether we have accumulated any
perfect virtue, a cause for liberation or not. In order for something to be
a cause for liberation, it must not be influenced or motivated by
attachment to this life’s happiness or even looking for future life’s
happiness. Even when we do engage in virtue looking for future life’s
happiness, that virtue does not become a perfect virtue and it does not
become a cause for our liberation. We have to check ourselves.
Even if we do achieve a rebirth as a human or a celestial being, that human
rebirth and celestial being rebirth has not transcended the nature of
suffering. It has not transcended samsara. From this, we can establish the
cause of a human and celestial being rebirth cannot be a perfect virtue.
What we do not want is problems and suffering. The cause of the problems
and suffering that we experience is none other than non-virtue. Although
non-virtue is the cause of suffering, however we instinctively and
naturally take to non-virtue. Day and night we just follow non-virtue so
effortlessly
As such, this verse is essentially a summary of what all the previous
verses have said. What we want is happiness, what we don’t want is
suffering. However, we have never accumulated any perfect virtue (pure
virtue). Although we want happiness but we don’t create the cause for
happiness. Although we don’t want suffering, we are always engaging in non-
virtue - the cause of suffering. We just do it so naturally and
effortlessly. We are the creators of our own suffering. Why are we in such
a situation? Why do we live our lives like that? The conclusion is
basically the same: it is due to our self-cherishing. If that is the case,
then the conclusion must be that we should then do something about our self-
cherishing. We should destroy it.
Verse 91
Aha! You whose strength is that of the ultimate body of the Sugata who
conquers the demon of the egotistic view, you wielder of the staff, the
weapon of the wisdom of selflessness, turn it over your head three times,
without hesitation!
Ven Gyurme’s translation: Aha! You whose strength is that of the dharmakaya
of the Sugatas who has conquered the demon of self-grasping. you wielder of
the staff, the weapon of the wisdom of selflessness, turn it over my head
three times, without hesitation!
Ven Gyurme: If you say your head, then you are asking Yamantaka
Aha! is an expression of amazement. Why are we expressing this amazement?
Because we finally have come to realize the faults, the disadvantages, and
the mistakes of our self-cherishing attitude. In that sense, for the first
time one could is happy and amaze. Wow finally.
Here the author Dharmarakshita who passed on the teachings to Lama Atisha.
They both would say “Yeah”. But whether we have any reason to express any
amazement or not is something that remains to be seen.
In the commentary which I’m using: “the demon of the egoistic view or the
demon of the view of a self” - the view of the self or the self-grasping
refers to the apprehension of a self. It is from the apprehension of a self
or self-grasping that self-cherishing arises. It is the wrathful Yamantaka
who possesses the power to vanquish or destroy this demon of self-grasping.
I think I did explain the meaning of Sugata at the beginning of the
Engaging in Bodhisattva Deeds.
“Sugata” is the one gone to bliss.
There is the abandonment Sugata and the realizational Sugata.  Of the two,
Sugata here refers primarily to the abandonment Sugata.
This abandonment Sugata possesses three features:
   1. Good abandonment
   2. Irreversible abandonment
   3. Complete abandonment.
In the context of the tathagata essence, what is this abandonment Sugata
which possesses the three features?
There is nature body which is natural purity and nature body which is
adventitious purity. Here the Sugata possessing the three features is
referring to the nature body which is an adventitious purity.
True cessation in the continuum of buddha superior is a good abandonment.
How can we understand this statement?
For example, the true cessation in the continuum of buddha superior is a
good abandonment because it is an abandonment which surpasses the
abandonment of the afflictions up to the Nothingness level of the formless
realm by the non-Buddhists. In that sense, this is the meaning of abandon.
The non-Buddhists are able to suppress the afflictions even up to the
afflictions included in the realm of Nothingness, which is the third of the
four levels of the formless realms. (see chart below)
The quality of abandonment in the continuum of buddha superior is superior
to that kind of abandonment. This particular feature of the Buddha
demonstrates that our founder, Buddha, greatly surpasses or is superior as
a teacher to the teacher of non-Buddhists because Buddha has already
abandoned every single affliction, even the affliction of the Peak of
Cyclic Existence level, which is the highest possible state of existence in
cyclic existence.
The point is from this that we can see how Buddha is a far superior teacher
than the founders of the non-Buddhist traditions.
There are non-Buddhists who do cultivate and achieve calm-abiding. On the
basis of that, they achieve special insight, of course, is a mundane
special insight. Based on that, they can so-called abandon the afflictions
all the way up to the afflictions of the realm of Nothingness, the third of
the four formless realms. But in order to abandon the afflictions of the
Peak of Cyclic Existence, one must generate supramundane path, of which non-
Buddhists cannot do that.
Ven Gyurme: Khen Rinpoche is wondering whether this discussion is necessary
or not? Whether you need it or not?
So that is the first feature of the abandonment Sugata – good abandonment.
The second feature is irreversible abandonment. For example the abandonment
achieved by the stream enterers is an abandonment, but it is not
irreversible abandonment. Although the stream enterers have achieved a
superior path, the Path of Seeing and they have achieved some abandonment,
but their abandonment is not irreversible. The stream enterers still have
to take rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions. As such,
the abandonment achieved by the stream enterers is not an irreversible
abandonment.
The first feature, good abandonment distinguishes the Buddha as a teacher
who is more superior than the non-Buddhist teachers.
Then the second feature, irreversible abandonment, distinguishes Buddha as
a more vastly superior to the stream enterers.
Then the third feature, complete abandonment, shows that the Buddha is
superior to the Hearers and Solitary Realizer arhats. Although the Hearers
and Solitary Realizer arhats have abandoned the afflictive obscurations,
however, they have not abandoned the knowledge obscurations; whereas the
Buddha has already abandoned the knowledge obscurations. As such, the
abandonment in the continuum of buddha superior is also a complete
abandonment.
The abandonment in the continuum of a buddha superior, the true cessation
in the continuum of a Buddha Superior, possesses these three features:
   1. Good abandonment
   2. Irreversible abandonment
   3. Complete abandonment.
From this, one can also see the qualities of the Buddha. As such, the
abandonment in the continuum of buddha superior is a perfect abandonment.
The realizational Sugata has three features as well. If you remember from
the study of the tathagata essence, in the verse which talks about the
eight qualities of the Buddha Jewel, there are uncompounded, spontaneous,
knowledge or knower and so forth.
The eight qualities of the Buddha are:
1. The quality of being uncompounded
2. The quality of spontaneity
3. The quality of not being realised through the cause of others
4. The quality of knowledge
5. The quality of mercy (or compassion)
6. The quality of power
7 The quality of having fulfilled one’s purpose
8. The quality of having fulfilled the purposes of others
The quality, knowledge or knower, means the knowledge of the mode of
phenomena. This knowledge or knower of the mode of variety, which is the
realizational Sugata, has three features:
   1. Knowing thusness (suchness)
   2. Stable knowing
   3. Complete knowing.
The first feature, knowing thusness, essentially refers to the exalted
knower in the Buddha’s continuum directly realizing emptiness. This shows
that the Buddha is a far more superior teacher than others.
The second feature, stable knowing, distinguishes the Buddha’s knowledge or
exalted knower as being superior to that of the stream enterers. This means
to say that the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of a
stream enterer is not a stable knower. Why? I think they have not yet
abandoned the innate view of the transitory collections.
When we say whether the wisdom directly realizing emptiness is stable or is
not stable, we are not saying that realization of emptiness will change
into something else. That is not what is meant.
The third feature, complete knower (or complete knowledge) distinguishes
the exalted knower in the Buddha’s continuum is a far superior or more
exalted than the knower in the continuum of a Hearer arhat or a Solitary
Realizer arhat. The Hearer arhat and Solitary Realizer arhat do not realize
the paths of all three vehicles. They do not have the knowledge of all the
paths of the three vehicles because they have not internalized and
generated it whereas the Buddha is someone who has full knowledge of the
paths of the three vehicles. As such, the Buddha is able to act as a
teacher to the trainees of all three vehicles, in that the Buddha can show
the path and guide the respective trainees to the attainments of the
respective vehicles.
We did talk about the two levels of Yamantaka:
   1. Definitive Yamantaka
   2. Interpretive Yamantaka
The definitive Yamantaka is the realizational Sugata which can act as the
direct antidote to the demon of the egoistic view, the demon of the self-
grasping. This particular realizational Sugata appearing in the form of a
deity, Yamantaka, is the interpretive Yamantaka. In this case, the
realizational Sugata is the direct antidote to this demon of self-grasping.
The one who possesses this ability is the interpretive Yamantaka.
The wisdom directly realizing selflessness of Yamantaka is likened to the
skull staff which is used to destroy the enemy. Likewise, this wisdom
directly realizing selflessness is that which overcomes the self-grasping.
This weapon, the skull staff, is swung over his head three times and thrown
at the enemy to destroy him. Likewise, through wielding the wisdom directly
realizing selflessness, one vanquishes or destroys the self-grasping and
then the self-cherishing (which arises from that self-grasping). Then it
also destroys the appropriated contaminated aggregates which arise from
that self-cherishing. So that is the meaning of three times, in the verse
“turn it over your head three times”.
We will not be able to finish this on Thursday. As such, we will have class
next week on Tuesday (8 Oct) and Thursday (10 Oct).
[pic]
[pic]
