Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson17.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:48.031112
================================================================================


(Missed recording on the initial part when Student 1raised a question)
Khen Rinpoche: There are certain instances of self-cherishing that brings
us to hell, and there are also certain instances of self-cherishing which
can lead us to liberation (nirvana). As such, we cannot say self-cherishing
is virtuous or neither can we say that self-cherishing is non-virtuous.
There are different patterns.
Student 2: In the last Tuesday discussion, it is said that self-cherishing
is not an affliction to be abandoned. Self-cherishing is not a knowledge
obscuration to be abandoned. Self-cherishing that leads to suffering has to
be abandoned. So my question is “How to abandon self-cherishing that leads
to suffering? We know that on the path of the ten grounds, there is no self-
cherishing because bodhisattvas have bodhicitta. The whole text that we are
doing now is “trample on the enemy of self-cherishing” which I am taking
that to be self-cherishing that leads to suffering. This text cannot be for
the bodhisattvas for bodhisattvas do not have self-cherishing that leads to
suffering, am I right?
How do we abandon self-cherishing that leads to suffering? Does it have to
come through wisdom that directly perceive emptiness or is it through
constant meditation, the sevenfold instructions, tonglen?
If it is not an affliction to be abandoned, it is not a knowledge
obscuration to be abandoned, yet it has to be abandoned. Do we all have to
be bodhisattvas on the path of the ten grounds?
Ven Gyurme: If I shorten your question to: Who abandons self-cherishing?
The answer would answer all of that.
Student 2: My question is how. First of all, I think all Buddhists, both
Mahayanist and Hinayanist, should abandon self-cherishing that leads to
suffering.
Ven Gyurme: What is your definition of abandon?
Student 2: To have bodhicitta that diminishes self-cherishing, because self-
cherishing leads to suffering.
Ven Gyurme:  But you just said that all Buddhists should have …
Student 2: Should abandon self-cherishing but how? The question is how.
Ven Gyurme: But then you said that it is through bodhicitta.
Student 2: Then the question is “If it is to be abandoned, this bodhicitta,
how do we do it? Bodhisattvas on the grounds onwards, from Path of
Meditation, already have bodhicitta. They start on this path because they
have direct perception of wisdom. I’m trying to connect the wisdom part;
does it play a role in abandoning self-cherishing? If you are not
bodhisattvas but as Buddhist: “How do you abandon self-cherishing? It is
not an affliction to be abandoned, it is not a knowledge obscuration to be
abandoned, but it has to be abandoned. So I think it is dilemma for me.
Ven Gyurme: So who has abandoned it?
Student 2: Who we know the bodhisattvas are?
Khen Rinpoche: I think I have given the answer to this question before.  Of
the many verses that we have read so far, they all end with “Roar and
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike
at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!” These two lines are repeated
in many of the verses. That essentially shows the solution to self-grasping
and self-cherishing, and the solution is generating the conventional
bodhicitta and ultimate bodhicitta.
“Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy” - in this context
here “enemy” means self-cherishing and self-grasping. The antidote - the
slayer of this enemy- is the conventional bodhicitta and ultimate
bodhicitta.
How is self-cherishing destroyed? It is destroyed by bodhicitta.
How self-grasping is destroyed? It is destroyed by the wisdom realizing
selflessness.
One trains in either the sevenfold cause and effect instructions or the
instructions of exchanging self and others to generate bodhicitta. Come the
time when one generates the bodhicitta, one enters the Mahayana path and
one achieves the small Mahayana Path of Accumulation.
One enters the Mahayana path upon the generation of the mind of
enlightenment (bodhicitta) and one achieves the small Mahayana Path of
Accumulation.  We have gone through this in class before that there are
bodhisattvas on the small Path of Accumulation who do fall into the
Hinayana. That happens when they lose their bodhicitta i.e. when their
bodhicitta degenerates. There are such bodhisattvas who fall back to
Hinayana. These bodhisattvas have bodhicitta before their bodhicitta
degenerated but still self-cherishing manifested. Because of the arising of
self-cherishing, they fell into the Hinayana. They have realized bodhicitta
but self-cherishing manifest.
There is a historical account related to Shariputra. It is said that
Shariputra did generate bodhicitta. One day, he met with someone who asked
him for his right arm. So Shariputra used his left arm to chop his right
arm. He then used his left arm to pick up the chopped arm and offered to
the recipient. The recipient then asked him: “How can you give me your
right arm with your left hand? So disrespectful!” It was culturally
disrespectful to offer thing with left arm. Shariputra thought “Oh my
goodness! Sentient beings are hopeless. Forget it.” So he gave up and he
then fell into the Hinayana.
You can train your mind to generate bodhicitta either through the sevenfold
cause and effect instructions or the exchanging self and others. At the end
of the training, when you do generate uncontrived bodhicitta, that is the
fully qualified bodhicitta, and it is the actual bodhicitta. Simultaneous
to that, you entered the Mahayana path and achieve the small Mahayana Path
of Accumulation. But it is still possible for one’s bodhicitta at that
level to generate.
From this, you can see it is very clear that even after having actualized
bodhicitta while on the small Mahayana Path of Accumulation, one hasn’t
gotten rid of self-cherishing to the point that it will never arise again.
In the Great Treatises, it is said that when one achieves the middle
Mahayana Path of Accumulation, that bodhisattva’s bodhicitta becomes very
stable and his mind generation (bodhicitta) is called mind generation like
gold as gold always remain constant and does not change into something
else. In that sense, it is very stable, so his mind generation at that time
is very stable. It is said that regardless of the conditions that that
bodhisattva may meet with, his mind generation will never degenerate.
While it is not clear in the treatises but I think that by this point in
time, the middle Mahayana Path of Accumulation, one would have realized
emptiness. That may or could be the reason why that bodhisattva’s mind
generation will never degenerate henceforth. There must be a reason and I
think the reason must be that the bodhisattva by then should have realized
emptiness.
It is clear that you have to say that on the great Path of Accumulation,
one has calm abiding observing emptiness. In order to enter the Mahayana
Path of Preparation, you need the special insight observing emptiness.
Therefore, prior to entering the Mahayana Path of Preparation, prior to
achieving the special insight observing emptiness, one must first have calm
abiding observing emptiness. That is on the great Mahayana Path of
Accumulation. As such, then you probably will have to say that one
definitely must have realized emptiness by the middle Mahayana Path of
Accumulation. Before you can actualize calm abiding focusing on emptiness
or observing emptiness which happens at least latest by the great Mahayana
Path of Accumulation, so before you can have calm abiding observing
emptiness, you first must have realized emptiness first.
As to whether one will have necessarily realized emptiness by the middle
Path of Accumulation or not, and when I think about it, I think I would say
‘Yes” but I’m not saying this is definitely so because it is not clearly
mentioned in the treatises. So this could be a subject of discussion.
Whether the bodhisattva would definitely have realized emptiness by the
middle Path of Accumulation or not is something that is to be analyzed. But
it is very clear that on the small Path of Accumulation, there are
instances of both: there are bodhisattvas who have not realized emptiness
and there are bodhisattvas who already have realized emptiness. There are
the sharp faculty trainees who entered the Mahayana path with the
realization of emptiness whereas the dull faculty trainees do not enter the
Mahayana path with the realization of emptiness. As such, on the small Path
of Accumulation, there are bodhisattvas who have realized emptiness and
there are those who have not realized emptiness. So that is quite clear. As
such, I would think that from the middle Path of Accumulation, self-
cherishing will never arise henceforth.
How do you overcome self cherishing? Likewise, how do you overcome the self-
grasping? The general procedure is the same. Self-cherishing and self-
grasping have their own mode of apprehension i.e. its own manner of
apprehending its object. So in order to overcome self-grasping,
apprehension of true existence which is the mode of apprehension, one has
to generate another mind whose mode of apprehension is the direct opposite
to that of self-grasping. That is the general procedure for overcoming self-
grasping. Likewise, self-cherishing has a particular mode of apprehension.
So to overcome self-cherishing, one has to generate a mind whose mode of
apprehension is the complete opposite to the mode of apprehension of self-
cherishing.
To counteract self-cherishing, we have to generate the mind that cherishes
others - the mode of apprehension is cherishing others. Through training
gradually, then one comes to develop bodhicitta. When we have bodhicitta,
then we have the mind that can counteract self-cherishing. Simultaneous
with the generation of bodhicitta, one enters the Mahayana path and
achieves the small Path of Accumulation. When one get into the middle Path
of Accumulation, I guess we can say that henceforth, from then self-
cherishing will not arise again.
The text that we are looking here is a text on Mahayana mind training. The
subject matter is the practices of the path of a person of great capacity.
It is an instruction for generating the mind of enlightenment (bodhicitta).
When we talk about lojong or mind training, it specifically means the
Mahayana mind training which practices to develop bodhicitta. After one has
developed bodhicitta, one needs to increase the bodhicitta that has been
generated. The word lojong specifically means that. But lojong in English
is mind training, but the word mind training in the general sense literally
means developing the mind. There is training the mind in the path of a
person of small capacity, in the path of a person of medium capacity, and
in the path the person of great capacity. So in general, lojong means
training the mind. But the word lojong is mainly refers to Mahayana mind
training.
Before we can even engage in training our minds in the path of the person
of great capacity, we first must have trained our minds in the path that is
shared with the person of small capacity and the person of medium capacity.
This is explained very clearly in the Stages of the Path literature.

Before one can start to train the mind in the Mahayana practices, one must
first have trained the mind in the path that is shared with the person of
small capacity. After having achieved that, then one train the mind in the
path that is shared with the person of medium capacity. It is only after
then one is really qualified to train in the practices of a person of great
capacity.
What is the main obstacle for someone attempting to be a person of great
capacity? The biggest obstacle is self-cherishing. That is why to such a
person, a detailed explanation on the faults of self-cherishing is given.
There is no mention of any good about self-cherishing to such a person. To
such a person, it is just talking bad about self-cherishing and nothing
good about it. The focus is just on that. As what you can find in this
text, from beginning to end, it just talks about how bad self-cherishing
is. So this instruction is for the person who is about to train his mind in
the Mahayana. This person is someone who has really finished training the
mind in the path that is shared with the person of small capacity and the
person of medium capacity.
If you look at the path that is shared with the person of small capacity,
there is no discussion whatsoever of how bad self-cherishing is. But there
is discussion on death and impermanence, and karma and its effects.  The
whole emphasis at that point in time is to reverse our attachment to the
happiness of this life. The whole emphasis then is to overcome attachment
to this life’s happiness. After we have gotten rid of attachment to this
life’s happiness, one then starts to train the mind in the path that is
shared with the person of medium capacity. If you look at the instructions
for that period of training, again there is no discussion on the faults of
self-cherishing. But there is a lot of explanation about the suffering of
cyclic existence and how one circle around in samsara. Then there is the
presentation of Four Noble Truths. All these are with the aim of producing
the thought for liberation.
For the person in the path that is shared with the person of small
capacity, the emphasis was to overcome attachment to this life’s happiness.
In the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity, the emphasis
is to overcome attachment to future life’s happiness. Basically that is the
whole explanation of how one really has got to achieve liberation from
samsara (cyclic existence).
As such, there shouldn’t be any confusion as to whether self cherishing is
good or bad or when is good, when is it bad. If you got the whole path
structure then it is very clear right.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You got the answer?
Student 3: I clearly understand the explanation. If you could explain or
give an example of what is virtuous self- cherishing and non-virtuous self-
cherishing? I don’t understand the difference between the two.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Somebody comes give example to what he is
asking.
Student 4: Virtuous self-cherishing is like “I want to attain nirvana to
get out of samsara to achieve lasting happiness for myself alone first”. I
think that is considered to be virtuous self-cherishing. I think non-
virtuous self-cherishing all the ones we have in this life’s happiness.
Khen Rinpoche: The mind seeking happiness of future lives is a virtuous
mind or not?  The mind seeking for a human or a god rebirth is virtuous or
not? Is it virtuous or not? Is it self-cherishing?
Student 4: It is self cherishing.
Khen Rinpoche: Is it virtuous?
Student 4: Virtuous if….
Khen Rinpoche (In English): No, no, no, it i virtuous or non-virtuous.
Don’t explain now, then I will ask you.
Student 4: Virtuous.
Khen Rinpoche: It is virtuous because?
Student 4: Because before you can attain enlightenment or nirvana, you need
to fulfill the short term aim which is higher rebirths. So you have to have
achieved good conditions in order to practice the path, therefore you aim
for higher rebirths.
Khen Rinpoche: There is a wish to live a long time now. Is it self-
cherishing? It is, yeah?  Is it virtuous?
Student 4: Depends on what you want to use for.
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, by extension of what you just said, it follows
that the mind wishing for future life’s happiness as a god or human being
is not necessarily virtuous. Depends also by virtue of what you just said.
Student 4: I wanted to say that but you stop me.
Khen Rinpoche: Point is, there is no pervasion, right?
Student 4: I have to say “Yes”
Khen Rinpoche: It is not certain that the mind looking for good rebirth is
necessarily virtuous, yeah?
Student 4: Yes. You just want it for its own end to have a god’s rebirth.
That’s all. You don’t want to use the higher rebirth for a higher purpose
like nirvana.
Ven Gyurme: So you are saying just wishing to get a good rebirth for the
sake of a good rebirth is definitely not virtuous?
Student 4: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: We practice generosity or an ethical discipline looking for
something in the future lives. Maybe we want a good rebirth or a good body
and we want possession or wealth in the future lives. That is the reason
why we practice ethical discipline and generosity and the karma that is
created will be ripened in the form of good rebirth and enjoyments. Is this
karma necessarily virtuous or not necessarily virtuous?
Student 4: I think it is virtuous.
Khen Rinpoche: Necessarily virtuous?
Student 4: It doesn’t produce suffering, so it has to be virtuous.
Khen Rinpoche: If that is the case, then the mind that looks for good
rebirths in the future lives and the mind that is looking for future lives
happiness are necessarily virtuous, isn’t it?
Student 4: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: So, that is no depending, yeah?
Student 4: Yes, correct.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You just don’t go correct, correct, correct
like that.
Ven Gyurme: Just now you said not correct. But now you say correct.
Student 4: Higher rebirth doesn’t produce suffering on its own. The karma
is not non-virtuous so higher rebirth is virtuos.
Ven Gyurme: It is not suffering? This aggregate is not suffering?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): So, achieve nirvana no suffering?
Student 4: At least there is no obvious suffering.
Ven Gyurme: It is not obvious to you?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You don’t have obvious suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: The mind that looking for future lives happiness is nothing
except virtue. It is virtuous, right?
Student: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: The wish to live very long in this life. It is self-
cherishing. Is it virtuous or not?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Don’t say depend again huh?
Ven Gyurme: This life not happy, then future lives how to be happy? Every
day you are looking for happiness.
Student 4: I supposed it is virtuous.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You have to think and say. Don’t say virtuous.
Without thinking, don’t say.
Khen Rinpoche: Sponsoring puja for happiness of this life is virtuous,
yeah? So reciting mantra for this life happiness is virtuous, right? Have
to be virtuous right? Is the result is virtuous?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Say something.
Student: I have no choice but have to say virtuous.
Khen Rinpoche: We practicing generosity looking for wealth and prosperity
of this life are virtuous, yeah?
Student 4: Sound like eight worldly concerns. I mean praying for thing in
this life is non-dharma.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You have answer or not? You think yes or no?
Khen Rinpoche: So doing pujas just for this life happiness, reciting
mantras for this life happiness, is it virtuous or not?
Student 4: Seems like it is not. It is eight worldly-dharma.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): I don’t know.
Student 4: Arhat who enters the Mahayana Path, at which point does he
enters it? Is it right at the beginning at small Path of Accumulation?
Khen Rinpoche: What make you ask this question? Are you looking for
something? The answer is straightforward. It is very easy. But the more
important thing is: What make you ask the question? Obviously you must have
a doubt right?
Student 4: He has the direct realization of emptiness. In this case, he has
generated bodhicitta to enter the Mahayana Path. He can’t be entered at the
point of Path of Seeing, right?  I don’t know how strong his bodhicitta is
whether can still be degenerated. If that is the case, then maybe at the
small Path of Accumulation?
Khen Rinpoche: An arhat doesn’t have bodhicitta, right?
Student 4: If he has first generated bodhicitta, at which point does he
enter the Mahayana path?
Khen Rinpoche: The moment the arhat generates bodhicitta, he becomes a
bodhisattva. He then enters the Path of Accumulation.
Student 4: The small Path of Accumulation?
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, there is no other point of entry.
Student 4: Does he accelerate very fast to the Path of Seeing compared to
the rest? Because he has already got the direct realization of emptiness
and moreover he has gotten rid of all his afflictive obscurations.
Ven Gyurme: You are saying he accumulates only the collection of merit and
not the collection of wisdom?
Student: Is that the case?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Okay, I think to read my text also. Good to ask
questions.
Khen Rinpoche: It is good to have such questions. When questions are
raised, it is very important to pay attention to the discussion because we
can really understand a lot of things just through participating in the
questions and answers. It is useful. The text that we are going through is
not intellectually difficult at all as it is meant for practical
application right away. In that sense, it is really nothing much to say
about it. When we listen to the teachings of Mahayana mind training and
when we read about them, there are times we may even feel hurt and
uncomfortable. That is actually a good sign because it is a sign that
something has poked at our own self-cherishing and hurt it.
If you know how to listen to all these Mahayana teachings in general,
especially lojong, you will feel hurt and uncomfortable. Because we are
supposed to be reflecting on our own state of mind and it is not meant to
be the description of what other people are doing or not doing. If we are
listening to the teachings by thinking that it is pointing to somebody else
then it doesn’t touch the heart. But if we listen and learn these things
properly then it should be about looking at our own mistakes and at our own
faults. If it leaves you uncomfortable at that time then that is actually a
good sign.
It is said that one can receive blessing when listening to the teachings.
When we hear somebody’s teachings about the faults of our own self-
cherishing, we feel uncomfortable as we feel that we have been exposed, and
that is a sign that the blessing of the dharma has entered our heart. If we
don’t have self-cherishing then it is a completely different thing. Then
whether you feel anything or not, it is fine because if you don’t have self-
cherishing then there is nothing to say. But this teaching is just talking
one after another about the faults of our own self-cherishing. We only feel
hurt because we have self-cherishing. If there is no self-cherishing then
we will not feel offended, hurt or uncomfortable. So, when we study and
listen to the mind training teachings and when we don’t feel anything then
there are only two possibilities:
Either we don’t have self-cherishing or we really have no idea how to
listen to the teachings and use the teachings.
So, there are only these two possibilities.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): So, which one?
Verse 63
Although my learning is scant, my penchant for empty verbiage is great.
Although the extent of my religious instructions is slight, I pretend to
understand everything. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false
construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme’s translation:
Although my learning is little, I made a lot of empty talks and boasting.
Although the extent of my religious instructions is slight, I pretend to
understand everything. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, evil
thoughts – self-cherishing! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher,
the enemy, Ego!
Our understanding of the dharma is little as we have not done much learning
and reflection. But one may pretend to be very knowledgeable, or pretend to
be a meditator or a great practitioner. So here it is talking about such
people.
Although one has very little learning one acts as if one is a great
practitioner and has a lot of knowledge. Then suddenly when somebody asks a
dharma question, and because of one’s understanding is really limited or
one’s experience or knowledge is very limited, and as one has not much to
say but have to say something, then one says: “there is no need to know so
much and there is no need to study so much. You just need to examine the
mind as everything is in the nature of emptiness. You just leave it as
that.” This thing again happens due to our own self-cherishing.
When we have extensive learning, extensive knowledge and understanding then
it doesn’t matter what questions people may pose to us. We will be able to
answer them or at least eliminate the qualms of others by employing reasons
and scriptural sources.  Through employing scriptural authorities, quoting
citations and reasoning then one can give a reasonable answer. One can at
least help the person to gain some understanding or to eliminate qualms. If
one’s understanding is limited and yet one wants to talk about dharma to
others, and when people ask questions, then what we can say is also very
limited since our understanding is limited. Due to the self-cherishing, one
doesn’t stop there. One then fabricates the answers, makes stories, tell
all sorts of lies and half-truths in order to come out with some answers.
This is the result of self-cherishing.
We may know just a few words from the sutra or know a couple of sentences
from some texts or sutra. We don’t actually have any real great
understanding, but we then tell people as if the few sentences that we know
represent the entire dharma and that is the emphasis. We will just keep
telling people about those few sentences and talking the same thing over
and over again, and at the same time putting on the appearance emphasizing
that is the most importance and real thing. We are trying to tell people as
if we really know a lot. While not really knowing anything but pretending
to know, again this is the fault of our self-cherishing.
When we are asked a question, just be honest, if we know the answer we just
say what we know. But if we really don’t know the answer, as we haven’t
thought well or we have not studied well then we just say “Sorry, I really
don’t know”. Then just leave it as that.
If you are graduates of the Basic Program or you are going to graduate from
the Basic Program, and if somebody asks you a question and you don’t know
then just say “Don’t know” and don’t pretend to know.
Verse 64
Although my companions and underlings are numerous, not one is dependable.
Although I have many masters, not one is a reliable protector. Roar and
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike
at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
[BP1 Module 6: This is referring to those who have many people working
under them such as government officials or the rich and powerful. In the
case of a lama, a big entourage may accompany him. If we mishandle or are
unable to treat people around us well, we would not be able to find anyone
whom we can depend on at times when we need to get things done.
“Although I have many masters, not one is a reliable protector” - The
‘master’ here is referring to those in positions of authority such as
officials and ministers and not the spiritual guru. When we need help or
protection, we rely on them, but when we place our hopes in these people,
they are unable to help us.]
Verse 65
Although I have high status, my merit is less than an evil spirit’s.
Although I am a great religious teacher, my passions are grosser than a
demon’s. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction!
Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme’s translation:
Although I have high status, my qualities are less than the spirit’s.
Although I am a great lama or religious teacher, my attachment and anger
are coarser than a demon’s. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer,
false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy,
Ego!
If one has high status or position and really have the qualities that can
make one be beneficial to others, and has the intention to benefit others
then it is very useful. Otherwise, just having power or authority, and just
being in a high position alone doesn’t necessarily bring benefit to others.
There are different qualities: external qualities and internal qualities.
Internal qualities are mental qualities that are positive aspects of the
mind.
It doesn’t help just because of one has a high title or one is a lama, one
is a geshe or one is a dharma teacher. It doesn’t help just being having
such title. One must have the qualities and the appropriate conducts and
behaviors. However if one’s conduct is motivated excessively by anger or
attachment, or has not worked with one’s anger or attachment to the point
where the mind is pretty stable, then just having a title alone doesn’t
help. In fact, the teachings say that there are people like that - who have
title but have no quality and whose behaviors and actions are worse than
maras or spirits or ghosts.
Not just anger and attachment, there are people with title or in high
position but have a lot of jealousy and competitiveness in a negative way.
All of these again are said to be the manifestation or the result of self-
cherishing.
Verse 66
Although my view is lofty, my behavior is worse than a dog’s. Although my
good qualities are many, their basis is carried off by the wind. Roar and
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike
at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
“Although my view is lofty” - one may have some understanding of the view
of reality, emptiness, and one’s understands is only a little but one acts
as if one has a very correct, profound and high understanding of emptiness.
Yet at the same time, our actual behavior or conduct may actually be worse
than a dog. In reality, the person who really has correct understanding of
emptiness and who has profound understanding of emptiness is somebody who
guards his vow and samaya carefully. He is somebody who will never
deprecate on karma and its effects. But there are people whose view is very
lofty. They talk about emptiness, they think about emptiness and yet at the
same time, they do not pay attention to guarding their vow and samaya. In
fact they may even despise, deprecate or look down on karma and its
effects. This again is the result of self-cherishing.
Whether your view of emptiness is lofty or not but the point is one has to
abide by the ethical discipline that one has adopted. For instance, there
may be ordained people who do talk about emptiness but are not careful
about their ethical conduct. An ordained person is celibate and does not
partake of alcohol. In the case of my village or home town, I had seen with
my own eyes that ordained monks drank so much and then got drunk and
vomited. I had seen that myself. I have seen them drinking during puja and
then half-way in the puja they have to go out and vomit. I had seen with my
own eyes. So that is what you called the conduct or behavior that is worse
than a dog.
The practice of ethical discipline is said the foundation of all the
qualities. As such, it is important to practice ethical discipline. There
is a verse by the fifth Dalai Lama which says: “Although tantra is said to
be very secret and profound, one must first have trained the mind in the
shared path before attempting the practice of tantra. Otherwise, it will be
liked riding an untamed elephant and in the end you destroy yourself.”
Do you understand the meaning of that verse? What is the verse trying to
say? What is it implies?
What it is saying is that one shouldn’t act in any way one pleases just
because one says one is practicing tantra. Practice the foundation of
ethical discipline is important.


