Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson3.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.591486
================================================================================


Verse 3
Vigilant, the moment a delusion appears in my mind, endangering myself and
others, I shall confront and avert it without delay.
Verse 3 speaks on the need to continually rely on mindfulness and
introspection. So the moment we find the affliction is arising and
manifesting in our mind, with mindfulness and vigilance (introspection) we
should notice the arising and then attempt to stop it.
We need to see for ourselves the faults and the disadvantages of our own
afflictions. Like what I had said in the previous lesson, we need to think
how harmful our afflictions are from many angles. We also need to see how
the afflictions harm ourselves and others.
As the verse 3 says, “Vigilant, the moment a delusion appears in my mind,
endangering myself and others, I shall confront and avert it without delay”
on the basis of relying on the mindfulness and introspection.
In his “Supplement to the Middle Way” Chandrakirti spoke of the
disadvantages and faults of anger, in that when we are upset, we lose the
ability to differentiate between what is right and wrong. Of course he was
speaking about anger and this particular fault applies equally to other
afflictions such as desire.
This is something pretty evident because we all have experienced the
disadvantages. When we are upset or when there is very strong desire
manifest in our hearts, we somehow lose the ability to think straight and
we cannot really distinguish between what is good and what is bad.
When we are very upset, attached or desirous, our ability to distinguish
between what is beneficial, what is harmful, what is right and what is
wrong is greatly diminished. As a result, all the decisions we made and the
actions we take during that state are hardly fruitful and they won’t turn
out well. We have experienced that many times in the past. We should
remember all the mistakes we have made in the past such as how we have
screwed up in the past. So by recollecting those past experiences, whenever
we find ourselves coming under the influence of these strong afflictions
again, we should then immediately remember “If I were to continue along
this same route and thinking in the same way by following my afflictions,
the result will not be any different from what I have already experienced
in the past.”
The antidotes that we have in our hands to counteract the afflictions are
pretty weak because we are still beginners. As such, there are ways for us
beginners to deal with our afflictions through modifying our external and
verbal behaviors.
As in verse 3, “In all of my conduct” (???) means that whatever actions
that we may undertake, both physically and verbally, we are supposed to be
mindful. We are to watch our minds to see exactly what we are up to. There
are many such advices in the teachings pertaining to watching our physical
and verbal conduct. In the teaching, there is the advice of restraining our
senses in which we are advised not to gaze or look at those objects that
may cause us to develop desire.
The practice of ethical discipline is very important for us beginner. The
ethical discipline here is primarily about restraining the non-virtuous
deeds of body and speech such as killing, stealing, sexual misconduct,
lying, divisive speech, offensive speech and meaningless speech.  So prior
to engaging in whatever activities with our body or speech, we should
examine whether that action will harm somebody or whether that action will
cause our affliction to arise and to increase.  Of course we have to check
that by relying on mindfulness and introspection.
If we do find that that action that we are about to undertake physically or
verbally may lead to the harming of somebody else or it will lead to the
increase of our own afflictions, then it is said that we must turn away
from that action and distance ourselves from the object of the action. So I
guess this is how we as beginners can work with our afflictions through
modifying our behavior and conduct.
As we are about to engage in any action either physically or verbally, we
should rely on mindfulness and vigilance to really examine whether that
action is harmful or not. If we become aware that our action will lead to
the manifestion and increase of the affliction, then we are advised to
immediately turn our attention away from that object and not follow through
with the action. We are to avert from that action and to turn away from
that object. For example, in the instruction for developing meditative
serenity (calm abiding), one of the prerequisite is to stay in an isolated
place away from the hustle and bustle of life. That is a crucial
prerequisite for developing meditative serenity (calm abiding) because if
we do not stay in an isolated place that is away from the hustle and bustle
of life, we do not live a simple quiet life. This tends to be the cause for
distraction and the mind will be easily distracted. It is very difficult to
achieve any kind of concentration when the mind keeps getting distracted.
As such, one should lives in an isolated place with a simple life; not a
busy life i.e. away from all the hustle and bustle and distractions. Since
there are not many distractions, therefore it is much easier to develop
calm abiding.
There are a couple of causes and conditions for the afflictions to arise.
In his Abidharmakosha, Vasubandhu said that when the three following
conditions come together, afflictions will arise:
   1. Being near to the objects that contribute to the generation of
      afflictions
   2. Having incorrect attention
   3. Not doing something to abandon the afflictions.
As beginners, we can start working with our afflictions through modifying
our conduct primarily distancing ourselves as much as possible away from
the objects that contribute to the arising of afflictions and also to turn
away from these objects.  But that alone will not stop the afflictions from
arising. Just by distancing ourselves from objects will not help us to
remove the afflictions. As such, we have to rely also on meditation.
In the teachings, different afflictions have their own antidote, for
example, the meditation on ugliness is prescribed as an antidote for
attachment. And meditation on love is prescribed as an antidote for anger.
In the Stages of the Path, there is the path of the person of small
capacity, the path of the person of medium capacity and path of the person
of great capacity. The path of the person of small capacity is essentially
an antidote to afflictions. What the person is striving in is to discipline
the mind working with the afflictions. You all have already heard about
this since you all already know the Lamrim.  Everything right from the
beginning of the Lamrim is for working with the afflictions and reducing
the afflictions.
The Lamrim starts with the topic of correctly devoting to the virtuous
friend. In the Lamrim, one of the benefits of correctly devoting to the
virtuous friend is said to naturally reduce the mistaken way of our conduct
and our afflictions will then naturally decline. So if we have the correct
faith and really know how to devote to the virtuous friend, then one of the
benefits is that our mind will become more subdued and disciplined. In the
section of correctly devoting to one’s virtuous friend, nine kinds of
attitudes are taught in the sutra, for example, in relation to one’s own
guru or virtuous friend, from our own side we regards ourselves as a
servant to the master and as an obedience dog.
Verse 2
When in the company of others, I shall always consider myself the lowest of
all, and from the depths of my heart hold others dear and supreme.
Verse 2 is an advice to consider ourselves lower than others. This practice
of holding ourselves lower than others first start with our own virtuous
friend, in which we consider ourselves lower than the virtuous friend or
the spiritual master in order to reduce our self-cherishing and our pride.
So right from the beginning the practice starts with the virtuous friend.
Again in the practice the person of small capacity, there is a meditation
on our own coming death and our own impermanence. If we do really meditate
well on our own mortality and our own impermanence, naturally a lot of our
mental disturbance (afflictions) will naturally subsides. It is said in the
Lamrim  that one of the disadvantages of not remembering our own death and
our own impermanence is that we don’t remember the Dharma, that means our
mind is always in the state of following some afflictions. If we really do
our meditation on our own death and impermanence really well, then a lot of
our mental disturbance (afflictions) will naturally subside.
Similarly, if we have good practice of going for refuge to the Three
Jewels, many of our afflictions will be stopped.  Likewise, if we meditate
well on karma and its effect, through that meditation if we do find
definite conviction in karma and its effect, then naturally many of our
mental disturbances (afflictions) will also subside.
If we do understand well the way of proceeding with the practices of a
person of small capacity especially if we are able to reflect and meditate
well on those points then many of our afflictions can be stopped.
When we meditate on the practices of the person of medium capacity, of
course the positive effect will be even greater, especially if we reflect
on the Four Noble Truths and the Twelve Links of Dependent Origination.
There is so much discussion on how all our problems come back to the
afflictions. So afflictions are the source of our problems. There is also
much discussion on the faults of the afflictions and so forth. The practice
of the person of medium capacity is essentially the three higher trainings.
If the person is able to reflect well on those points and actually
cultivate those antidotes then so many of that person’s afflictions can be
dealt with.
Then when one comes to the practices of a person of greatest capacity, that
person’s practice is essentially destroying his own self-cherishing. That
is done first through considering from every single angle how self-
cherishing is harmful, and also considering from all various angles how
extremely beneficial of cherishing others is. If that person is able to
work with his own self-cherishing and weaken it, then so many more
afflictions can be weakened and dealt with.
The whole point of training the mind and meditating on all these topics
that are found in the practices of the person of small, the person of
medium capacity and the person of the great capacity is for disciplining
the mind and for working with the afflictions. That is dealing with our
afflictions through modifying our conduct. On that basis, there is
meditation on the entire Lamrim – the Stages of the Path - which comprises
of the path that is shared with the person of small capacity, the person of
medium capacity and the path of the person of great capacity.
So there is conduct and meditation that deal with the afflictions. The last
one that deals with the afflictions is through the view. Here we look at
the nature of the afflictions themselves. We need to look and understand
and to realize how the afflictions themselves are empty of existing
inherently. For example, we take our ignorance, our grasping at true
existence, as the object for analysis. We have to see for ourselves that
the thing that our ignorance is grasping at has never existed. If we can
realize the object that our ignorance believed in has never existed, we
will not only deal with the afflictions but we will be able to uproot the
afflictions. We will be able to destroy them completely from the root.
We can correlate the three approaches of dealing with the afflictions with
the three higher training. The three approaches are:
   1. Conduct
   2. Meditation
   3. View
We can correlate them respectively with the three higher trainings:
1. The higher training in ethical discipline can correlate with conduct;
   that is dealing with the afflictions through modifying our conduct,
   which essentially what ethical discipline is.
2. When one has a good stable practice of ethical discipline, then one has
   much chance in succeeding in one’s practice of concentration; which is
   the second higher training - higher training in concentration. The main
   obstacle for developing single-pointedness of mind is the mental
   excitement and laxity. So if one has a good practice of ethical
   discipline, one would have already removed many of those distractions
   and causes for excitement and mental laxity. As such, it makes the job
   of achieving concentration much easier.
3. Through the force of that concentration, many of the afflictions become
   non-manifest, but this doesn’t mean that they have been removed. As
   such, there is the practice of the higher training in wisdom. Therefore,
   it is said that the wisdom realizing selflessness is essential; without
   which there is no way we can remove the afflictions completely from its
   root.
With the generation and development of the wisdom realizing selflessness,
various levels of defilements are gradually abandoned. When one directly
realizes the selflessness, one starts to abandon the Path of Seeing
abandonments which we had learned in the previous module. Then gradually
one starts abandoning the Path of Meditation abandonments. One starts
abandoning the Path of Seeing abandonments and then one move on to abandon
the Path of Meditation abandonments. Then through the continual
familiarization with that wisdom, there will come a point where the process
of removing the knowledge obscurations will start.
In whatever we do, whether walking, travelling, sitting down, go going
about doing, we have to continually rely on mindfulness and introspection
to check whether we are coming under the control and influence of our
afflictions or not. So by depending on mindfulness and introspection, the
moment we notice the arising of an affliction, the teachings tell us that
we should apply the antidote right away.
Verse 4
 Whenever I see beings who are wicked in nature and overwhelmed by violent
negative actions and suffering, I shall hold such rare ones dear, as if I
had found a precious treasure.
Ven Gyurme: Here “who are wicked in nature” does not necessarily mean wick
all the time. It means that who are unpleasant, who are bad.
One must meet with conditions for the bodhicitta to increase more and more.
Those who are wicked in nature are those who are bad-natured and despite
whatever you do or say, they will never change.
The verse is also referring to those people who are always involved in very
strong non-virtues, such as those who are always killing. Those bad-natured
sentient beings who are always engaging in non-virtues and those who are
experiencing a lot of suffering and pain such as being oppressed by very
strong illnesses.
The practitioners of bodhicitta are so happy when they meet with the
conditions that enable their bodhicitta to increase, just like a hungry
person is overjoyed when he finds food, or somebody who is very poor
suddenly becomes very rich. They are so happy. Likewise, the practitioners
of bodhicitta become very happy, just like a poor person who suddenly finds
a very precious jewel, when they meet with people of bad-natured who always
engaging in non-virtues or those who are really suffering. When the
practitioners see such bad-natured sentient beings who are always engaging
in non-virtues, they generate very strong compassion when they reflect on
the suffering that these people will have to experience in the future as a
result of their current actions. Likewise, when the practitioners of
bodhicitta find people who are suffering greatly such as being very sick
and so forth, they feel as if they have found a precious jewel.
Verse 5
When, out of envy, others mistreat me with abuse, insults, or the like, I
shall accept defeat and offer the victory to others.
This is how a practitioner of bodhicitta will react when they are in such a
situation. The verse is trying to convey that when others out of their
jealousy scold us directly on our face or talk behind our back.
The word “mistreat” means that in reality when somebody out of jealousy
scolds or insults us, but in the conventional  sense, we are not at our
fault as we didn’t do anything wrong but yet we still receive the criticism
whether directly or behind our back. So “mistreat” here is unjustified in
the conventional sense.
This verse is telling us that when that happens to us, the first thing to
do is not to put up any defense trying to prove one’s innocence. So the
first step is not to prove anything, but to remain calm and mentally
undisturbed.
The verse is saying that in the event of us experiencing this unjustified
mistreatment, we don’t have to prove anything and defending ourselves, but
rather we have to remain calm and not to be mentally disturbed. Within that
state, the verse says “I shall accept defeat and offer the victory to
others.”
The teaching says that the practice of generosity and the practice of
ethical discipline are very important. The teaching tells us that the
reason why we do these practices is mainly to accumulate merits and to
purify our negativities.
The teaching says that in such a situation as layout in verse 5 where
others, motivated by jealousy, accuse us of having done something that we
didn’t do or accuse us of certain faults, and criticize us on our face or
back-mouthed us behind our back, we should be mentally undisturbed, be
patient, to accept it and offer the victory to others. It is said that the
benefits of doing so would greatly exceed the benefits we will get from the
practices of generosity and ethical discipline.
The verse is saying that if we succeed in doing that, in the event of being
faced with verbally abuse, or people talking behind our back motivated by
jealousy, and if we are able to remain mentally calm and not disturbed,
being able to accept that we lost that defeat and offer the victory to
other, the purification that we will experience will be greater than that
we can get from practicing generosity and ethical discipline. Likewise, the
accumulation of merits will be greater as well.
In order to practice patience there must be causes and conditions to engage
in it. So in order to practice patience, we need the object for cultivating
patience. Generally, in order to practice patience, we need somebody who is
pissed off with us, who basically just oppose us, or don’t like us. There
is necessarily an object to practice patience. Since that is a condition
for the development of patience, that person should be worshipped in the
way we would worshipped the Dharma. Shantideva said something to this
effect in his Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds.
It is helpful to think of how we will never ever meet with the result of an
action that we have never done. It is impossible to meet with the result of
an action that we ourselves have never done. It is helpful to think of that
when trying to cultivate patience. Again back to the scenario, when others
accuse us of something we really did not do in this life i.e. from the
conventional sense we honestly did nothing in this life, but since it is
not possible to meet with the effect an action that we did not do,
therefore that means that we are experiencing the result of an action that
we have done sometime in the past or in one of our past lives. If we think
well about our karma and its effect, although we did not do anything in
this life, but we must have done something in our past lives, and that is
the reason why we are experiencing the ripening effect in this life.
How do most people think about this? The conventional idea that most people
would adopt is that when we are falsely accused of something that we really
did not do, in the sense we are innocent, it is wrong to put up with it. We
are justified to correct that misperception. We must correct it and it is
even justifiable to get upset. So if we do practice patience when we are
actually innocent, then we are just being dumb. In this case, how can we
just practice patience? It is wrong, just plain wrong. This is what we
think, isn’t it?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Correct? So how?
Student 1: Rinpoche, if you think that the other person is making mistake
for wrongly accusing and insulting you, don’t you think you should correct
him out of compassion, rather than let him continue making the mistakes
which you are encouraging him.
Ven Gyurme: Are you saying that those people who don’t react mean they
don’t have compassion?
Student 1: That is beside the point.
In such situation, in the first place why do you want to justify? Because
the mind is not happy and is already disturbed, that is why we need to
justify. You might think “I didn’t do anything, I am correct” but because
the mind is already disturbed, that is why we need to justify and in due
course there is anger. As I mentioned earlier in the text, it say that when
the mind is undisturbed, then there is room for discussion and there is a
way to talk.
We react because we are mentally disturbed, so whatever we say to justify
is out of anger. From our side, we will say something. In the first place,
that person would says whatever he want to say because he must have a
reason; right or wrongly even he is motivated out of jealousy. When we try
to justify, the person is not going to sit quiet but he will further
justify. When that person replies to our justification, then we get upset
with that further justification. Then there will be to and fro exchanges.
At the end we don’t have any benefit and that person also doesn’t get any
benefits but it only makes the situation more and more heated. This is what
we have experience and is always like that. The to and fro exchanges “I
didn’t do it, you did it” and it doesn’t matter whether it is true or not
true, this will make the problems become bigger.
When somebody insult or criticize us which is something that we don’t like,
we hold onto that person behavior and that becomes a cause for us to get
upset at that person. That person behavior makes us feel justified to get
upset, and because of that person’s behavior, we attack on him.
In his Four Hundred Verses, Aryadeva said that we have to make a
distinction between the actor and the action i.e. we have to differentiate
the action and the actor, the person. Aryadeva also says that the Buddha
said that we should regard that person’s affliction as the enemy and not
the person as the enemy. An example that is given is of a patient who is
possessed by a spirit. When he is brought in the presence of a healer or
the doctor who is aware that there is a spirit possessing that person, then
it doesn’t matter what that patient might do to the doctor, the doctor will
never gets upset with the patient. This is because the doctor understands
that it is not the patient but rather the spirit who is controlling that
person, is making all the noises and the disturbances. Likewise, the Buddha
said that we should not view the person as the enemy but rather the
afflictions of the person as the enemy.
We must distinguish between the actor and the action. We should never be
upset with the person but what we need to oppose is anger. Accordingly, the
person should never ever be an object of anger. The person is only to be an
object of patience and an object of compassion. Then with an undisturbed
mind and with sincere affection and concern, one can address the problem
itself; not the person. We should address the problem with the person by
saying “Perhaps is this and not that.”  As such, the person is only an
object of patience and also an object of compassion, and not one’s
opponent. Therefore, that person then becomes the object to whom we offer
the victory to.
Essentially, verse 5 is an advice on the practice of patience. For somebody
who considers themselves a practitioner, then this is what he should do.
This kind of lifestyle (worldview or practice) goes against what the world
would normally accept. In the world, the practice is that when you are
criticized or insulted, you must not keep quiet. You are supposed to
retaliate and fight, in particular even in conventional sense, it is really
justifiable when you know you are not wrong and are compel to fight back to
redress the wrong. Just like we would see in the world, there is always
fighting and then the problems become bigger and bigger. When we meet with
these situations, it is very difficult for us to accept and practice what
is said in the verse. It is very difficult to put up with. However, if we
are able to practice, then it becomes very beneficial.
Verse 6 is also talking about the practice of patience. What is being
mentioned in this verse is even more difficult than what we have just
looked at.
Verse 6
When someone whom I have benefited and in whom I have great hopes gives me
terrible harm, I shall regard that person as my holy Guru.
The approach is pretty much the same. If we are a real practitioner and if
we do really practice, then we have to remember the workings of karma and
its effect. When we do experience all these kinds of situations that are
mentioned in the verse, we have to remember that we are experiencing the
effect of an action that we ourselves have done; may not in this life but
definitely sometime in the past. If we can view that unpleasant experience
as a purification of our negativities, then perhaps we can experience those
situations with joy.
Instead of being patience, if we retaliate then we will cause the other
party to accumulate more negativity. As the result, he may go to the lower
realms. If that happens, it is as if we are the one who are sending that
person to the lower realms. So the practice of patience here can be done
within the thinking about karma and its effects and within the thinking of
the qualities of the person in that how cherishing others is the basis of
all good qualities.
When we do experience or encounter difficulties from people, it is very
helpful to make a distinction between that person and his afflictions and
his self-cherishing. Just as we do make a distinction between ourselves and
our afflictions “I am me and my afflictions are not me”, “I am not the
afflictions. They are my afflictions.”
Actually in reality we are not our self-grasping; indeed we are different
if we talk about “me and my self-grasping”. Therefore, the person and the
self-grasping are indeed different. When somebody criticizes or scolds us
or does something that we don’t like, we can see it as an attack at our
self-grasping, but not against we. It is criticizing out self-grasping but
not us. We need to think in this way “That the person is attacking my self-
grasping and he is harming my self-grasping, not me.”
For those who really see the point, then when they do experience all the
difficulties that somebody else is directing at them, whether it is
criticism or attack or whatever, they see it as an attack on their
afflictions and an attack on their ego and not an attack on them. So they
see as an attack on the real enemy. The person who realizes this would even
say thank you to the other person because that person is really doing him a
service in that the person is attacking “my real enemy, my afflictions”.
The real enemy is our self-cherishing, so that is what we need to oppose.
As such the person who opposes and attacking our self-cherishing is
therefore not an enemy.
As I have mentioned in the first class, all of these points are just
straight forward. They are evident, sensible and common sense which is very
easily to understand, but yet very difficult to practice. Since it is
difficult, we just have to strive and work at it.
Exam Briefing
Khen Rinpoche: So this Sunday we are supposed to come together for the
exam, so there is no class on this Thursday. Why no class? I think you
should know. I think most of you have already written your answer. In case
you have not done so, please do on Thursday from 7.30pm – 9.30pm. You sit
down at one place and do it. Don’t say you don’t have time. I am giving
time just for that. Sit down for two hours and write something. So that is
why Thursday has no class. Those people who are busy and don’t have time.
That is why I am giving this time for those people. Also I mentioned to
have lunch together, but I am not sure how many people really want to come
for lunch. If you really want to come for lunch, then you must write down.
In case of no lunch, we start at 1pm and we can have just tea. You can
decide and put there. If there is lunch then must come 12pm. After your
exam, if your exam is good then we can have dinner. So no lunch, all come
here at 1pm. We see how long it takes, maybe until 9.30 or 10pm.

