Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson12_rev.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.915276
================================================================================


Student 1:  For sentient beings, is it possible for a mind that realizes
emptiness through a mental image be transformed into a mind that realizes
emptiness directly? The reason I am asking this question is because I was
thinking about the evolution of the wisdom that directly realizes emptiness
and I was unable to find the answers how the transition into the wisdom
directly realizes emptiness arise. And also, I was wondering is it the case
for sentient beings that the conceptual mind that realizes emptiness
through a mental image has to be stopped temporarily or has to stop
functioning temporarily so as to allow the wisdom that directly realizes
emptiness to arise?
Khen Rinpoche: There are ordinary beings who realize emptiness, but
ordinary beings do not realize emptiness directly. If you remember from the
discussion on the different kinds of awareness or the types of
consciousness, there are wrong conception (or wrong consciousness) and
doubt. Doubt itself is divided into three divisions:
   1. Doubt tending to the non-factual
   2. Equal doubt
   3. Doubt tending towards the factual
After that, there are: correct belief (or correctly assuming
consciousness), inferential cognizer and direct perception.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You remember or forgot? All have forgotten all
these?
We went through all these in class, didn’t we?
Initially one may has a wrong consciousness (perverse consciousness) with
regards to the ultimate nature of reality. One may actually deny the
existence of emptiness and may think that there is no such thing.
Let’s say one hears the teachings on emptiness and then one’s strong belief
in the non-existence of emptiness perhaps is broken down a little and
weakened. But one still have doubts after hearing the teaching. One may
still wonder but not as strong as wrong consciousness. Then one proceed
from a doubt tending towards the non-factual to equal doubt and one is a
little bit more open “Maybe yes, maybe not. Not sure.”  Then with more
hearing and reflection, perhaps one then side more with the possibility of
emptiness. One is still indecisive but at least one is siding more with
emptiness “Maybe it is true. Maybe things don’t exist inherently.”  Then
with more hearing and reflection one may come to a point that one believe
strongly that “It has to be like that. It cannot be anything else”. It is a
very strong belief, but not an ascertainment yet. It is just a belief but a
very strong one.
Then come the time when the person understand and realize emptiness via a
correct reason, and it has to be a correct reason. In dependence upon a
correct reason or correct reasons, then one comes to really realize the
object, and in this case is emptiness. That mind is called an inferential
cognizer realizing emptiness and it is a conceptual mind.
After one has that inferential cognition of emptiness through a correct a
reason or correct reasons, then that person just have to familiarize
oneself over and over again with that meaning. It is said that it will come
a time that understanding or realization would be transformed into a direct
perception.
On the Path of Accumulation and the Path of Preparation, that individual
primarily meditates on emptiness, but that meditation always involves
meaning generality of emptiness. That realization is a realization of
emptiness via meaning generality.
Essentially, if you think about the question that was just asked, how do we
explain the transformation of a doubt with regards to emptiness into a
correct belief? Can there be a transformation or not? Likewise how do you
move from correct belief to an inferential cognition? With regards to
inferential cognition of the object emptiness, can that mind transform its
entity into a direct perception?
If you really sit down and think about it, this is really difficult to
conceive and understand. From the sutric point of view, essentially, the
mind that moves to enlightenment, there is no way out other than saying
that conceptual mind can transform in entity into direct perception.
Even if you talk about sentient being moving on to enlightenment, during
the time of sentient beings, there are conceptualities in the mind and all
of them will be transformed into direct perception. That is from the view
from sutra. We have to say that certain conceptual thoughts (conceptual
minds) can transform into a direct perception.
If you explain it from the view point of tantra, then it is a little bit
easier.
Starting from the mind that moves from life to life, it is actually the
extremely subtle mind that moves at the time of death to the next life. It
is the extremely subtle mind that moves to enlightenment. All the coarser
levels of consciousnesses cease to exist before enlightenment can happen.
If you look at it from the sutric point of view, you have to say that
through familiarization over a period of time that conceptual mind
realizing emptiness can be transformed in entity into a direct perception
of emptiness.
Isn’t this the case? Don’t we end up saying this? There is no other way,
right? Without starting the debate first, we have really no choice but to
say this.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What do you think?
Student 1: The reason I am asking this question is because the premise is
that the inferential realization of emptiness and the direct realization of
emptiness; these are two different minds. But it seems that from the sutric
point of view, when we talk about the evolution of the wisdom that realizes
emptiness directly, we were taught that there is this wisdom that arises
from hearing, and it moves on to the wisdom that arises from reflection,
and it moves on to the wisdom that realizes emptiness directly. We have
this premise that the inferential realization of emptiness and the direct
realization of emptiness are two different minds. So when we talk about the
transition, it seems that the conceptual mind that realizes emptiness
through a mental image or a meaning generality has to be transformed into a
direct perception. So, it’s like, on one hand, it seems like there is one
entity by means of transformation, and on the other hand, it’s like, it
seems like there are two different minds: inferential cognition and direct
cognition of emptiness. So I was at a loss; I couldn’t find the answers.
Khen Rinpoche: An inferential cognition of emptiness and direct perception
of emptiness are necessarily different, because they are different mind.
One is thought, and one is direct perceiver. There is nothing difficult
about this point. They are necessarily different minds. It is clear that
one is a thought and one is direct perceiver. That is easy, but that is not
your question. Your question is: Does that inferential cognition of
emptiness transform in entity into a direct perception or not?
The main question is about the mind realizing emptiness in the continuum of
a person on the Path of Preparation. The mind realizing emptiness in the
continuum of a person on the Path of Preparation is necessarily conceptual.
Then come a time with repeated familiarization, it is said that that person
will see emptiness directly and hence enters the Path of Seeing. Then the
basic question is: Does the inferential cognition of emptiness in that
person continuum transform in entity into a direct perceiver?
Does the inferential cognition of emptiness in the continuum of a person on
the Path of Preparation transforms in entity into the direct perception of
emptiness when he enters the Path of Seeing?
If you say “No”, then you have only one other option, which is, in order to
achieve the Path of Seeing, you have to generate a completely different
mind, which is the mind realizing emptiness directly. So here are the only
two parties.
I guess the better option would be the first one. You probably have to end
up saying that it is the inferential cognition realizing emptiness which
then transforms into a direct perceiver.
What other option is there? If you say that inferential cognition of
emptiness does not transform into a direct perceiver upon entering the Path
of Seeing, then you have to say that mind directly perceiving emptiness is
a new phenomenon that is newly arisen. If it is newly arisen, what is its
prior moment?
If you say that it is a new mind, then you have to account for what is the
immediate prior moment to the arising of the direct perception. The
immediate prior moment is essentially a mind in the continuum of a person
on the Path of Preparation. So that mind, which is the substantial cause,
that moves to become a direct perceiver, does that mind realizes emptiness?
If you say that the wisdom realizing emptiness upon entering the Path of
Seeing is a new mind, then what is its former moment? Its former moment is
a mind that realizes emptiness or not? If you say “Yes”, is that former
moment of mind which realizes emptiness a direct perceiver or not?
If you take the first position which is the inferential cognition realizing
emptiness in the continuum of a person on the Path of Preparation that
transforms into the direct perception of emptiness upon achieving the Path
of Seeing, then this position has less complication.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You think so? I make more complicate? Which one
you going to choose? I think there are only two options.
You either say the inferential cognition realizing emptiness, which is
essentially conceptuality (thought), ceases at the time of achieving the
Path of Seeing or it doesn’t cease. If it doesn’t cease, then it will just
go on to the Path of Seeing, and then on the Path of Meditation. Those
realizations of emptiness are conceptual and are all thoughts.
If the inferential cognition realizing emptiness in the continuum of a
person on the Path of Preparation does not transform into a direct
perceiver upon achieving the Path of Seeing, that means it will continue as
a thought (conceptual mind) and that conceptual mind will continue on the
Path of Seeing and then Path of Meditation and all the way up to the end of
the Path of Meditation. Then even the mind that realizing emptiness in the
last moment as a sentient being would be a conceptual thought. Then what
moves to enlightenment? Does the continuum of a similar type moves to
enlightenment or not?
Does the continuum of this conceptual thought realizing emptiness in the
continuum of the person who is in the last moment as a sentient being
moves to enlightenment or not?
You have to account for all these questions. There are more questions: Is
the inferential cognition realizing emptiness in the continuum of a person
on the Path of Preparation is a buddha lineage or not?
That is the thing with these great treatises. If you don’t think about
stuff, that’s it. If you think about stuff, there is so much to think about
and sometimes you do end up with a lot of unanswered qualms. And having
many qualms even though they may be unanswered is not a bad thing at all.
In fact it is a very good thing. It is not good at all to not have any
qualms. If you are Buddha, you don’t need these qualms as you don’t have
qualms. Otherwise you need.
The essence of the answer is that the inferential cognizer realizing
emptiness in the continuum of a person on the Path of Preparation transform
in entity into a direct perceiver when he realizes emptiness directly.
What difficulty do you face if you take this to be the answer? Anything you
are not happy about?
Khen Rinpoche responded to the student: You must understand the last one.
The question is that do you find any difficulty in accepting the essential
answer?
Student 2: I have a qualm regarding this. I think have to say is transform.

Ven Gyurme: Then no difficult.
Student 2: I got difficulty. If you transform, then what happen to the
meaning generality when it becomes a direct realization? When it becomes a
direct realization, does that meaning generality, the mental image, becomes
a phenomena source form?
Khen Rinpoche: What do you find so difficult?
Student 2:  What happens to the mental image if it gets transform?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): The mental image disappears.
Student 2: It was mentioned in lorig that it becomes a phenomena source
form or something?
Khen Rinpoche: There can only be a meaning generality if a thought
(conceptuality) is involved. If conceptuality does not exist, then there is
no meaning generality to talk about.
Student 2: Then what is phenomena source form?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Anything related?
Khen Rinpoche: Do you find any difficulty in accepting that an inferential
cognition realizing emptiness transforms into a direct perceiver? What is
it that you are bothered by?
Student1:  If it is a consciousness it is necessarily a product, and we
understand consciousness in term of a continuum i.e. it comes from the
continuum of a similar type. Let’s say we talk about the first moment of
the direct realization of emptiness, we take it as a newly created
phenomenon. What is the substantial cause of that wisdom that directly
realize emptiness? It got to be a conceptual realization of emptiness which
is of the two different minds.
Khen Rinpoche: They are definitely different minds.
(Student answer inaudible)
Ven Gyurme: What you are trying to say basically is that a thought cannot
become a direct perceiver because there is no continuum of a similar type.
That is what you are trying to say, right? That means you didn’t accept the
answer right from the beginning.
(Student answer inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: There is a continuity of similarity. In fact the most
important similarity is that they both realize emptiness.
(Student answer inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: Any qualms about the explanation? Are you thinking or do you
want to think? If you don’t want to think, then we will just stop here and
just continue with the text.
Student 3: I am always confused with this line which I think is related to
our discussion. In the Heart Sutra: “there is no eye element and so on, and
up to and including no mind element, and no mental consciousness element”
What is a mental consciousness element, and how is it related to the direct
perception of emptiness? If we do understand what a mental consciousness
element is, will it help us to understand the mind that transforms?
Khen Rinpoche: If it a consciousness, it is either a sense or mental
consciousness. So when consciousness is divided into two, there are sense
consciousness and mental consciousness. The mental consciousness primarily
refers to the mental main mind.
I think the difference is the mind constituent, also as translated as mind
element; which in Tibetan is “kham”.
So “mind element” would probably refer to the mental consciousness,
primarily consciousness, the main mind, whereas “mental consciousness
element” would include both main mind and mental factors.
Student 4: About the qualm with regards to the inferential cognizer
transforms into a direct perceiver, and based on that logic, and if we go
back, we would have to say that a correctly assuming consciousness will be
transformed into an inferential cognizer.  And if we go back again, we will
end up having to say that ignorance actually transformed into wisdom
ultimately.
Ven Gyurme: No pervasion.
Student 4: Even if there is no pervasion. The object will be different but
I think one of the qualms will end up.
Ven Gyurme: Between doubt and the correct belief, because one is a
factually concordant mind and one is not, so does a non-factually
concordant mind can transform in entity into a factually concordant mind?
Khen Rinpoche: That question will arise if you explain the inferential
cognition realizing emptiness can transform in entity into a direct
perception of emptiness. If you extend that argument backwards, is
inferential cognition of emptiness the same continuum as the correct belief
focusing on emptiness?  Then is that correct belief a continuation
essentially of doubt? This doubt is actually a continuation of wrong
consciousness.
If you think about it, you can say that through listening and thinking
about stuff, can you argue that a wrong consciousness in general become a
doubt? Maybe you can argue for that. Let’s say you have perverse
consciousness (wrong consciousness) that decisively thinks that there is no
such thing as Buddha, no such thing as karma. Then somehow you think about
stuff and based on some reason then you change your view and thinks “Maybe
there is actually karma”. Is that doubt a continuation of the wrong
consciousness from before? If you think about it, you might have to say
that it is a continuation. Otherwise, what option do you have? If you say
that wrong consciousness can transform an entity into a doubt or something
else, what problems will there be?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Any problem? No problem?
Ven Gyurme: The emptiness of the wrong view goes to enlightenment?
Khen Rinpoche: That is why in the Tathagata Essence, there was a question
about whether the emptiness of the apprehension of true existence is buddha
lineage or not. If you accept what has been said so far “It can transform”,
then you would probably have to end up saying that is buddha lineage.  Then
it follows that ignorance is buddha lineage!
A wrong consciousness can never ever be changed to something better? Can it
become something like a doubt, which is much better than wrong view? It is
not possible that wrong consciousness is always wrong consciousness. It
either changes into something else or it disappears. Can a wrong
consciousness transform in entity i.e. the wrong consciousness itself
becomes a doubting consciousness? Yes or no?
Student response inaudible.
Question: Can wrong consciousness transform in entity into a doubting
consciousness? Yes or no?
Students responded: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: If yes, that means there is the continuation of the
apprehension of true existence all the way to enlightenment. Is the
apprehension of true existence buddha lineage?
Ven Gyurme: You accepted it.
Khen Rinpoche: If wrong consciousness can transform in entity into doubting
consciousness, wouldn’t that make ignorance buddha lineage?
You have to stand for what you believe. You cannot one minute like this,
then another minute like that.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Is your brain functioning? Working?  Last time
you used to say no pervasion.

Wheel of Sharp Weapons
Verse 31
When things get worse no matter what I do, it is the weapon of my own evil
deeds turned upon me for disparaging moral causality and dependent
origination. From now on I shall strive to accumulate merit.
When things get worse no matter what I do” - this could be in terms of
practice. One’s practice doesn’t succeed, or it seems to be getting worse.
It could also be one’s career or one’s business. No matter what you do, you
are not successful. Not only that, but things actually become worse. It is
said that it is the weapon of our own evil deeds turned upon us for
disparaging karma and its effect.
So when things get worse no matter what we do, then it is the ripening
effect of the non-virtue that we have accumulated in the past because of
not having believed in karma and its effects and from not being careful
with living our lives according to the principles of karma. The solution to
that therefore is we need to accumulate merit.
In some text, it says “from now on I shall strive to accumulate merit”.
There are other editions which say “from now on I strive to be patient”.
Essentially, whatever happens, the solution is not to disparage karma, and
to strive to live our lives according to the principles of karma and its
effects. When we live our lives according to the principles of karma and
its effects, there will be challenges, and it is not easy at times. Even if
we do face with difficulties and trying to keep up with our principles and
our beliefs in karma, we have to just put up and bear with it.
Verse 32
When all the religious rites I perform go awry, it is the weapon of my own
evil deeds turned upon me for looking to the dark quarter for help. From
now on I shall turn away from the dark quarter.
There are people who resort to pujas or religious rites when things go
wrong or when they meet with obstacles or sicknesses. Sometimes, even after
the pujas are done, but things don’t improve, in fact things may even get
worse. Then it is really possible at that time to develop wrong views
thinking that all these pujas are just rubbish and it doesn’t work and is
not true.
It all depends on whether that person who arranges for the pujas to be done
has the understanding of what the dharma is and have faith in the dharma.
If you have faith in dharma, it doesn’t matter what the result of the pujas
is. Even if the pujas don’t seem to be helpful in that particular
situation, because of having faith and understanding in dharma, you know
that once the cause is created, it is only a matter of time the result will
happen. Even if it is not now, it would definitely ripen in the future.
But there are times when despite having pujas have done, things may even
get worse. What is the cause of that?  It is because the force of the non-
virtue that is behind those bad experiences is stronger, therefore it is
ripening now and that makes it look like the puja is useless or
ineffective.
There are people who sponsor the pujas but instead of the problem going
away, the problem gets bigger. Then they think “I’m doing pujas to make
more problems”. They put the blame on the puja and all these rites thinking
that it is the pujas that is causing more problems. Actually that is not
the case. Because the strength of the non-virtue is so powerful, it is
ripening in the form of more and more problems.
When religious rites that we perform go awry, it is the weapon of our own
evil deeds turned upon us for looking to the dark quarter or the dark side
for help. That means in the past we listen to people whose advices are
basically non-dharma, and we have done things that are completely opposite
to the dharma.
If we do not desire such an outcome, then the solution is that we should
from now on turn away from the dark quarter or the dark side, which means
not to engage in non-dharma, and we should do things according to the
dharma.
Verse 33
When my prayers to the Three Jewels go unanswered, it is the weapon of my
own evil deeds turned upon me for not believing in buddhahood. From now on
I shall rely on the Three Jewels alone.
Many people, who are solely by concern to their happiness of this life
alone, would make prayers to the Three Jewels to overcome some sickness,
spirit harms, or failures in careers or businesses. Motivated mainly by the
happiness of this life alone, they make prayers to the Three Jewels as they
want to be free from those problems. At times, their prayers don’t succeed
i.e. the prayers don’t materialize. At those times it is quite normal for
people to think “I make so strong prayers but nothing happens. What is the
use? The Three Jewels have no power”. It is really possible to have such
wrong views.
Question: From the Buddha side, does Buddha has the complete power to
fulfill all your aims of this life or not? Does the Buddha have the power
to grant you whatever you like for the happiness of this life?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Some say yes, some say no. Simple question.
Question: Does the Buddha have the power to free you from your sickness?
Does the Buddha have the power to solve your business problems?
Ven Gyurme: Everyday taking refuges you are still have doubt?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Have? Don’t have?
Students response inaudible.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Tua Pek Kong has power or not?
Student: In one teaching I recall very clearly, Lama Zopa Rinpoche
mentioned that the power of Buddha’s enlightened activities is 50% and the
power of sentient beings’ karma is 50%.
Ven Gyurme: No, what that means is from the Buddha’s own side, he has all
the power. It doesn’t mean that Buddha is half powerful. He has all the
power.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Why you have doubt? What is so difficult? Yes
just say yes. No just say no.
What’s so difficult? Buddha can bring you to enlightenment. Buddha can free
sentient beings from samsara. He cannot do this small little thing? He has
the power, right?
Buddha has the power to save you, protect you from the sufferings of cyclic
existence, in general, and also the sufferings of the lower realms. That is
the reason why you take refuge, right? Do you all have the experience to
what is being said in the verse?
Ven Gyurme: You do pujas don’t work and that is why you don’t believe. Must
be.
Otherwise there is no reason to doubt, and you must have the reason to
doubt, right?
It happens that sometimes our prayers to the Three Jewels concerning the
affairs of this life may not materialize. When that happens it is important
to avoid generating the wrong view thinking “The Buddha is useless, and he
can’t help me”.  When our prayers concerning the affairs of this life to
the Three Jewels do not materialize, the explanation for that is that in
the past, we did not have the real conviction or single-pointed trust in
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. Or it could be that in the past life, or
even in this life, we don’t really believe in what the Buddha said i.e. we
don’t have much conviction of trust and belief in Buddha’s speech or words.

While it is said that it doesn’t matter what happens to us in our lives,
whether good or bad, we should completely entrust to the Three Jewels. If
you look at what refuge is, it is a mind. Essentially, it is a faith of
conviction in the Three Jewels’ ability to protect oneself from the lower
realms and from the entire samsara. In order to generate the mind of refuge
there must be two causes. One of which is the faith of conviction in their
ability to protect you from whatever level of suffering one is concerned
with.
This faith of conviction is the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha’s ability to protect
us from the sufferings of samsara and the lower realm is extremely
important. If we have this faith of conviction then they can protect us.
If you have the faith of conviction in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha
ability to protect you from the sufferings of samsara and in the lower
realms, then you will be protected. That is what it is said. Then the
question is how? Even if you have the faith of conviction that the Buddha,
Dharma, Sangha can protect you from the sufferings of samsara and the lower
realms, how?
It is not easy. Even if you have thought about, it is really not so
straight forward. It is said “If you believe and have faith of conviction
in the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha power and ability to protect you from all
sufferings, sufferings of samsara and suffering of lower realms, you will
definitely be protected. Then the question is: “How are you protected?”
You have to think about this. Don’t you think this is so important? This is
crucial for us, for the thing that will save us from lower realms
supposedly this entrust and faith in the Buddha’s power and ability to
protect you from the lower realms. That is what is being mentioned in the
teachings. If you have complete trust in the Buddha, you are convinced that
he can protect you, and it is guarantee that you will not go to lower
realms. It is said with so much confidence in the teachings that you
definitely will not fall to the lower realms. The question is how? Don’t
you think that it is such an important thing to think about?


Summary
|Present negative condition     |Karma and its effect   |Remedy                |
|One’s practice doesn’t succeed.|Ripening effect of the |I shall strive to     |
|It seems to be getting worse no|non-virtue that we have|accumulate merit      |
|matter what we do.             |accumulated in the past|                      |
|This could be one’s career or  |because of not having  |                      |
|one’s business. No matter what |believed in karma and  |                      |
|you do, you are not successful.|its effects and from   |                      |
|Not only that, but things      |not being careful with |                      |
|actually become worse          |living our lives       |                      |
|                               |according to the       |                      |
|                               |principles of karma.   |                      |
|People resort to pujas or      |Ripening effect of our |I shall turn away from|
|religious rites and when things|own evil deeds turned  |the dark quarter,     |
|go wrong or when they meet with|upon us for looking to |which means not to    |
|obstacles or sicknesses.       |the dark side for help.|engage in non-dharma, |
|Sometimes, even after the pujas|                       |and should do things  |
|are done, things don’t improve |                       |according to the      |
|but in fact things may even get|                       |dharma.               |
|worse. Then it is really       |                       |                      |
|possible at that time to       |                       |                      |
|develop wrong views thinking   |                       |                      |
|that all these pujas are just  |                       |                      |
|rubbish and they do not work   |                       |                      |
|and is not true.               |                       |                      |
|The prayers to the Three Jewels|Ripening effect is due |I shall rely on the   |
|concerning the affairs of this |to in the past, we did |Three Jewels alone    |
|life may not materialize.      |not have the real      |                      |
|                               |conviction or          |                      |
|                               |single-pointed trust in|                      |
|                               |the Buddha, Dharma and |                      |
|                               |Sangha.                |                      |
|                               |It could be that in the|                      |
|                               |past life, or even in  |                      |
|                               |this life, we don’t    |                      |
|                               |have much conviction of|                      |
|                               |trust and belief in    |                      |
|                               |Buddha’s speech or     |                      |
|                               |words.                 |                      |

