Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson06.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.888880
================================================================================


Verse 1
When the peacocks roam the jungle of virulent poison, the flocks take no
delight in gardens of medicinal plants, no matter how beautiful they may
be, for peacocks thrive on the essence of virulent poison.
Verse2
Similarly, when the heroes roam the jungle of cyclic existence, they do not
become attached to the garden of happiness and prosperity, no matter how
beautiful it may be, for heroes thrive in the jungle of suffering.
It is said that peacocks are not interested in the fruits and beautiful
flowers that can be found in the garden. But rather, they look for
poisonous plants and take delight in it. In fact, they extract poison from
the plant and thrive on it. It is said that when the peacocks ingest
poison, the poison helps them to look more beautiful and have more splendid
body. The point is that the peacocks are able to thrive on poison because
they can use the poison as the condition for them to become more beautiful
and more attractive. Because they know how to do it, therefore they ingest
the poison voluntarily and happily.
The heroes are those who work for the happiness of sentient beings and for
the welfare of others. In this context here, the heroes are the
bodhisattvas.
“When the heroes roam the jungle of cyclic existence” – Here the jungle is
analogous of the three poisons: ignorance, anger and attachment. It is very
dark in the jungle and one can’t see anything. Likewise, the jungle of
cyclic existence is enveloped by the darkness of the three poisons.
When the bodhisattvas roam the jungle of cyclic existence, they are never
attached to the samsaric perfections no matter how beautiful or how good
they appear to be because they know fully the faults and disadvantages of
cyclic existence. The bodhisattvas also know what is suffering and how
samsaric suffering arises. So they are like the peacocks which are not
interested in beautiful gardens, the bodhisattvas are not interested in the
garden of happiness and prosperity of cyclic existence.
It is said that the bodhisattvas voluntarily accept the suffering and
difficulties that they face while abiding in samsaric abode. They are able
to do that because they know how to use those difficulties and suffering to
enhance their practice of the bodhisattvas’ deeds, just as the peacocks
which know how to thrive on the poison to enhance their looks.
Verse 3
Therefore, it is due to cowardice that persons avidly pursue their own
happiness and so come to suffer; and it is due to heroism that
bodhisattvas, willingly taking the suffering of others onto themselves, are
always happy.
If one does not voluntarily accept suffering of samsara but just follows
the self-cherishing attitude and becomes negative due to some small
difficulties, and become so easily excited by just a small samsaric
happiness, then such people will face a lot of problems. Such persons are
following their self-cherishing attitude and running after the happiness of
this life. In so doing, they bring about suffering for themselves in this
life. Not just this life, they will also bring about suffering in all their
future lives to come.
Whereas the heroes, the bodhisattvas, willingly and voluntarily accept and
take on the suffering onto themselves, it is said that they will be happy
in this life and also in all their future lives.
The first half of verse 3 is saying that those ordinary people who out of
their self-cherishing attitude looking for their own happiness and become
attached just to the happiness of this life alone. Such people will not
just suffer in this life but also in all their future lives. Whereas those
who voluntarily take on suffering onto themselves and cherishing others
will become happy in this life and in all their future lives.
Verse 4
Now here, desire is like a jungle of virulent poison: the hero, like the
peacock, masters it; the coward, like the crow, perishes.
We are talking about the practices of a person of great capacity. For the
person of the great capacity, they are able to utilize the challenges in
the difficult situations and some afflictions as an aid to aid their path
to enlightenment. They are able to bring them into the path, so to speak.
This is what a person of great capacity can do. But before one can even
start to train in such a practice, one must have thoroughly train one’s
mind in the practices of a person of small and middling capacity.
The teachings state very clearly that one must have train one’s mind well
in the practices of a person of small and middling capacity before one is
even qualified to start in training one’s mind in the practices like the
ones mentioned here - utilizing the challenges on the path and bringing
them onto the path, and utilizing the afflictions and bringing them onto
the path.
In the Mahayana Paramitayana (Perfection Vehicle), the bodhisattva
superiors are allowed to use some afflictions as an aid to benefit sentient
beings. Then in Mahayana Tantra, those practitioners can take the
afflictions as the path to enlightenment. So in Mahayana Tantra, not only
afflictions are taken as an aid to benefit sentient beings, but rather one
can take afflictions as the path.
In verse 4, “desire”, dod chags in Tibetan, that is specifically mentioned
here is a kind of sensual desire (attachment). In Mahayana Tantra,
afflictions such as attachment (desire) can be taken as the path.
Affliction such as desire (attachment) is something that arises so easily
in everybody’s mind. It is very difficult even to recognize that there is
actually desire in the mind. Although it rises very easily, it is difficult
to really know that desire has manifest very strongly in the mind.
We can get attached to almost everything, even something that is fairly
insignificant like a cup of tea. With regards to a cup of tea, there are so
many types of attachment. For the same cup of tea, there is an attachment
to the taste for the tea, there is also an attachment for the smell of the
tea, and also perhaps there is an attachment to the looks of the tea. So
even for something pretty insignificant like a cup of tea, there are so
many forms of desire grasping at that tea. So we can get attached to almost
anything. The object of attachment could be a person or it could be
inanimate object. Whatever the object of attachment may be, the thing is
that attachment arises so easily.
What you think about the tea? There are five sense objects, and the cup of
tea does possess these five qualities - form, sound, smell, taste and touch-
 so I guess we can be attached to how the tea looks like, how the tea taste
like, how the tea smells like and how the tea feels like such as the
softness or the hardness of the tea. Then what about the sound?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Any sound? Teh tarik? I don’t know anybody
attached to teh tarik. But not really the sound isn’t it. You are attached
to how they do the pulling of the tea. Not to the sound. But I noticed in
China when I was in the Tibet trip, they sell about 20-30 different types
of tea in the tea shop. Then each time, they said this is good tea and they
teach how to drink the tea in a small cup. Each tea they drank, they make
different noise from the mouth. They said you must drink this tea with this
kind of sound, so you get a better taste. So you have to make all sort of
noise. I think that time many of you went there? I don’t know.
Student (respond): Sichuan.
Khen Rinpoche: Sichuan? Ya, somewhere there. So it’s interesting how they
sell the tea.
Desire (attachment) arises very easily and it is very difficult to really
know what desire is. Here desire is likened to poison. I don’t know how the
example goes. Maybe there are some kinds of poisons that are easily
produced.
The point is that desire here is likened to a jungle of virulent poison
which arises easily and strongly in many forms.
The heroes are like the peacocks which can master the poison. Within the
bodhisattvas, mainly the bodhisattva superiors are the ones who can use
attachment (desire).
If you are speaking from the tantric perspective, these great heroes are
the ones who can utilize attachments as the path.
If you are speaking from the perspective of Mahayana sutra, the bodhisattva
superiors are the ones who can use attachment as an aid to benefit sentient
beings.
It is only those heroes or great bodhisattvas who have completely forsaken
themselves, working for others and only immersed in cherishing others can
use attachment as an aid to benefit sentient beings. Whereas if people who
are just concern about their own welfare, who have not forsaken themselves
and do not cherish others completely try to use attachment like the
bodhisattvas, then they cut the very life of their own liberation from
samsara. Not only that, they will fall into the lower realms. So such
ordinary people who want to use desire are just like the crows die when
they eat the poison; unlike the peacocks which are able to thrive on poison
that makes them more beautiful and splendid. That is why the following
verse says:
Verse 5
How can persons concerned only with their own desires master this poison?
If they involve themselves in the other afflictions as well, it will cost
them their chance for emancipation, just like the crow.
Verse 6
Thus the bodhisattva roams like the peacock in the forest of cyclic
existence, converting the afflictions, which are like a jungle of virulent
poisons, into an elixir. Willingly embracing the afflictions, the hero
shall conquer the poison.
The great beings, the mahasattva, are like peacocks be in the samsara and
at the same time utilizing afflictions such as desire as an aid for their
path to enlightenment. They can utilize the afflictions as the path.
When we are faced with samsaric perfections such as enjoyments, having lots
of wealth and possessions or live in a nice place, whatever it may be, our
usual reaction is that we are immediately attached. But these great beings,
the bodhisattvas, are not attached no matter how wonderful the samsaric
perfections that they encounter. Let’s say that even they become attached
to these samsaric perfections, but because of who they are, they are able
to utilize all these opportunities as the means to benefit sentient beings
and as a means to achieve enlightenment with the attitude “I must achieve
enlightenment for sentient beings. I’m going to utilize these things.” As
such, they are able to transform their enjoyment into the condition for
enlightenment. As such, these great beings willingly embrace the
afflictions and conquer the poison.
We all need to understand and see the reason why it is an absolute
necessity to train the mind in the practices of the person of small
capacity and middling capacity prior to training in the practices of the
person of great capacity. The point is prior to attempt to do anything
Mahayana.
You heard of renunciation which is the determination to be free.
Essentially, in the practices of the person of middling capacity, the focus
is on developing renunciation, the determination to be free. In order to
generate renunciation, one must know thoroughly in detail of the Four Noble
Truths; starting with true suffering and true origin. You need to know in
detail what exactly true suffering is and what exactly true origin of
suffering is. When we say we want to renounce and be free, what is it that
we want to give up? Essentially, we need to give up true origin. We need to
know comprehensively what exactly is true suffering and true origin. It is
only on this basis that we develop the wish to abandon them and distance
ourselves from them. It is only then we will come to develop the wish to
achieve the peace (nirvana) which is essentially the pacification of true
suffering and true origins of suffering.
What is renunciation or the determination to be free? It is essentially
that mind that is determined to be free from true suffering and true origin
and then to achieve a peace that is a pacification of those two (true
suffering and true origin). Renunciation or the determination to be free is
a very much emphasized in the teachings. We need very strong renunciation
before we can go on to do any other practice. For it is mentioned in the
Lam Rim (The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment) that our attitude of
renunciation should be even stronger than someone who very much want to
escape from a house that is completely on fire. Or our attitude of
renunciation, the determination to be free from true suffering and true
origin, should be at least stronger than a prisoner who detest being in
prison and just wants to get out of prison. Until we think over and over
again to develop this renunciation, the determination to be free. We first
must be disgusted with true origin and true suffering. The disgust must be
very strong as if we just don’t want to have anything to do with true
suffering and true origin. If there is no strong disgust and dislike for
true suffering and true origin, then we will not have interest to be free
from them. Just like one is being stuck in a middle of a burning house or
being stuck in a prison cell, and if one has no dislike for being in the
middle of a burning house or has no dislike for being in prison, then one
can never develop the wish to be free from those situations.
If we don’t have a good recognition and an understanding of true suffering
and true origin, and if our disgust and dislike for our true suffering and
our true origin is just like that, then our wish to achieve liberation from
those two will also be just liked that.

If we don’t have real disgust and dislike for true suffering and true
origins, then our wish for freedom for liberation is also very weak and
would be just like that. Since our wish for liberation is like that and is
very weak then our so-called practice to achieve liberation from samsara
would be just mere words and just talk only. If we do not even have that
real wish and effort to free ourselves from true suffering and true origin,
we can’t even do it for ourselves then how is it really possible that we
can develop real compassion for others who are suffering in samsara. If we
cannot wish it for ourselves then even if we think about how poor their
suffering in samsara “I have compassion, I want to liberate them”, how
would it arise? If there is no real renunciation, there is no room
whatsoever for real compassion especially great compassion. If there is no
real great compassion then it is impossible to develop the real bodhicitta,
the uncontrived, the spontaneous real feelings “I will achieve
enlightenment for sentient beings”. It is impossible for that thought to
ever arise.
From this, you can see why it is absolutely necessary to first train the
mind in the practices of a person of middling capacity even before trying
to do any Mahayana practice. If the mind is not well trained in the
practice of a person of middling capacity, if there is no renunciation,
there is no way we can have real compassion; especially great compassion.
Without great compassion, there is no hope whatsoever of developing the
uncontrived bodhicitta. Without this actual realization of uncontrived
bodhicitta, we will not even enter into the ranks of the Mahayana. We
cannot even be considered as a Mahayanist. From this, we can see it is
absolutely necessary to train the mind in the practices of a person of
middling capacity and develop the realization of renunciation.
Bodhisattvas do not like samsara at all. The bodhisattvas’ disenchantment
with samsara is greater than the disenchantment that is in the minds of the
people on the Hinayana path. We must understand that the bodhisattvas’
disenchantment with samsara and their wish to be freed from samsara is so
much greater even than the Hearers and Solitary realizers.
When we looked at the Lamrim Chen Mo (The Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment) the great treatise by Lama Tsongkhapa, there was a qualm
pertaining to this. Somebody raised that qualm by saying bodhisattvas do
not generate the disenchantment for cyclic existence. Why? If the
bodhisattvas meditate on renunciation and then generate disenchantment for
samsara, they will be liked the Hearers and Solitary Realizers falling into
the extreme of peace.
If they generate disenchantment with cyclic existence then they will not
take rebirth in cyclic existence to benefit sentient beings. So it is
actually an obstacle for bodhisattva. Therefore, bodhisattvas should not
meditate on renunciation and should not generate disenchantment.
The answer to this qualm is that it is not that the bodhisattvas do not
have renunciation for taking rebirth in samsara due to karma and
afflictions. In fact, they do have fear of taking rebirth in cyclic
existence due to karma and afflictions. They don’t like it. They want to
renounce that. The bodhisattvas do take rebirth in cyclic existence, and
here we are talking primarily of the bodhisattva superiors. The bodhisattva
superiors take rebirth in cyclic existence willingly. It is the choice that
they made. They made the choice out of compassion. They take rebirth due to
the power of their prayers. The bodhisattva superiors do not take rebirth
in samsara due to karma and afflictions. They take rebirth in samsara due
to the power of their prayers and compassion.
The bodhisattva superiors are completely disenchanted with taking rebirth
in samsara due to karma and afflictions. That is for sure. But they still
take rebirth in samsara. They have a choice because they have control. They
do so due to their prayers and their compassion. They are definitely
disenchanted with taking rebirth in samsara due to karma and afflictions
because if it is a rebirth due to karma and afflictions, it is definitely
suffering.
How can you really of benefit to others when you are suffering? If you take
rebirth in samsara due to karma and afflictions, you yourself are suffering
and you yourself do not even achieve your own goal. If you cannot even
achieve your own purpose and your own goal, how can you be of any real
benefit to others?
The bodhisattva superiors understand that a rebirth in samsara due to karma
and afflictions is an impediment to helping others. If you under the
control of karma and afflictions and take rebirth due to that, that mean
you cannot even take care of yourself, then how can you do anything
effective for others?
The bodhisattvas are disenchanted with taking rebirth in samsara due to
karma and afflictions. That is one essential point to understand. It is
said that the bodhisattva superiors can utilize afflictions such as desire
as an aid to benefit sentient beings.
Bodhisattva superiors who are of the definite lineage do not focus so much
on abandoning afflictions like desire.
They do not focus at it and see that as the thing of their primary goal of
their life “My main practice is to take this desire and abandon it.” They
don’t look at desire like that.
It is mentioned in the sutra that those who have generated bodhicitta and
are engaged in benefitting sentient beings do not abandoned all the
afflictions. I am just stating the scriptural authority for the statement
which I have made earlier that desire is not the main object of abandonment
of the bodhisattva superiors of the definite lineage. There are scriptural
citations and there are sources in the Buddha’s words in this particular
sutra and also in the Arya Vimuktisena’s explanation on the Perfection of
Wisdom Sutra in Twenty Thousand Verses that the bodhisattvas’ main object
of abandonment is the apprehension of true existence. These bodhisattvas
are primarily interested in benefitting sentient beings in samsara. The
bodhisattvas’ main goal is to benefit the sentient beings as such they do
not abandon the attachment (desire) of the three realms: the desire realms,
form and formless realms. The point is that attachment is not the main
object of abandonment. The bodhisattvas do not focus so much on abandoning
the attachment of the desire realms, attachment of the form realms because
such form of attachment can be utilized by these great beings to benefit
others. It is mentioned in the teaching that such great beings can utilize
attachment and to take rebirth as a universal monarch, wheel turning king,
who has controlled over the particular world system. They are called
princes and can father many children to benefit sentient beings.
If you add something medicinal into the poison, this will make the poison
less deadly, it even could be beneficial.
So, the desire in the continuum of the bodhisattvas is something like that.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): The idea is that in most of the medicine, they
add some kind of poison inside there. Actually if you just eat the poison
directly, it doesn’t cure your sickness. They mix with something then the
poison becomes not so powerful. They have a lot of this in Tibetan
medicine. Poison plant is put inside and at the same time they put a lot of
different others medicine plants. These combined together, and if you take
it, you are able to cure it. The poison doesn’t harm you.
The arhats have abandoned the afflictions. Because they don’t have
afflictions, they can never be harmed by the afflictions. The bodhisattva
superiors have the similar experience. Many bodhisattva superiors still
have afflictions in their minds but their afflictions do not harmed them as
if they did not have the afflictions. The bodhisattva superiors cannot be
harmed by their afflictions even though some of them still possess
afflictions. Because they cannot be harmed by those afflictions, as such
they are able to use some of these afflictions as an act to benefit
sentient beings. Because the bodhisattva superiors cannot be harmed by
their afflictions such as desire, they are able to use those afflictions as
an aid to benefit sentient beings.
Ordinary beings are not able to do that, in particular those who have the
self-cherishing. Those who focus on their own welfare alone are never able
to use afflictions to benefit others. Ordinary beings are beings who take
rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions. As long as one
has not abandoned self-cherishing, as long as there is self-cherishing in
the mind, one is never in the position of using afflictions as an aid to
benefit sentient beings. That is reason why the main reason for Hearers and
Solitary Realizers is to abandon the afflictions. Their main practice is
destroying the afflictions.
As long as there is self-cherishing, the afflictions can harm us. As such,
the Hearers and Solitary Realizers primarily focus on abandoning the
afflictions. Whereas bodhisattvas have no self-cherishing, they have
abandoned self-cherishing. Not only has that, the bodhisattvas looked at
all afflictions as faults.
The bodhisattvas regard all afflictions as faults but some bodhisattvas can
use afflictions such as desire as an aid to benefit sentient beings.
Because they don’t have self-cherishing so the potential harm that they can
receive from their own afflictions is much lower. In particular, when we
talk about the bodhisattva superiors, bodhisattva superiors cannot be
harmed by their afflictions. Some bodhisattvas still have afflictions and
they are not fully abandoned them, but nevertheless, their afflictions
cannot harm them. As such, you will find it in the teachings, saying that
the bodhisattva superiors happily enter into samsara to accomplish the
welfare of others. They do it happily, willingly, and by choice for the
benefit of sentient beings. As such, these bodhisattva superiors are said
to not fear samsara.
There are different ways in which one enters into samsara. One takes
rebirth in samsara depending on who you are.
    • Ordinary beings take rebirth in cyclic existence due to the power of
      karma and afflictions.
    • Bodhisattva superiors take rebirth in cyclic existence due to the
      power of prayers and compassion.
    • Ordinary bodhisattvas who are in the Pureland are said that they take
      rebirth in samsara also due to the power of prayers.
    • Then the bodhisattvas abiding in the pure grounds, in the 8th, 9th and
      10th grounds, take rebirth due to the level of the predisposition of
      ignorance and uncontaminated karma.
The verses 1 to 6 are kind of like the general explanations. The actual
body of the text, the main subject, starts from verse 7.
Q&A
Student 1: How can a person of small and medium capacity use afflictions to
develop renunciations and at the same time the teaching is telling us to
train the mind to abandon afflictions?
Ven Gyurme: We never say that.
Student 1: Is fear an affliction?
Khen Rinpoche: In essence, it is not an affliction. The fear in this
context is not an affliction. Disenchantment is not an affliction.
Student 1: Can you explain how fear in one context is an affliction and in
a different context, it is not an affliction?
Khen Rinpcohe: As for fear, let’s say is the fear of suffering in cyclic
existence. The bodhisattvas have it, and the Solitary Realizers have it.
Student 1: The conflict is to do with the ordinary sentient beings because
in one hand we are supposed to abandon afflictions and one hand we are
supposed to use fear. There seems to be a contradiction.
Khen Rinpoche: First you must understand what is the fear of taking rebirth
in samsara due to karma and afflictions?  As for the fear of taking rebirth
in samsara due to karma and afflictions, that kind of fear is possessed by
Hearers, Solitary realizers, and bodhisattvas. When you hear statements
like bodhisattvas are not afraid of taking rebirth in cyclic existence,
this means that they take rebirth in cyclic existence motivated by
compassion. They do it willingly by choice due to the power of prayers.
That statement does not mean that the bodhisattvas are not afraid of taking
rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions. In fact, they
are. Definitely all bodhisattvas are afraid of taking rebirth in cyclic
existence due to karma and afflictions.
It is not that we go around purposefully cultivating fear and making
ourselves to be afraid. That is not the point. We do cultivate fear of
samsara and the fear of lower realms suffering. But it is not as if that is
the practice to develop fear. Fear has to be abandoned one day. But the
point here is “What do we fear?” Or is there a point or purpose in
cultivating that fear? It is not that we are purposely focusing of
cultivating the fear. You must know what the fear is and what the problem
is.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I am answering your question or not?
Student 2: Can ordinary bodhisattvas take rebirth in samsara and are they
harmed by afflictions?
Khen Rinpcohe (in English): I think so.
Khen Rinpoche: Ordinary bodhisattvas are bodhisattvas who are ordinary
beings. Ordinary beings are those who take rebirths in cyclic existence due
to the force of karma and afflictions. As such ordinary bodhisattvas take
rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions.
Student 2: They do not have self-cherishing so they shouldn’t be harmed by
afflictions.
Ven Gyurme: You are saying afflictions don’t harm?
Student 2: (Inaudible)
Ven Gyurme: Are you saying arhats are harmed by self-cherishing?
Student 2: (Inaudible)
Ven Gyurme: If it is not harmful then there is no need to abandon? Arhats
are harmed by self-cherishing, what do you think?
Student 2:  (Inaudible)
Ven Gyurme: But you said that bodhisattvas are not harmed by afflictions
because they have abandoned self-cherishing?
Khen Rinpoche: Student 2’s question next time, I don’t have time.

