Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson19.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.426076
================================================================================


Student 1: In lesson 17, it was mentioned that when we feel uncomfortable
when we listen to the teachings on Mahayana mind training about the faults
about our self cherishing, it is a sign that the blessings of the lama have
entered our hearts. The qualm is that when we are driven by our ego, and
when somebody points out about our faults and our mistakes, there is a
feeling of emotional discomfort and mental unhappiness and that is a sign
that we have a big ego. It is not really a sign that the blessings of the
lama have entered our hearts. Can Khen Rinpoche please clarify the meaning
of having received the lama’s blessings? Because I take the definition of
having received the lama’s blessings when the state of our mind has
improved, the frequency of our afflictions, the intensity of our
afflictions and the duration of our afflictions are reduced.
Khen Rinpoche: The word for blessing in Tibetan is “jin lab” and when
translated in English, it is blessing. But the Tibetan word has the
connotation of change. Hence, to receive blessing means that you have made
some progress internally and your mind has transformed for the better. So,
that positive transformation that has occurred is a blessing.
One of the factors that make it possible for a positive change in our mind
is the very nature of mind itself. You have heard many times how our minds
are in the nature of clear light. That is a fact. That is the nature of the
mind itself which is just reality. The nature of our mind being clear light
is the basis for change. It is that which allows change to happen. Having
said that, just having buddha nature itself is not sufficient for change to
happen.  You need that because that is the basis that allows for
transformation.  But having that alone doesn’t necessarily mean the mind
will change for the better. So we must meet with the different conditions
for change to happen. In the study of the working of consciousness of mind,
we have learned that for the generation of a particular type of mind or any
mind, there must be the coming together of the objective condition, the
empowering condition and also the immediately preceding condition.
In the presentation of mind and awareness, it is explained of how the
production of a particular kind of consciousness is dependent on coming
together of few conditions. For example, in order for an eye consciousness
apprehending an object e.g. blue to arise, you need the objective
condition, the empowering condition and also the immediately preceding
condition. In this case, you need the particular sense power and also need
a previous moment of consciousness which is called the immediately
preceding condition. My point is that in order for a particular mental
event, cognition, to manifest, many conditions must come together. As such,
in order for a virtuous mind to arise, the conditions that are necessary
for the manifesting of that virtuous state of mind must come together.
Without which the virtuous state of mind will not arise.
It is said that every single virtuous thought that arises in the continuum
of sentient being is the enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body.
Whenever we develop a virtuous thought, that means we have been engaged by
the enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body.  We have received the
blessings of the enlighten activity of the wisdom truth body. If all the
virtuous thoughts in the continuum of sentient beings are the blessings of
the wisdom truth body, then whenever a virtuous thought arises in us, of
the many conditions for the arising of that virtuous thought, what is the
empowering condition for that virtuous thought? The empowering condition is
the wisdom truth body.
Of what you have just asked, what I said before was never meant to mean
that one receives the blessings when your mind is disturbed by others
pointing out your faults. So when somebody points out your fault and you
are disturbed, that disturbance is not blessing. That is not what I meant.
We usually get upset when somebody criticizes us or points out our fault.
The more they do it, the more angry and more upset we get. If we get more
and more angry, that is not receiving blessings. Otherwise, every day we
will be receiving blessings. So that is not the meaning.
However, if as a result of somebody pointing out our faults, and in the
process even if we become very uncomfortable or don’t feel good or even
feel upset but we just sit down and reflect on it, and then come to realize
that uncomfortable feeling or that unhappiness that we feel as a result of
somebody criticizing us is actually the manifestation of our self-
cherishing and recognize that self-cherishing is the source of our
problems, then that recognition is a blessing. When we realized and
acknowledge that, then that is blessing.
Anyway, it is impossible for us to receive criticisms if we hadn’t created
the cause some time in the past. It is not possible to meet with the result
of an action that one did not do. That is impossible. With that as the
backdrop, then when somebody criticizes us, and we are cognizant of the
main cause of that criticism in that we must have done something in the
past that created the cause, the karma, therefore now we are receiving the
criticism. As a result of knowing that, we are able to stay calm and relax
and not be affected, as we know there is no one else to blame. That state
of the calm mind that enables us to stay composed and undisturbed is
blessing.
Through thinking about it, we can really see for ourselves from the bottom
of our heart that the main cause of all our unhappiness and problems lies
within us and not outside of us. It is our self-cherishing attitude that is
the root and the source of all our problems and sufferings. The person who
has that kind of understanding from the heart realizes the main cause of
suffering does not lie outside them but within them. As such, when such a
person experiences criticisms from others, they would not put the blame on
somebody outside because they realize that ultimately the source lies
within them. They don’t see the need or feel any need to retaliate and put
the blame outside.  They don’t feel uncomfortable and upset with the person
out there because they recognize that they are at fault. That is blessing.
Therefore, for the Mahayana mind training here, first it is extremely
important to realize that our self-cherishing is the source and the root of
the many problems. That is the very first essential step to realize.
The discussions and all the verses that we had covered so far are basically
telling us the many faults of our self-cherishing attitude. Because of our
self-cherishing attitude, we experience this problem, that problem, this
unhappiness and so forth. Then come the day and time when we can really
feel from our heart that indeed our self cherishing is the main
troublemaker and the real source of our unhappiness, I think that would be
the greatest blessing.
If we really can see, feel and realize from our heart that our self-
cherishing attitude is indeed the source of many of our problems and
difficulties, and if we are also cognizant of karma, then we will not meet
with the result of an action that we did not do. With that kind of
understanding, then whatever difficulties that we generally experiences
that are considered as unpleasant; such as people criticizing or scolding
us, the person who has realized the faults of their own self-cherishing and
also realized karma would always be able to stay very peaceful. As they
have really understood and accepted that are really their own fault and not
somebody else’s fault, then no matter whatever criticisms or scolding that
they are experiencing, they would be very calm and would not get disturbed.
Furthermore, they can even think “That is wonderful. This is purifying my
negativities”. This will happens if we are able to have that kind of
understanding.
Those people who really realize that their self-cherishing is the source of
all their problems, then no matter what befalls on them, as mentioned in
the guru puja:
“Even if all the undesirable sufferings befall on me like rain, may I be
able to see this as the cause for purifying my negativities. As such,
please grant me blessings to transform all adverse conditions into the path
to enlightenment”.
The person who really realizes that their own self-cherishing is the
sources of all their problems will able to live their lives with that kind
of views that is mentioned in the particular verse in guru puja. So every
undesirable thing that happens to them, they are able to use those adverse
conditions as the means for achieving enlightenment. In fact for them, the
more difficulties mean more blessings for that person.
Student 2: To clear the whole confusion about self-cherishing, can I
confirm that the text we are reading at the moment is attacking on self-
cherishing; not self-grasping. The emphasis in this text is to stamp our
self-cherishing; not self-grasping. So that is the first thing I want to
clarify. Then my question is: Where does self-cherishing come from? Does it
come from self grasping? Or does it come from the view of the transitory
collection which perceives the individual self as substantially existent.
In one lesson you mentioned that self-cherishing is the master and self-
grasping is the slave but it is reverse in some text.
Khen Rinpoche: I believe I have actually addressed the issue about the
relationship between self-cherishing and self-grasping. In the context of
this particular text that we are looking, the subject matter is training
the mind to generate bodhicitta (the mind of enlightenment) and, in
particular, training the mind to develop bodhicitta through exchanging self
and other. The greatest impediment or obstacle to the generation of
bodhicitta is self-cherishing. Since self cherishing is the greatest
obstacle to the generation of bodhicitta, first we must understand all the
faults of self-cherishing. Therefore, in this text, there is so much
emphasis on discussing the various faults of self-cherishing which bring
all the problems to us.
As I have said before, self-cherishing and self-grasping are not the same.
They are not the same mind, and they are of different minds.
How is self-cherishing overcome? It is overcome through generating
bodhicitta.
How is self-grasping is overcome? It is overcome by the wisdom realizing
selflessness.
In the commentaries, you will find the words of the master and the slave
being used. Of the two – self-cherishing and self-grasping, who is the
master and who is the slave? Sometimes self-cherishing is the boss, and
sometimes it is said that self-grasping is the boss. So far, based on this
particular commentary which I am using, self-cherishing is said to be the
master (the boss) and self-grasping is like the slave doing the bidding of
the self cherishing. But later on you will notice a change as there is this
discussion on how self-grasping is like the master and the self-cherishing
is like the slave.
When we think about it from our own experience, we will find that we have
both possibilities. There are times whereby our self-rasping is the boss
(the master) and the self-cherishing just follows the order of self
grasping. But there are times whereby our self-cherishing is the boss. So
in our minds have both, we have everything. Our self-cherishing and self-
grasping take turns to be prime minister depending on the election result.
I did explain to you that, in general, it is easier if we say that the boss
is the self-grasping. It is said that every single problem that we
experience, basically our entire samsara has its roots in our ignorance.
Ignorance is self-grasping. Self-grasping is ignorance. As such, we can say
that our self-cherishing comes into being or arises in dependence on our
self-grasping.
Whether we say self-grasping, the view of the transitory collection, or
ignorance, it comes down to the same thing. They are not exactly the same
thing. They are not one. They are different. At the end the meaning comes
down to the same thing.
What is the view of the transitory collection? It is the mind which
apprehends the “I” in one’s continuum. Basically one’s own “I”, the person
included in one’s continuum, means oneself, not the person in somebody
else’s continuum. So the view of the transitory collection is the mind
which apprehends the person included in one’s continuum as existing by way
of its own character or existing inherently. So that is the view of the
transitory collection. This is the root of our own samsara. This is self-
grasping.
If you want to talk about ignorance being the root of our own samara, this
is called ignorance. The meaning comes down to that. We are not saying that
ignorance is necessarily the view of the transitory collection. If you want
to talk about the root of cyclic existence, it is ignorance, in particular
it is the self-grasping, and in particular, it is the view of the
transitory collection, which is the mind apprehending the person or “I” in
one’s continuum, to be existing by way of its own character.
Why do we say that they are not the same thing but their meaning come down
to the same thing?
First, we must understand what is the view of the transitory collection? It
is the mind which apprehends the person included in one’s continuum to be
existing by way of its own character, exists truly, exists inherently. The
view of the transitory collection is necessarily self grasping. But self
grasping, grasping at the self, is not necessarily the view of the
transitory collection.

Wheel- Weapon Mind Training
Verse 79
When someone seeks my assistance, I ignore him and secretly cause him harm.
When someone agrees with me, I won’t concur, but seek quarrels even at a
distance. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false
construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
There are times when the people whom we usually respect like our teachers,
our parents and so forth offer us good advice to help us but we don’t pay
attention to them. Not only we do not pay attention, sometimes we act in
opposite to what they advise us.
There are also times when people respect us and show us respect. When this
happens, all the more we should behave in an appropriate way towards those
who accord us such respect.  But sometimes we don’t do that at all. Not
only we do not show respect in return, we may even criticize the person and
expose or point out his faults.
Many a time people respect us but somehow we are unable to show respect to
that person mainly because of pride. So if we analyze again, our pride
comes from our self-cherishing. The point is it all comes back to our self-
cherishing.
Verse 80
I do not appreciate advice and I’m always difficult to be with. Many things
offend me and my clinging is always strong. Roar and thunder on the head of
the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the
butcher, the enemy, Ego!
What is mentioning in the teaching is that whatever things they do to make
us happy or to please us, but somehow we still feel uncomfortable and don’t
accept that.
We may be easily offended. All it takes is for somebody to point out a
small little fault that we have then we become very uncomfortable and get
offended easily. There are also people who are being offended hold grudges
in their heart and have a lot of resentment. Again this is doing of our own
self-cherishing.
The stronger our self-cherishing, the more difficulties we experience. The
stronger our self-cherishing, the more difficult we find it to put up with
difficulty things or situations. Perhaps we may have felt offended when
somebody says that we have lots of white hair or we have lots of wrinkles.
These are the examples that we get offended. We get offended because we
have self-cherishing. If it is white hair, it is white hair. If it is
wrinkle it is wrinkle. That is fact. Really there is nothing to be upset
about. But we are like that. If somebody will to tell you are fat, you will
be offended. But if somebody says you are thin, but somehow you are not
offended.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): I want to be fat, but I tried so much efforts
but it never happened.
Those who want to be fat remain thin, and those want to be thin always
remaining fat. This happens to all of us. We do take offend for different
things, somehow there are things that we take offend fairly easily. So, we
just have to be aware of that and try not to be like that and also not to
hold grudges for long time. In fact, there are people who bear grudges in
their mind for their entire life and are unwilling to let go even at the
time of death. They even make prayer “When I die, I want to come back and
get you”. I have personally seen this for myself. But anyway, it happened
to us. So, we just have to try let it go and forget about it. There is no
profit to begin with because if we hold it, we create negativities. The
thing is that we make ourselves unhappy.
Verse 81
I exalt myself above the high and low and consider holy people my enemies.
Because my lust is great, I energetically pursue young people. Roar and
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike
at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme’s translation:
I hold myself above both the high and low and consider holy people my
enemies. Because my longing desire (attachment) is great, I energetically
pursue young people. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false
construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
When we see people who have studied the teachings well, who are practicing
well who are teaching the dharma well, and also who are listening,
learning, studying the dharma well, actually we should feel happy for them
and rejoice. But somehow, we don’t. Instead of rejoicing, we find fault and
criticize them. It happened. If that happened, that is definitely motivated
by our self-cherishing. We must show respect to holy beings; instead of
criticizing or putting them down.
In this context, we can read it as having a lot of sexual desire or longing
desire. Pedophile is due to having very strong sexual desire. When people
who have partners and have committed to relationship but they may have
sexual relationship with people other than their partners.  All of these
are essentially the result of following self-cherishing.
Verse 82
Because my friendships are of short duration, I cast aside former
acquaintances. Because my new friends are many, I lay before them empty
promises of enjoyment. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false
construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!

One may have strong friendship with certain people and usually consider
them as close friend. Let’s say misfortune befalls on that friend, maybe he
becomes very sick, or suddenly has lots of problem in his life, or become
very poor. When close friend become like that, then one distance oneself
from him. Some people purposely avoid when their friends become poor or
sick or have lot of problem in their life for whatever reasons. They just
want to avoid and really distance from them.
There are people who are very fond of cultivating new relationship with
friends, and want to make a lot of friends. So, if you want to make a lot
of friends, then you have to put on a show by acting nicely, talk nicely,
or put on the best behavior. In particular, when people find out a
particular person is very rich or has lots of powers, he will put in more
efforts to be close to that person. In order to be close to that person,
then one has to do lots of things by talking nicely and behave nicely. As
before, all of this is just due to self-cherishing.
Verse 83
Having no precognition, I eagerly resort to lying and deprecation. Having
no compassion, I snatch away the confidence from others’ hearts. Roar and
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike
at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme’s of translation:
Having no clairvoyance, I eagerly resort to lying. Having no compassion, I
snatch away the confidence from others’ hearts. Roar and thunder on the
head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of
the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Some people give others the impression that they have clairvoyance and
welcome people to seek advice from them. Actually they don’t have
clairvoyance but they just give the impression as if they have
clairvoyance. People will come and ask about various things, what to do and
what not to do. As one has no clairvoyance, one is basically lying by
saying this and that and giving advices. Of course, some of the things that
that person says will be bound to be proven wrong. When he is proven wrong,
people will come back and say “Last time you say this but is not correct.”
Since that person has to cover himself, he then has to tell more lies by
saying “That didn’t happen to you is because of this and that.” There are
such people.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Last time one person went to consult someone. I
think that person is sick or something like that. That person said “Your
sickness came from eating too much meat” but the person himself is
vegetarian for life. Of course, the person has to immediately have to say
something. “Oh, I am not talking about this life. You eat too much meat in
the past life.” This person told me the story. Not I make up.
In short, there are people who lied about having clairvoyance and they tell
lie one after another in order to cover themselves. These are all the
results following the self-cherishing.
Verse 84
Having studied little, I wildly guess about everything. Since my religious
education is slight, I have wrong views about everything. Roar and thunder
on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the
heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Because of having heard very little of the teaching and having done very
little reflection, one is unable to make a firm stand or decisively make
the point when one engages in the dharma discussion with others or when
teaching the dharma. They always say “Maybe like this, maybe like that” and
just making wild guesses.
If one has no deep knowledge of the teachings, one hasn’t studied much and
has not much thought of things, then one neither have wealth of scriptural
sources nor understanding that is back up by many different reasoning. One
may deny what other says. For example, during the dharma discussion,
someone might say, “It is not like this but is like that because of this
reason and that reason and it is mentioned in the text”. Because of little
understanding and doesn’t know or haven’t seen the reasoning, one will just
say “No, it is not true. Cannot be like that.”
This is one of the many reasons behind the need for studying and reflecting
extensively on the teachings. When one’s learning is very little and hasn’t
thought much about the Buddhist teachings backup by reasoning and
scriptural sources, then there is higher or greater possibility of such a
person accumulating extremely heavy negative karma of abandoning the
dharma. Because one doesn’t have the broad overview of understanding the
entire Buddhadharma backup by scriptural sources and especially reasoning,
then when one hears something that doesn’t fit one’s mind one would think;
“How can it be?” “How can it be?” is not that bad, the bad thing is that if
one says “No way! It cannot be like that. The Buddha didn’t say this. This
is definitely not the Buddha’s scripture.” Such a person of little learning
and reflection really has high chances of creating such negative karma of
abandoning the dharma and also generating wrong views. Wrong views mean
actively denying. So people who have studied extensively and have thought
well of the teachings are very unlikely to have this kind of wrong view and
accumulate the karma of abandoning the dharma. Therefore, it is extremely
important to have the good understanding of the entire teachings of the
Buddha, both sutra and tantra. Within sutra, there are Hinayana and
Mahayana and on top of that is Tantra.
There are people who just knowing one vehicle say that Tantra and Mahayana
teaching are false and are not teaching of Buddha. In particular, if one
doesn’t study about Tantra, especially the defining characteristic of
Tantra which is the special features of Tantra, then onw would have a lot
of wrong view about Tantra. They think Tantra is into the weird stuff and
have lots of negative views about Buddhist Tantra.
There are many people who only know the Hinayana teachings about the
Hearers and Solitary Realizers, and they think that is the Buddha’s
teachings and nothing else. That is why they say that Mahayana is not the
Buddha’s teachings and put down the Mahayana. Likewise, there are people
who only know about both Hinayana and/or Mahayana sutra but don’t
understand what Buddhist’s Tantra is. Without investigation, they just
said, ‘How can this be taught by Buddha?’ and they just criticize. There
are many such people. If we gain an understanding of all the Buddha
teachings and at least have an overview, and we study as much as we can,
the chances of us having wrong views about the Buddha’s teachings, and the
chances of us accumulating this extremely heavy negative karma of
abandoning the dharma is much lesser. Again, this is one of the many
reasons for studying dharma extensively.
Verse 85
Habituated to attachment and aversion, I revile everyone opposed to me.
Habituated to envy, I slander and deprecate others. Roar and thunder on the
head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of
the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme’s translation:
Habituated to attachment and anger, I criticize and put down others.
Habituated to jealousy, I slander and deprecate others. Roar and thunder on
the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart
of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
[BP1 Module 6: ‘Habituated to attachment and aversion, I revile everyone
opposed to me’: We are very familiar with attachment and anger. We become
attached to our own side and develop aversion and anger towards the other
side. Because of this, we praise ourselves and we condemn the other side.
We say things like, ‘My side is perfect. Things are not perfect and not
right on the other side.’ In the same way, because we are very familiar
with envy or jealousy, when something good happens to other people, we find
it unbearable and because we find this unbearable, we slander others.
‘Slander,’ here refers to superimposition. E.g. we accuse someone of making
a mistake they did not make. Unable to stand other people’s good qualities,
we also deprecate them, denying they have such qualities and putting them
down.
Why is this happening? We can again trace this bad behavior to our self-
cherishing and self-grasping. To counter this, we should not praise
ourselves and we should not condemn the other side. We should not get
jealous when good things happen to other people and instead of not being
able to stand it, we should bear it and we should rejoice from our hearts,
saying, ‘How wonderful,’ and mean it.
Verse 86
Never studying, I despise the vast teaching. Never relying on a guru, I
revile religious instruction. Roar and thunder on the head of the
destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher,
the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme’s translation:
Never studying, I disregard the vast teaching. Never relying on a guru, I
criticize or put down the dharma. Roar and thunder on the head of the
destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher,
the enemy, Ego!
Some people who hold on to just a very small teaching of Buddha and think
that is the main thing. And by practicing the small little instruction, one
can then achieves realization and enlightenment. They say “You don’t need
anything else. Why you need to study all these? For what?  It is so
complicated and there is no need to study all these. This one is already
enough.”  These people then disregard the study and don’t see learning as
an important and a necessary thing.
There are those who are relatively smart, quick and intelligent people as
they can understand things fairly quickly easily. Because they can do it,
they say “There is no need to receive all these transmissions such as oral
transmission or the lineage of commentaries. Why you need to go and receive
all these lineages and transmission? They kind of look down on it and
disregard receiving all these.
It is extremely important to receive the blessing of the lineage, whether
it is the lineage of the oral transmission or lineage of the commentaries,
because these lineages have come down to the present time in an unbroken
form all the way from the Buddha. So, there is the blessing of this
continuation of the lineage. When we receive the lineages of oral
transmission and the lineages of the commentaries and because of the
blessing imbued in the lineage, that makes a big difference to our
actualizing the path and the realization. Actually it is considered to be
very important.
Mahayana Path of Accumulation is divided into three levels. When one
reaches the level of Mahayana great Path of Accumulation, one achieves the
meditative stabilization called the stream of the doctrine. It is said that
when one achieves that meditative stabilization called the stream of the
doctrine, one will remember all the oral transmissions and lineages of
commentaries and all the teachings that one has heard for many lifetimes.
I wonder whether there is a connection between remembering all the oral
transmissions and commentaries that one has received in the past when one
achieve the meditative stabilization of the stream of the doctrine on the
great Mahayana Path of Accumulation.
I wonder whether there is any connection with the blessing of the lineage.
It is important to receive the lineages whether it is the lineage of the
oral transmission or the lineages of the various types of commentaries and
so forth.  Because there is a blessing imbued in the lineage as there is
the continuation of the unbroken blessing, I personally just wonder whether
one is actually remember anything at that time if one has not received the
lineage of blessing. The point is that you can remember them because you
have received it, but is it possible to remember if one doesn’t receive it
before?
I think that there must be some significant or importance in receiving the
lineages whether it is the lineage of the oral transmission or the lineage
of the commentaries. You do hear of people saying why one want to go and
sit down there and listen and receive all these transmissions. I also heard
people saying this. Why do you go to this thing? What is the point? Perhaps
maybe, I think, there must be some significant. I guess maybe it has to do
with the blessing of the lineage.

