Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson11.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.928866
================================================================================


Student 1: Bodhisattvas are disenchanted with taking rebirth in cyclic
existence through karma and delusion.
But there are ordinary bodhisattvas who take rebirth through karma and
delusion. Under what circumstances does that happen?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Why you ask that question?
Student 1:  Curious, because I cannot find the answer.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You must have reason. Why wondering?
Student 1: Because there is a contradiction. Bodhisattvas are disenchanted
with taking rebirth through karma and delusion, but there are ordinary
bodhisattvas who take rebirth in that way. So there is a contradiction.
That is my qualm.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Anybody can answer? He thinks there is a
contradiction. Bodhisattvas already have renunciation, why they take
rebirth in samsara again due to karma and affliction?
Student 2:  They take rebirth because they have not realized emptiness
directly. That is why they still have the ignorance of the twelve links.
Does all ordinary bodhisattva go to pureland?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Student 1’s doubt is that bodhisattvas have
already renounce samsara, then why they still take rebirth in samsara?
Student 2:  I think the bodhisattva has even stronger compassion so he does
not primarily focus on realizing emptiness to be liberated but rather he
focus more on cultivating the bodhisattva path.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Are you saying therefore he has to take rebirth
in samsara due to karma and delusion? Is that your reason? So last sentence
should be like that: therefore the ordinary bodhisattva have to take
rebirth in samsara due to karma and delusion.
Student 2:  Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Your sentence doesn’t fit.
Khen Rinpoche: Does bodhisattva takes rebirth intentionally and through
choice by karma and delusions?
Student 2:  No.
Ven Gyurme: The consequence of your answer is that motivated on great
compassion he purposely takes rebirth due to karma and afflictions in
samsara because he wants to benefit sentient beings in samsara
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What Student 1 has asked is very simple
question but you must know how to answer. You must understand what he is
asking. He is asking ordinary bodhisattva already have renunciation but why
he takes rebirth in samsara due to karma and delusion? He thinks it is
contradictory.
Student 3:  I think because they still do not have total control over their
rebirth, so it is possible that they can still take rebirth. Just like we
all don’t like to get sick, but because we all have no control, we still
get sick. So I think similar to that. The ordinary bodhisattva still has
ignorance so they still will take uncontrollable rebirth.
Khen Rinpoche: If one has ignorance, does it necessarily follow that one
will take rebirth?
Student 3:  Not necessarily follow but it could happen.
Khen Rinpoche: You still have to answer why ordinary bodhisattvas still
takes rebirth due to karma and affliction?
Student 3:   Because they still have grasping.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You must know what you are saying. Just now you
said because they have ignorance.
Student 3:   Because they still have craving and grasping so at that time
of death, craving and grasping could still happen for them to ripen their
previous karma that they have created to take rebirth in samsara.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the reason for them having craving and grasping?
Student 3:   Because they have not overcome craving and grasping.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You are not answering the question. You are
repeating same thing.
Student 3:   I thought they still have the dependent link…
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Why they still have?
Student 3:  Because they still grasp on to true existence i.e. they still
have the apprehension of true existence. From there still can develop
craving and grasping.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you are saying “because he still has apprehension of
true existence therefore he have craving and grasping?
Student 3: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Is that a correct reason?
Student 3: I thought that is the cause that will cause the karma to be
ripened.
Khen Rinpoche: Is that the correct reason?
Student 3: I don’t know. I thought that is the reason.
Khen Rinpoche: There is no pervasion. So when one have apprehension of true
existence, does one necessarily have graving and grasping?
Student 3: Not necessary.
Khen Rinpoche: If it is not necessary then you cannot say that because
there is apprehension of true existence, then you have craving and
grasping.  Earlier on you said because there is apprehension of true
existence, and with that as the reason, therefore there is craving and
grasping.
Khen Rinpoche: Other people getting what I’m talking? Must listen what he
said, what I’m saying. This is also part of learning on how to ask
question. Just one question somebody answer, not to stop there.
Student 3: I don’t know what other reason.
Khen Rinpoche: The question that Student 1 posted was that while the
bodhisattvas have disenchantment with samsara and have renunciation, yet on
the other hand, ordinary bodhisattvas take rebirth in cyclic existence due
to karma and afflictions. Is there a contradiction? If no, then how do you
explain that there is no contradiction?
Student 2: Even though the bodhisattvas are disenchanted with samsara, but
some ordinary bodhisattvas still do not have control over their rebirth
even though they have disenchantment because they still have craving and
grasping. That is why the karma still can ripen for them to still take
rebirth in samsara.
Khen Rinpoche: Quite okay but why do these ordinary bodhisattvas have
craving and grasping?
Student 3: Is it because before that they have feeling?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Then before feeling what they have?
Student 3: Contact.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Before contact what they have?
Student 3: Before contact are the six sources. Then name and form. Then
before that consciousness. Before that they have karma. Then ignorance.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): After ignorance, what they have?
Student 3: Karma and compositional factors
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Before ignorance, what they have?
Student 3: Comes from apprehension of true existence.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Okay. Anyway never mind.
Khen Rinpoche: Precisely because these ordinary bodhisattvas have attained
the path, so they necessarily have renunciation. They have projecting karma
which was accumulated from before. With many of such projecting karma, they
have no choice but to take rebirth in cyclic existence due to the force of
those formally accumulated projecting karma. They don’t have a choice. They
have no control. So although they have generated renunciation, they have
not abandoned the projecting karma.
Now a question to you all: Is there craving and grasping in the continuum
of someone who has realized emptiness directly?
Student 4: Yes, they still have craving and grasping.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Give example they have this and that. Explain
more.
Student 4: On the 2nd ground, they still have not abandoned the
afflictions.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Then on the 3rd ground?
Student 4: On the 3rd ground, yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): 4th ground?
Student 4: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): 5th ground?
Student 4: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): 6th ground?
Student 4: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): 7th ground?
Student 4: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  8th ground? 9th ground, 10th ground?
Student 4: On the pure grounds 8th, 9th, 10th, won’t have craving and
grasping.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Why?
Student 4:  Because they have abandoned the afflictions.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Okay, good.
Khen Rinpoche: If one possesses the apprehension of true existence, does
one also necessarily possess craving and grasping? Or if there is
apprehension of true existence in one’s mind, does one necessarily also
have craving and grasping? Is it necessarily that?
Student 4: You are talking about on the pure ground?
Khen Rinpoche: If there is apprehension of true existence, does one
necessarily have craving and grasping?
Student 4:  Not necessary.
Khen Rinpoche:  Posit an illustration.
Student 4: 10th ground.
Khen Rinpoche: Does the bodhisattva on the 10th ground possess the
apprehension of true existence or not?
Student 4: No.
Khen Rinpoche: Why do you posit that as an illustration of somebody who has
apprehension of true existence but not necessarily having craving and
grasping? No need to talk about it because 10th ground bodhisattvas don’t
have apprehension of true existence, right?
Student 4:  You said appearance or apprehension?
Ven Gyurme: Apprehension. If one has the apprehension of true existence,
does it necessarily mean that one has craving and grasping?
Student 4: Yes necessary.
Ven Gyurme: Example?
Student 4: Me
Khen Rinpoche: If there is craving and grasping, you will definitely take
rebirth in cyclic existence, isn’t it?
Student 4: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Do bodhisattva superiors take rebirth in cyclic existence?
Is their rebirth in cyclic existence due to a karmic seed that is nourished
by craving and grasping?
Student 4: Which ground?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  You can say 1st ground, 2nd ground, whatever
you choose. I give you until 7th ground and you can choose whatever grounds
you like.
Student 4: If you are asking whether at the 7th ground he will take rebirth
due to craving and grasping? Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t there the fallacy of that bodhisattva superior taking
rebirth due to karma and afflictions?
Student 4: On the 8th ground, he only achieves liberation. So before 8th
ground, on the 7th ground, he still has afflictions as in the Mahayana path
and ground chart.
Khen Rinpoche:  You are saying that bodhisattva superiors, for example on
the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd ground, they take rebirth in cyclic existence due to
karma and afflictions, are you saying that?
Student 4: Have to say that.
Khen Rinpoche: As such, then we cannot talk about such bodhisattva
superiors possessing a mental body.
Student 4: Actually I have a qualm. In BP1 Buddha nature module, Rinpoche
said that they have a mental body on the 8th, 9th, 10th ground, not on the
1st to 7th ground. But in this BP2 Bodhisattva Deeds module you said (the
mental body) is on the 1st ground onwards.
Khen Rinpoche: What I said? I forgot what I said. So you think don’t have?
Khen Rinpoche: In short, you are saying is that the bodhisattva superiors,
for example on the 1st, 2nd ground doesn’t have a mental body, and they
have a contaminated body. Therefore, they have true suffering, right? As
such, the bodies of such bodhisattva superiors would then be true
suffering.
Student 4: Yes, have to say yes.
Ven Gyurme: Why? Because have not free from samsara?
Student 4: Because have not touched the 8th ground.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  From the 1st ground until 7th ground, the
bodhisattva’s body is still the same as our body; no difference and is
still true suffering. You said that?  Anybody agree with that or disagree
with that?  If you disagree with him, and if not correct then you make the
correction.
Student 5: I disagree with that. It would mean that they would still
possess the twelve links that is in the class of afflictions. This means
that as they are progressing on the path to abandon the twelve links, at
the same time they are still producing the twelve links and this means that
they will never be able to be freed from this twelve links.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You are not really answering. What you are
saying, you are not answering.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): What you are saying is nothing to his view. If
his view is wrong, you must correct. What logic you have if his view is not
correct.
Student 5:  My logic is that the bodhisattva will continue to produce
twelve links of the class of afflictions. So which means that he will
continue to produce twelve links as he is continuing to abandon the twelve
links.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Also at the same time, he is not saying
producing your karma. He is not saying that. He is saying taking rebirth
due to twelve links. He is not saying producing the karma. He is not saying
that.
Student 5: So that means that he will not have the direct realization of
emptiness to stop that production.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  You know that he is not creating new karma.
You still saying the bodhisattva superior still take rebirth in samsara due
to karma and delusion. You accept that?
Student 5: No, because they will have the direct realization of emptiness
which will not accumulate further the twelve links that is the class of
afflictions.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Now you accept that.
Student 5: So which means that he will not be producing those twelve links
and he will also not be taking rebirth due to those twelve links because he
has the direct realization of emptiness which are powerful enough to stop
the projecting karma from manifesting or ripening.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that once you realize emptiness directly, you
will not take rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions?
Student 5: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche:  So what you are essentially saying is that once you realize
emptiness directly, you necessarily do not have craving and grasping.
Student 5: Of the twelve links in the class of afflictions. Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Student 4 is saying the opposite.
Student 5: Therefore they have the mental body which is produced by the
twelve links of the class of knowledge obscuration, by predisposition and
so on.
Khen Rinpoche:  What Student 4 is saying is that even though you have
realized emptiness directly, you still have craving and grasping. As such
those individuals still take rebirth in samsara due to craving and
grasping, essentially due to karma and afflictions whereas your position is
the complete opposite.
Student 5: Even though they may have the ignorance as well as the imprints
of that in his continuum, but he does not newly produce these sets of
twelve links anymore.
Khen Rinpoche: The basis of debate is not that. What you are saying is once
you realized emptiness directly, you do not have craving and grasping,
definitely one will not take rebirth due to craving and grasping.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  What Student 4 said is wrong, and what you are
saying is also wrong. What Student 5 said is correct or not? If not correct
then you give example.
Student 6: Example of someone who directly realizes emptiness but still
have craving and grasping is stream enterer or once returner who needs to
take rebirth in desire realm.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Then what about what Student 4 is saying?
Student 6 (to Student 4):  You are saying 1st to 7th ground is also true
suffering, do you accept that 1st ground bodhisattva can manifest 100
bodies, then 2nd ground can manifest more? Does that mean they manifest
more true suffering?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Good. Good. So when you reach 1st ground, you
can manifest 1000 bodies and that means they produce 1000 suffering bodies.
Student 4: Yes, on the 1st ground they manifest 100 bodies, and on the 2nd
ground they manifest 1000 bodies,
Ven Gyurme: More suffering, right?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): His point is that asking you why they produce
more suffering bodies.
Student 4: For them, their concern is not suffering. For them, their
concern is helping others. Their motivation for them is to help others.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): They still suffering.
Student 4: They may have suffering. For them, their aim is to help others.
Ven Gyurme: So they are suffering when they are helping others? So the
higher you go the more suffering?
Student 4: My thesis is that before they reach the 8th ground or pure
ground, they still have ignorance.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Ignorance, we accept that. There is no
question. Nobody debate about that.
Student: 4: Then what is your qualm?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Qualm is that after you reach 1st ground, you
are producing more suffering bodies.
Then 2nd ground, there are double of it.
Student 4: I think there is no pervasion. Like someone pray to go to the
hell to help those in the hell, that doesn’t mean he will suffer in the
hell.
Khen Rinpoche: The bodhisattva emanates and goes to hell, but he doesn’t
suffer. So it follows that the bodhisattva body is not true suffering. No
pain, therefore there is no true suffering. It is mentioned in the
teachings on the perfection on generosity, if you are not a bodhisattva
superior, you are not encouraged or are not allowed to give your body away.
 Once you become a bodhisattva superior, then you can give your body away.
It is said that the more the bodhisattvas give, the more happiness they
achieve. With each additional piece that they give, they get that much more
happiness. What does that proof? It proves that their body is not true
suffering. That is the point.
Student 4: It proves that compassion is greater than their self -interest.
Ven Gyurme: They have self- interest?
Student 4: No I’m saying their compassion is greater than self -interest.
Ven Gyurme: They have self -interest?
Student 4: Greater than self-interest.
Ven Gyurme: If there is no self- interest, you cannot be greater than a non-
existent.
Student 4: I mean that it proves that they have more compassion for others.
So when they are being tortured, they will not feel the suffering.
Ven Gyurme: Is it still true suffering?
Student 4: In their mind-stream, they will not feel the true suffering and
they will not feel the pain, because their aim is for helping others.
Khen Rinpoche: The supreme mundane qualities level of the Path of
Preparation is that which immediately precedes the attainment of the Path
of Seeing.  What progresses onto the Path of Seeing is the supreme mundane
qualities level of the Path of Preparation and this happens in the same
continuous meditative equipoise. What is the difference between body of the
bodhisattva on the supreme mundane qualities level of the Path of
Preparation and the next moment when he enters the Path of Seeing? What is
the body of the bodhisattva when he is already on the Path of Seeing?
Student 4: Same body.
Khen Rinpoche: If we speak up the argument a bit, same, same, same, same,
same, even up to before enlightenment also same. Then after enlightenment
also in the same body. With that same body, the bodhisattva on the path of
preparation enters the path of seeing then he becomes enlighten in the same
body, right?
Student 4:  I get your logic.  You cannot depend on sutric path alone to
attain enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche: Since that is too fast, so we bring back a bit. Let’s come
back to the 7th ground. At the last moment on the 7th ground and at the 1st
moment on the 8th ground, you asserted earlier that there is mental body.
Is the same body?  Is there a difference in the body or not?
Student 4: Have to say no.
Ven Gyurme: Then you fast forward until enlightenment, also no right?
Student 4: From the tantric point of view, the sutric path will not able to
get one to enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche: There is a verse in the Maitreya’s Ornament for the Mahayana
Sutra which says that the bodhisattva superiors do not have the sufferings
of sickness, ageing and death. So that mean bodhisattva superiors do not
have true suffering. Once the 1st ground is achieved, that bodhisattva
superior acquires a mental body. It is said that bodhisattva superiors do
not possess true suffering. As such, when they give away their bodies, they
don’t feel pain. They don’t have true suffering.
Student 7: Can I just clarify one point? Is the mental body the illusory
body? Are they the same thing?
Ven Gyurme: You can achieve illusory body….
Student 7: I think on tantric path, it is an illusory body.
Ven Gyurme: Are you saying they are equivalent? You are saying the same or
similar?
Student 7: Same thing. I’m asking are they the same thing.
Khen Rinpoche: No, they are not the same. The achievement of the illusory
body has to be preceded by actualizing clear light. Because it is from
within the clear light that one arises into the illusory body.  Such a
presentation of clear light and illusory body is not found in the sutra.
There is no presentation of that. There isn’t even the presentation of the
extremely subtle mind in Sutra. Yet it is difficult for us to imagine what
a mental body is. I think that is a bit difficult for us. What exactly is a
mental body?
Of the qualms that were collated from the last exam, one of the questions
has to do with the mental body. What is the substantial cause of this
mental body?
We have to answer the question “What is the substantial cause of the mental
body?” But it is difficult. According to the sutra, what is posited as the
cause of the two bodies - the Truth Body and the Form Body- is essentially
the collection of wisdom which results in the Truth Body, and the
collection of merit which results in the Form Body. That is the explanation
according to sutra. There isn’t a better explanation than that.
The explanation according to tantra is much more profound than this.
According to the Highest Yoga Tantra:
    - the substantial cause of the Truth Body is the extremely subtle mind
    - the substantial cause for the Form Body is the extremely subtle wind;
      which is of one entity with the extremely subtle mind.
The explanation of the causes of the two bodies in tantra makes more sense.

According to the Highest Yoga Tantra,
    - the substantial cause for the Truth Body is the extremely subtle mind,


    - the cooperative condition for the Truth Body is the extremely subtle
      wind.
    - the substantial cause for the Form Body is the extremely subtle wind
    - the cooperative condition for the achievement of the Form Body is the
      extremely subtle mind
According to the sutra, the collection of merits is the cause for the Form
Body. They don’t have a better explanation than that.
Then in order to answer the question "What is the substantial cause of a
mental body?" It is not stated in the text and it is not obvious. Based on
sutric explanation of what the substantial cause of the Form Body is, and
if we reason by extension, then perhaps we can say that it is the powerful
accumulation of the collection of merits of that bodhisattva on the Path of
Preparation which acts as the cause for the mental body of the 1st ground.
Do you think we can see the bodhisattva superior’s mental body? Does it
look like ours?
Student 7: I have a feeling it is similar to the intermediate state being
body, an energy body. My feeling is that it is probably has to do with the
wind. It is similar to the intermediate state body and also the dream body.
Ven Gyurme: Can you see it? If tomorrow you achieve the path of seeing,
will I still see you? You disappear or you are there?
Student 7: But you can possess both bodies at the same time right? Can't
you?
Ven Gyurme: Both bodies?
Student 7: When you achieve the illusory body, you don’t lose your own
body.
Ven Gyurme: So you have true suffering and mental body at the same time?
Student 7: I don’t know how it works. If you are a yogi meditating and
achieved the illusory body, does it means that you disappear and don’t have
your own body anymore? You still don’t because you have not actually
achieved enlightenment yet. You still got to use of this body. You probably
can possess both at the same time.
Ven Gyurme: So true suffering is the container and the mental body is
inside is it?
Student 7: I don’t know how it works, but I think is the energy body.
Student 1: Just now it was said that it was the accumulation of merit on
the path of preparation is the substantial cause for the mental body of a
bodhisattva on the 1st ground. Wouldn’t that makes the cause a contaminated
one because it is not conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing
emptiness? It seems to me it is accumulated as an ordinary being. So how
can something that is accumulated as an ordinary being be a cause for
something that is a mental body of a superior? There seems to be a
contradiction. I mean it is ordinary merits.
Ven Gyurme: Then ordinary wisdom also?
Student 1: Yeah it is ordinary as he has not directly realizing emptiness.
As for my first qualm, now I know why I asked. The answer was the ordinary
bodhisattva has no choice but have to take rebirth. So why don’t they go to
pureland first?  Through the power of prayer they take rebirth there and is
very safe.
Ven Gyurme; Why you worry about other people’s choices?
Student 1: I am thinking of my own path in the future. Everyone also,
including yours.
Ven Gyurme: See you there.
Khen Rinpoche: So basically you are saying the collection of merits
accumulated prior to the path of seeing is all contaminated,  therefore is
the contaminated cause, then how does it results in mental body?

Wheel of Sharp Weapons
Verse 28
When my intellect is blind toward all that is worth knowing, it is the
weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me for claiming as the Dharma what
ought to be put aside. From now on I shall cultivate the wisdom that comes
from study, examination, and meditation.

(Ven Gyurme: In the Tibetan “from study, examination, and meditation” is
“hearing and so forth”)
When we hear the teachings we don’t remember the words. When we reflect on
the teachings, we don’t understand the meaning. When we meditate on the
teachings we don’t get any realizations. Sometimes we feel that we are not
so intelligent and not so wise when compared with others; “How come I am
not intelligent? How come I am not so wise?”  Even siblings don’t necessary
have the same level of intelligence. There may be people who are related
and sharing the same parent, but somehow there are some who are more
intelligent than the others.
In Dharmakirti’s Pramanavartika (Commentary on Valid Cognition), he says
that the parent’s egg and sperm is not the substantial cause of one’s mind
or one’s consciousness. For if it was, it would have to follow that
siblings would have the same level of intelligence, and the same kind of
mental characteristics. So the egg and sperm of the parent is not the
substantial cause of the consciousness, and you have to posit the
substantial cause for consciousness has to be a former moment of
consciousness. That is how we established past and future lives.
It is quite clear and evident that siblings don’t have same level of
intelligence. If you look at everybody, everybody is different. Sometimes
people do wonder, “Why am I not intelligent? Why am I not as smart as so
and so?” The Buddhist explanation is basically due to karma, for one did
not create the cause in the past. It could be that in our past lives, we
only engaged in non-dharma activities, entertaining non-dharmic thoughts
and so forth. Even if we did meet the dharma in the past lives, but we
didn’t take the opportunity to learn, we didn’t cherish it as we just
thought that it is something that we can put aside. Yes, we did meet the
dharma but we didn’t do anything about it. That is the reason why in the
present:
- when we hear the teachings, we don’t remember the words;
- when we reflect on the teachings we don’t understand their meanings; and
- when we try to internalize the teachings, we don’t gain any realizations.
If in our present life we do find that we are in such situation when we
don’t understand the teachings no matter what we do, then we have to
understand that is the result of certain causes and conditions. The causes
and conditions are basically not having heard and reflected on the
teachings in our previous lives. So we should tell ourselves that if we do
not put in effort in this life, if we do not work hard at learning and
reflecting on the teachings, then it is not going to be any better in our
future lives. In fact, we may end up even more dull witted. It is not going
to get better on its own, and in fact we may become even duller. So not
being able to understand the teachings in this life should not be a reason
to stop learning. In fact, it should be a reason for us to strive and work
hard to learn, and to think about stuff and plant positive impressions
(imprints) in our mind. So the advice here is that through hearing,
reflection and meditation, then we strive to generate the wisdom arisen
from hearing, the wisdom arisen from reflection and the wisdom arise from
meditation respectively.
All of us make the same mistakes. Whenever we don’t understand any of the
teachings, we just give up. That is a huge mistake, because if we give up,
it doesn’t mean that things will get better on their own. No! Things will
never improve. In fact, we may become even more dull. There is always
something that we will not understand, and that should not be a reason for
us to stop trying. We have to work hard. We have to put in effort to learn
and to reflect, and then things will get better in the future lives. So if
we don’t do anything about it, things will not get better, and there is no
way for progress. If we really work hard and strive, definitely we will
make some progress in this life. If there is progress in this life, then
there is really hope for the future lives to be better. But if we stop and
give up, then definitely there will not be any progress in this life. Then,
of course, if there is no progress in this life, how can there be progress
in the future lives?
Such pieces of advice are really very helpful. What we have seen so far is
essentially asking us to take our own responsibility and to reflect on our
own karma and effects. Whenever the going gets tough in whatever we do, the
point here is to reflect on karma and its effect and then to keep on going
and work for it.
Verse 29
When I am overcome by sleep while practicing Dharma, it is the weapon of my
own evil deeds turned upon me for piling up obscurations to the holy
Dharma. From now on I shall undergo hardship for the sake of the Dharma.
Sometimes when we attend pujas or prayer sessions, and before the puja we
are not sleepy, but once the puja or the prayer session starts, around ten
or fifteen minutes into it, suddenly we just feel uncontrollably sleepy. Or
before doing our daily recitation or prayers, we maybe wide awake, but once
we start our prayers, we feel very sleepy. Or when people come to class,
they listen to the dharma, they feel sleepy. But somehow people don’t feel
sleepy when they are watching a show. This happens to us.
Sometimes no matter how hard we try to stay awake, somehow we are
overwhelmed by sleep, and it is uncontrollable. This is due to the force of
the obscurations. This is said to be the karmic results of having
accumulated negativities (obscurations) in relation to the holy dharma. For
example, we don’t show proper respect to the dharma texts such as putting
them on the bare ground or low place, walking over them, or placing all
kinds of things on the dharma text, and not regarding dharma texts with
reverence and respect but just viewing them as just an article.
There is also accumulating of negativities in relation to the realizational
dharma. How does one do that? One criticises or despises or put down an
individual who possess the realizational dharma in his or her mental
continuum. That is how we accumulate the negativities in relation to the
realizational dharma.
The advice is that “From now on we shall undergo hardship for the sake of
the dharma. From now on we will not disrespect dharma text, and we will not
put down, or revile or despise (criticize) the individual who possess the
realizational dharma in their minds.
Verse 30
When I delight in the afflictions and am greatly distracted, it is the
weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me for not meditating upon
impermanence and the shortcomings of cyclic existence. From now on I shall
increase my dissatisfaction for cyclic existence.
“Delight in the afflictions” such as:
1. Taking delight in attachment which refers to just being wholly involved
in doing things to acquire material wealth, power, reputation, and
followers motivated by attachment.
2. Taking delight in anger - there are some people who seemed to enjoy
looking down or putting down on others and so forth.
3. Taking delight in ignorance - perhaps we could take this to mean being
very fond of sleep or enjoying sleep greatly.
“Greatly distracted” means that one has no mental space for dharma as one’s
emphasis, one’s goal or one’s philosophy in life is just this life. Day and
night one just focusing on the affairs of this life and the happiness of
this life to the point that one does not have any space nor time to
practice dharma.
The teachings tells us that when we are in such a situation in taking
delight in the afflictions, when we are greatly distracted and just
completely preoccupied with the affairs of this life, and thinking that is
the most important things in this life, that is the result of not having
thought or reflected on death and impermanence and the faults of cyclic
existence in our past lives. The solution is that from now we have to
increase our dissatisfaction for cyclic existence. We have to strengthen
that renunciation of cyclic existence through thinking about impermanence
and the faults of cyclic existence.
Reflecting and meditating well on impermanence and the faults of cyclic
existence is extremely important in particular for beginners. Reflecting
and meditating on impermanence is critical and is very, very important.
Although meditation on impermanence itself will not eliminate our anger and
attachment completely, but it is very effective in reducing the strength of
our afflictions. It is very helpful in reducing the power and strength of
our anger and our attachment. On top of that, if we can reflect on the
shortcomings and faults of cyclic existence, of course it is even much more
beneficial and is very effective and helpful in reducing the power and the
strength of our afflictions. This is extremely important and we should pay
attention to this. We shouldn’t look down on these practices.

On the Result of Exam paper
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I have passed the exam paper back to you all.
Well done. Whoever wrote, well done! Somebody wrote quite a lot, and some
less, but nevertheless is okay, never mind. We put A, B, C, D. So if
somebody asks what is A, B, C or D, then A is Apple, I think you all know.
B is Boy, then C is cat, D is dog, Okay, you know what ABCD means. Anyway
is just giving that label there. Anyway my point is that if you have done
your job, I am happy with that. Whether you write ten pages or two pages,
you put your hard work there that is my point. Whether you get good or not
good mark is not the point. You put your heart to study, you write what you
know so that is important.

Summary
|Present negative condition     |Karma and its effect   |Remedy                |
|When hear the teachings, don’t |Ripening result of not |From now on, I shall  |
|remember the words;            |having heard and       |try my very best to   |
|When reflect on the teachings, |reflected on the       |put in the effort to  |
|don’t understand their meanings|teachings in our       |study, reflect and    |
|                               |previous lives         |meditate.’            |
|When try to meditate on the    |                       |Through hearing,      |
|teachings, don’t gain any      |                       |reflection and        |
|realizations.                  |                       |meditation, one       |
|                               |                       |strives to generate   |
|                               |                       |the wisdom arisen from|
|                               |                       |hearing, the wisdom   |
|                               |                       |arisen from reflection|
|                               |                       |and the wisdom arise  |
|                               |                       |from meditation       |
|                               |                       |respectively.         |
|                               |                       |So strive and work    |
|                               |                       |hard to learn, to     |
|                               |                       |reflect and plant     |
|                               |                       |positive imprints in  |
|                               |                       |our mind.             |
|Feeling uncontrollably sleepy  |Karmic results of      |From now on, I shall  |
|during dharma activities such  |having accumulated     |undergo hardship for  |
|as attending puja or prayer    |negativities in        |the sake of the       |
|session, listening to dharma or|relation to:           |dharma, I will not    |
|doing daily prayers and        |-scriptural teaching   |disrespect dharma     |
|recitation                     |by not showing proper  |text, and I will not  |
|                               |respect to dharma texts|despise or criticize  |
|                               |such as putting them on|the individual who    |
|                               |the bare ground or low |possess the           |
|                               |place, walking over    |realizational dharma  |
|                               |them, placing all kinds|in his mental         |
|                               |of things on the dharma|continuum.            |
|                               |text, not regarding    |                      |
|                               |dharma texts with      |                      |
|                               |reverence and respect, |                      |
|                               |just view dharma text  |                      |
|                               |as just an article.    |                      |
|                               |- realizational        |                      |
|                               |teaching by criticizing|                      |
|                               |or despising an        |                      |
|                               |individual who possess |                      |
|                               |the realizational      |                      |
|                               |dharma in his mental   |                      |
|                               |continuum.             |                      |
|The mind is greatly distracted |Ripening karma of not  |I shall start my      |
|and completely preoccupied with|having reflected on    |Dharma practice by    |
|and only interested in worldly |impermanence and the   |reflecting and        |
|activities and affairs of this |faults of cyclic       |meditate on death and |
|life such as:                  |existence in the past. |impermanence.         |
|- Taking delight in attachment |                       |                      |
|- Taking delight in anger      |                       |                      |
|- Taking delight in ignorance  |                       |                      |







































31
When things get worse no matter what I do, it is the weapon of my own evil
deeds turned
Upon me for disparaging moral causality and dependent origination. From now
on I shall
strive to accumulate merit.



