Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson02.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.992445
================================================================================


Eight Verses of Thought Transformation
Verse 1
Determined to obtain the greatest possible benefit from all sentient
beings, who are more precious than a wish-fulfilling jewel, I shall hold
them most dear at all times
Verse 1 of the Eight Verses of Thought Transformation is to get us to widen
the perspective of our mind to generate the mind that takes into account
the welfare and happiness of all sentient beings. It is to get us to
develop in the beginning this very courageous thought wanting to cherish
all sentient beings.
The first verse is to get us to develop this very big courageous mind to
want to cherish every sentient being. But of course that can only arise on
the basis of seeing why we have to do it. There must be reasons. We must be
able to justify to ourselves the reasons for developing this kind of very
big huge perspective. The reason is stated in the first verse - with the
determination to achieve the highest goal or the highest aim. So when we
see that one can achieve the highest aim through cherishing all sentient
beings, we would then take on the pledge or the oath to cherish all
sentient beings. Only then will we have the thought “I’m going to do this!
I’m really going to develop this thought.”
It is said that ideally for someone who wants to put this into practice in
the form of meditative reflection, the reflection of these verses should be
preceded by the following:
 • Visualize clearly the objects of refuge and one’s personal deity that is
   inseparable from your own root guru.
 • On the basis of that, develop single-pointed devotion and faith in the
   guru deity.
 • On the basis of that, one performs the seven branch worship.
 • Then you make a wholehearted supplication.
 • When you make wholehearted supplications, you first visualize the flow
   of nectar from the guru deity enters into you through your crown and
   pervades your entire being. This purifies and illuminates all the
   impediments or obstacles that prevent you from cherishing all sentient
   beings.
 • After that, again with the visualization of the flow of nectar entering
   into your crown, you visualize that you receive the blessings to be able
   to develop this wish that cherishes all beings.
 • Then you recite the first verse slowly and contemplate on the meaning.
The verse says that all sentient beings are more precious than the wish
fulfilling jewel. This is being said but we must be convinced and see how
this is the case. We are told that all our happiness of this life, the
happiness of all our future lives, the happiness of liberation from our own
samsara and our own achievement of full enlightenment are said to be
dependent on sentient beings in that sentient beings are able to give us
all of these levels of happiness. This is being said but we have to check
for ourselves to see whether that is the case or not. We have to gain an
ascertainment and conviction on these. It is only with conviction and on
what we really see is really true then naturally the thought or the wish to
want to cherish sentient beings from our own side will arise.
If through our own critical reflection we see for ourselves indeed that is
the case that all of our different levels of happiness can be bestowed on
us by the sentient beings. Then naturally we will want to cherish sentient
beings from our own side. Through this, when we see the purpose of
cherishing others from our own side and the benefits of cherishing others
from our own side, then the wholehearted commitment will arise. We can then
basically promise to ourselves from our heart that “I will hold them most
dear at all times. I will cherish them most dear at all times.” So the
verse 1 is talking about generating this very big mind, which comes from
seeing the reasons why we have to do that and what is in for us.
Verse 2
When in the company of others, I shall always consider myself the lowest of
all, and from the depths of my heart hold others dear and supreme.
Then the next verse says that when we interact with others, we shall always
consider ourselves the lowest amongst all and from the depths of our heart
hold others as superior.
After having generated that big mind due to reflecting well on the verse 1,
then how can we translate that into something practical in our lives?
Verse 2 tells us how. Verse 2 is saying that when in the company of others,
so in our interaction with others it doesn’t matter who that person is, it
could be our own virtuous friend, the guru, or it could be somebody whom is
usually considered to be lower than us, like the poor destitute, the
beggars and so forth, whoever it maybe, then from our own side we consider
the other party as higher or superior than us and we consider ourselves to
be lower than that person.
Verse 2 says that to view and hold others as superior to us from the depths
of the heart, it has to be sincere to have that view of others as superior
to us. Then sincerely view others in that way with a respectful attitude.
It is evident in our own experience that in our interaction with others, if
from our own side we really think that we are lower than that person, then
probably there wouldn’t be any challenges or difficulties in our
relationship with that person.
There are a couple of things to think about here. There are few things to
sort out. At those times when we find ourselves being egoistic or feeling
proud, then at that moment it is important to focus on our own mistakes and
faults and the kind of shortcomings that we have.
For example, when we compare ourselves to a dog, we always think that the
dog is worse off than us, lower than us. The view is that “I’m a higher
being and is better in whatever way than that dog.”
Perhaps we can think about it in this way. In Je Rinpoche Lama Tsongkhapa’s
“In Praise of Dependent Arising” he said that there are people criticize
the Buddha out of ignorance and they cannot tolerate the explanation of the
emptiness of inherent existence. Due to their ignorance, they cannot
understand the profound dependent arising. So there are people who voice
their opposition and criticism. Lama Tsongkhapa said, “For those people to
do that is something that is not really surprising”. “Is not surprising”
means is to be expected.
Lama Tsongkhapa said that it is not very surprising for people who don’t
have much faith in the Buddha don’t really accept whatever is being said;
whether it is emptiness or dependent arising. But what Lama Tsongkhapa
found surprising was that people who admire the Buddha, people who respect
the Buddha, people who believe in the Buddha, people who accept his
teachings and people who also accept his teachings on dependent arising
cannot accept the emptiness of inherent existence. So Lama Tsongkhapa found
that very surprising.
Perhaps you would like to enlighten me why Lama Tsongkhapa was surprised?
When people who don’t have faith in the Buddhadharma, who don’t practice
the dharma, or who don’t accept the dharma make mistakes and commit
negativities, there is nothing surprising as it is to be expected. We
consider ourselves as Buddhists, we say we are proud to be Buddhists, we
have faith in the Buddha and his teachings and we practice the Mahayana
teachings, we say all these but yet we ourselves don’t have much faith and
not much practice to show for. That is really surprising. If we do compare
ourselves to somebody who is not a Buddhist, who does not have faith in the
teachings, and who is not practicing, in that sense, we are in some ways
lower, lesser and worse off than the non-Buddhists.
Going back to the example of a dog, of course a dog doesn’t practice
dharma. That is normal, it is expected and that is hardly surprising. But
for us who accept the dharma and yet we act completely opposite to what we
stand for and for what we believe, then that is really surprising. In that
sense, we kind of establish and feel that we are indeed in many ways lower
than the dog.
There are many things we can think about.  If we happen to be someone who
has heard many teachings and who knows the essential points of the practice
but yet we happens to be someone whose conduct does not accord with the
teachings, and if we happen to be someone who studied a lot the dharma but
just committing non-virtues and hardly creating any virtues in the whole
life, then that is really a pity and such a waste. In that way, such a
person is really much less superior and much worse off than others.
If we look at our own life story and if we happen to be like someone who
having met the dharma and practicing the dharma for years but have nothing
much to show for in our practice or has no attainments, then we have no
basis whatsoever to feel superior to others. There is no valid basis or
reasons and justification. So this is the method to see how we are indeed
less superior and how indeed we are lower than the other person through
seeing all our own mistakes, our own faults and our shortcomings.
In order for us to respect the other party, we must see and acknowledge the
other party’s qualities. For example, if the person is physically more
attractive than us, if the person has more wealth than us, or if the person
has something desirable and of good quality or if something good happening
in that person’s life but not happening to us, whatever good thing it
maybe, we see that person has it but we don’t, and that we see it is the
result of that person’s own karma. That person is richer and more well off
than us because he is experiencing the result of having practice generosity
in the past.
This is the training of the mind that we can do by focusing on the good
qualities of others. Those qualities that we can see are evident. When we
do see it, we have to realize that person has it because it is the result
of his own practice and good karma. In the case of really not seeing
anything from one side, then at the very least what we can think of is that
although it is not evident but it is possible that that person has some
qualities that I am not seeing now. So this is a training of the mind.
Chandrakirti said in his Supplement to the Middle Way that for somebody who
is really actively engaged in the practice of the perfection of generosity
i.e. somebody who always wants to enhance his practice of giving, then it
is really possible that that person in the midst of goes about his practice
of generosity, it is very possible that one of the recipients of his giving
could be a bodhisattva. So the person who is always giving, giving, giving
to all kinds of different sentient beings, it is really possible that the
recipients could be bodhisattvas. If one of the recipients is really a
bodhisattva, and the person happens to give to the bodhisattva, then that
person would accumulate so much merit because of having given to a
bodhisattva.
Buddha did say that it is very difficult to say with certainty of judging
who the other person is. We can’t really tell who they really are or
whether they are ordinary or not. It is not possible.
There are quite a few historical accounts of practitioners who have kept
low profile. One such example was Dromtonpa, a disciple of Lama Atisha, who
was a practitioner of the bodhicitta practice of exchanging self and
others. Dromtonpa himself was in an aspect of a lay person and not an
ordained person. If people look at Dromtonpa, people may assume he is a
very simple person and who doesn’t know anything; just an ordinary
unassuming person.  Dromtonpa had many disciples and one of them is Geshe
Chekawa. There was a time when Dromtonpa was invited to teach at the place
where his disciple Geshe Chekawa was residing. In Tibet, when the lamas
move from one place to another usually they do travel in a huge procession
of riding horses and having attendants and helpers.
On his way to the teaching venue, Dromtonpa was walking alone without any
attendants and neither was he sitting on a horse. He just walked to the
teaching venue. Geshe Chekawa’s monastery was situated on high ground. So
in order to get to the place, he had to cross over a pass which was going
uphill. Along the way, he met a lay tantric practitioner. I guess the lay
tantric practitioner must be carrying a lot of things. When the lay tantric
practitioner saw Dromtonpa coming up, he asked Dromtonpa “Can you help me
to carry my things?  Dromtonpa said “Yes. Sure.” After walking for a while,
the lay tantric practitioner decided to take out his boots and asked
Dromtonpa to carry it. Dromtonpa accepted it happily and sincerely.
Dromtonpa then carry the boots over his shoulders. As they were walking up
the slope gradually, and as they were nearing the monastery, the lay
tantric practitioner saw monks were lining up on the pathway to the
monastery as if they were waiting for somebody. The lay tantric
practitioner was wondering and asked Dromtonpa “What is happening.”
Dromtonpa then said “I assume they are waiting for me.” The lay tantric
practitioner was so ashamed and he took all his belongings back from
Dromtonpa and quickly gathered all his belongings and fled.
Since Dromtonpa was somebody who always practicing the instruction of
exchanging self and others, he really view himself as lower than others. He
translated that knowledge into practice.  As such, he was really happy to
carry whatever he was asked by the lay person; whether it was boot or
luggage. Dromtonpa did not experience any difficulties because he really
saw himself as lower than his travelling companion. As such, he was happy
to carry the boots or the luggage.
We learn the three scriptural collections, Tripitaka, for the purpose of
reducing the pride. If we are able to consider ourselves lower, then we
will benefit because then we will have less difficulties. We create the
conditions or the platform on which we can gain good qualities. It is very
clear if we look at our own experience then that is just what has happened
in our life. If we look at what had happen to others, we consider ourselves
are more important and we prioritize ourselves over others thinking ‘I am
better than you’, then there bounds to be difficulty in the relationship,
lots of challenges, and not harmonious. That is very clear from our own
experience.
That is the flavor of the teaching of the great Kadampa masters in that
they will just show what exactly our problem is into our face. They will
dig out all the faults and list them. They show them to us “This is the
problem. This is the fault.  You will experience all these problems because
of having these faults.” It is clear and quite obvious that egoistic people
have lots of problem in this life in the interaction with others, and the
problems will extend beyond this life. The great Kadampa masters said that
the disadvantages and problems that we are experiencing because of pride
will be worst in our future life in that it results in lower realm
rebirths. Even if we were born as human, we will be born in poverty or in a
lower caste (lowly lineage) and others will look down upon us.
Verse 3
Vigilant, the moment a delusion appears in my mind, endangering myself and
others, I shall confront and avert it without delay
We have to consider our own shortcomings and faults from many angles and we
also have to look the positive qualities of others from various angles.
Then come a time even when we do succeed in doing this, still we will
experience difficulties in our practice because the afflictions- ignorance,
anger and attachment- will still arise very strongly.
Verse 3 is telling us what we should do when the afflictions arise in our
mind. Even though we consider ourselves lower than others and if the
afflictions don’t arise then it is all good and well. But what if the
afflictions still arise even though we hold ourselves lower than others?
What we should do then? Then verse 3 is the answer.
Literally, in all of one’s conduct, we have to be vigilant and to check our
mind all the time. In general, there are four kinds of conduct on the
activities when we are engaging such as doing our stuffs or when moving
from a place to another. The four kinds of conduct are:
   1. Whether you are doing stuffs
   2. Whether you are travelling
   3. Whether you are seated
   4. Whether you are lying down
The verse is saying that whatever activities one is engaging, whether one
is walking, sitting, lying down, or doing stuffs, we have to rely on
mindfulness and vigilance. That is, to be mindful and vigilant in all of
our activities. So whatever activities it maybe - lying, walking, sitting
down, doing stuffs - we have to rely on mindfulness and vigilance to see
whether the afflictions are manifesting and whether we are following them.
When we talk about conduct, we can also talk about the conduct of body,
speech and mind. So whatever is happening to us physically, verbally or
mentally, we have to rely on mindfulness and vigilance to see whether what
we are doing things is due to afflictions or not and whether the
afflictions are manifesting or not. The afflictions being the three mental
poisons -ignorance, anger, desire (attachment) - and jealousy, pride and so
forth.
So whatever activities or practice we may be doing such as studying the
dharma, listening to the dharma, reciting mantras, doing our daily prayers,
we are in the retreat, doing prostration or doing circumambulation, the
crucial point is that we have to be mindful and vigilance to see whether
we are following the afflictions or whether the afflictions are
manifesting.
If we do rely on mindfulness and vigilance (introspection), we should able
to recognize the afflictions when they arise. When we do recognize the
afflictions, then we have to deal with afflictions and not follow after
them.
The verse is saying that we should rely on mindfulness and introspection
(vigilance) in order to check for the arising of the afflictions. The verse
is saying that when we discover the afflictions are manifesting, we do not
wait and we should confront and avert them right away. But our problem is
that we don’t even recognize when the afflictions are arising. In order to
recognize or to be aware that the afflictions are arising in our mind, we
need to be accustomed to mindfulness and introspection. So without
mindfulness and introspection, when the afflictions do arise, we don’t even
know they are arising but they have already arisen. For example, we don’t
usually catch desire when it arises. The desires will just snowballs and
when it becomes very strong and gross, and then we suddenly feel its
presence.  Maybe we will try to confront it by applying antidote. But when
the affliction is so strong and manifest, even if you try to deal with it,
it is very difficult and challenging. It is just so much difficult. In the
first place, would it be much easier to not let it arise? Even it does
arise, if we are able to catch it right away at the beginning due to having
mindfulness and introspection, then we will be able to deal with it there
and then and hence it would be much easier and less challenging.
If we are practitioners and if we really want to practice then we have to
cultivate mindfulness and vigilance constantly at all times. It is says
that we have to cultivate mindfulness and vigilance all the time in all of
our conducts and deeds.  This is said to be extremely important.
What life installs for us? What happens if we do not recognize the
afflictions when they arise? What happens if we do not do anything with it
but just follow it and let it arise?  Firstly, we don’t recognize them.
Even after we do recognize them and we do not apply any antidote to it but
just let attachment, desire and anger to arise, then what will happens?
Here the verse says “endangering myself and others”.
So when the afflictions do arise in our mind and if we do recognize them
but we do not apply any antidote, they will harm us and others. Therefore
we have to confront and avert it right away.
Here one is making a pledge to oneself “I will confront and avert the
afflictions without a delay. I will practice mindfulness and introspection
(vigilance). I will apply the antidotes right away.”
Due to the lack of mindfulness and vigilance, we do not really see the
arising of the afflictions. So when the afflictions do arise, they are
relatively weaker in strength comparing to the time when it is fully
developed. So when afflictions arise, it will be really difficult to spot
if we do not have mindfulness and vigilance. Because of not seeing the
afflictions arising, it then snowballs and becomes very strong. When the
afflictions become very strong and in a very strong manifestation state,
what does it do? Earlier we talked about predisposition of the afflictions
which they leave an imprint and impression on the mind. So when the
afflictions snowball to the point when it becomes very big, that is the
time a very strong impression is left on our mind. When we talk about
impression or the predisposition of the affliction, the potential is left.
So what is left? We are leaving the potential to be afflicted in the same
way again and for that desire or anger to arise again strongly in the
future.
If we are not aware of the afflictions arising and we don’t apply the
antidote right away then the afflictions get snowballs and become stronger
and stronger. The stronger the affliction, the stronger the impression is
left on our mind. That is why it is called imprints. When a very strong
impression of the affliction is left on our mind, what does it do to us? It
makes us so habituated to the affliction such that all it takes is to meet
with just one small little desirable object in the future, for example,
because of the familiarity with that desire, then with just one small
desirable object that we see, we will get so attached with much desire.
Likewise, because of very habituated with our anger, all we need to meet is
just a small difficult situation or something very small unpleasant
condition, we will get very upset right away.
Instead of letting ourselves into following after afflictions and becoming
more and more habituated to them, if from the beginning we look at the
affliction as fault and mistakes and deal with them and confront them as
much as possible, then the affliction will not be so strong. As such, the
impression that is left on our mind will be much weaker so much so that in
the future, even if we do meet with, for example, an object of attachment,
because of not following after the afflictions, and even if there are many
objects of attachment around, we will not become attached so easily. Even
if the attachment do arises, it is weak and would not be as strong as it
could be. Because the desire is not so strong in the first place, and if we
do meet with small object of attachment, it is said the attachment may not
even arise.
Shantideva emphasized in his Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds that our
afflictions are our main enemy. He emphasized the importance of dealing the
afflictions using mindfulness and vigilance. We already have looked at that
text and a lot was said about how terrible the afflictions are. In short,
the afflictions are said to be the main enemy. Usually our concept of enemy
has to do with somebody outside i.e. enemy is always external. But what the
teaching is telling us is that the external enemy is nowhere near as
dangerous as our internal enemy of the afflictions. An external enemy is
maybe a person who harms us and may even take away our life, and what the
external enemy can only harm us at most is for the duration of this one
particular life. But our afflictions can harm us in all our lifetimes.
The teaching also tells us of what we have already known i.e. the external
enemy can be won over with gifts, communication and so forth. We can even
make friend with the external enemy. It is possible for that to happen.
However, if we do make friend with the enemy of afflictions and the more
harmonious we are with the afflictions, then the more we give in to
afflictions, the more harms we will get in return.
It is said that no matter how powerful our external enemy may be, they are
nowhere near as powerful as our afflictions. The teachings tell us that
even if every single person on this planet hates us and become our enemies
there is nothing that they all can do to throw us to the lower realms. They
do not have the power to send us to the lowest of the hot hell, the
relentless hell, Avici. But our afflictions can do that. Our afflictions
have the power to throw us into the lowest of the hot hell. As such, our
affliction is much more deadly than the external enemy.
The teachings tell us that no matter how deadly or how powerful our
external enemy may be, and how many enemies we have, they can harm our
possessions, they can harm us physically but at most what can happen is
they deprived us from our life. They take away our life, that’s about it.
It is only that much the external enemy can do; nothing beyond this life.
But our afflictions can harm us all our lifetimes. Our afflictions can
throw us into worst of sufferings – the sufferings of the lower realms.
At time when the conditions are right, we can expel our enemy to some
faraway place or we can physically distant ourselves from that person.
Sometimes despite the best of attempt, they still come back; literally the
external enemy still knocks at our door.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): So, be careful.
The external enemy can come back but the internal enemy – the afflictions -
can never come back to harm us provided we rely on mindfulness and
vigilance.
If we don’t sit down and think about this, actually it is not so apparent
to us that our afflictions are so deadly and harmful. So if we don’t think
about it, then we would not realize how bad our afflictions are. We don’t
see it and it is not apparent. However, if we really sit down and reflect
on it, then gradually we will come to see how powerful our afflictions are
and how deadly and harmful they are. Once we can see that, we then can see
how the afflictions endanger ourselves. If we are endangered by our own
afflictions, then obviously we can infer that how everybody else is
endangered by their own afflictions. As such, as says in the verse,
‘endangering myself and others’.
Chandrakirti again in his Supplement to the Middle Way says that even a
person who really has good physical demeanor and who generally is pleasant
looking will becomes ugly when he become upset. As said in the teachings,
having an unattractive physical appearance is the karmic result of lack of
patience which is the result of anger. When we are upset we probably don’t
look very good. As such, when we are upset our physical demeanor is
unlikely to cause bliss to others; basically it is unlikely to cause the
others to feel happy looking at us.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Maybe some people just so angry and they just
smile. I am not sure. Angry smile? Could be but you can see that it is not
a smile?
Somebody who usually is regarded as good person, people say “This is a good
person. He is a very kind person.” Whatever it is being said but if the
person gets angry, he is not considered as a good person.
When we get upset and the anger is manifest, we cannot think straight.
Usually we are able to tell what is right, what is wrong, what is good to
do, what is not good to do i.e. we can discriminate. However, when the
anger manifest, we lose the ability to discriminate, lack of discernment,
and the sense of appropriateness. These could be of very strong anger or
very strong desire.
You may be someone who is quite wise or steady and usually know how to sort
thing out. But when the afflictions become very strong and become very
manifest taking over you, during those times you are not able to think well
and straight, and lose all those qualities.
We really have to know very well the faults of our afflictions, and know
how we harm ourselves by following the afflictions, how our afflictions
cause harm to others, and how afflictions in general harm everyone
When we talk about samsara i.e. circling from life to life due to our karma
and afflictions, of which the primary cause is the afflictions. The
afflictions cause us to suffer from life to life. Circling from life to
life is the source of all the problems and harms. If we can really feel and
see that, then naturally at all the time we will be mindful and vigilant to
guard ourselves as much as possible against our afflictions. In order to
help us to deal with our afflictions, varieties of method were taught. So
we can deal with the afflictions:
    - through adopting the correct view
    - through cultivation of meditation
    - through modifying our conducts; primary the physical and verbal
      conducts
In summary,
Verse 2 is the advice for us to consider ourselves lower than others and
then to cherish and hold others as superior. Essentially it is an advice on
how to work with our ego and pride.
Verse 3, if you consider yourself to be a practitioner then at all times on
whatever we are doing, even when we are doing our daily prayers,
recitations and so forth, we have to be mindful and vigilant and constantly
checking our mind to see whether the afflictions are arising or have arisen
or not. We really have to be honest and check to see whatever we are doing,
whether is our prayers or our daily practices or whatever we do in life is
really hurting our afflictions. And whatever we do, whether those prayers
and so forth are becoming a medicine and an antidote to the afflictions. It
is emphasized very strongly in the teachings that we really have to be
mindful and be vigilant all the times to guard our minds against our
afflictions. This is extremely important. It is really being emphasized in
the teachings. If we don’t work with our afflictions, and we are not
mindful and vigilant, and we do not apply any antidote, then the teaching
is saying that we do not become a practitioner. We are not a real
practitioner at all. We may look like a practitioner, we may have the form
or appearance of a practitioner but in reality we not a practitioner.
