Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson07.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.850367
================================================================================


Verse 6
Thus the bodhisattva roams like the peacock in the forest of cyclic
existence, converting the afflictions, which are like a jungle of virulent
poisons, into an elixir. Willingly embracing the afflictions, the hero
shall conquer the poison.
Bodhisattvas, in particular, the bodhisattva superiors do not primarily
focus on abandoning the afflictions such as desire, but they do regard all
afflictions as faults (mistakes). Bodhisattva superiors can utilize desire
as an aid to benefit sentient beings.
You must understand that there are some bodhisattva superiors who still
have to take rebirth in cyclic existence. They do so willingly and their
rebirths in cyclic existence happen due to the power of their prayers. They
do not take rebirth in cyclic existence due to the force of karma and
afflictions. As mentioned in the teachings, these bodhisattva superiors
take rebirth in cyclic existence willingly and happily. But you must not
understand this to mean that the bodhisattva superiors are happy to take
rebirth in cyclic existence because of liking cyclic existence. Neither
does it mean that they take rebirths in cyclic existence due to force of
karma and afflictions. In fact, bodhisattvas have great disenchantment with
cyclic existence. The renunciation possess by the bodhisattvas are said to
be much stronger than those possess by the Hinayanist. The statement that
the bodhisattvas take rebirths in cyclic existence happily means that they
do it willingly due to the power of their prayers in order to benefit
sentient beings. That is how you must understand that statement.
Bodhisattva superiors see all the faults of desire and attachment. They
know fully the faults of desire and attachment, but nevertheless such
bodhisattvas are beings who only focused on helping others. Their only goal
and only interest is to benefit others. For the bodhisattva superiors,
their desire and attachment do not harm them. In fact, they are able to
utilize desire and attachment as an aid to benefit sentient beings.
In the Hinayana, there are no exceptions when it comes to abandoning the
ten non virtues. In fact, their focus is on abandoning the ten non-virtues.
There is no permission whatsoever to engage in non-virtues of body and
speech. In the Mahayana teachings, the Buddha did made certain exceptions
with regards to the three non-virtues of body and four non-virtues of
speech. Basically, there are situations in which the three non-virtues of
body and four of the speech can be done.
It is clear in the Mahayana teachings that there are exceptions in the
situations in which permission is given to those individuals who are
capable for engaging in some of the non-virtues of the body and speech. I
think in the context of the Mahayana sutra teaching, there is no exceptions
given for the three non-virtues of mind. I don’t remember where exactly I
got the information from a particular text, but I seemed to remember that
this was mentioned in the text.
For as long as there is self-cherishing attitude, i.e. as long as one still
possesses the self-cherishing attitude, there are no exceptions being made
to engage in non-virtues of body and speech. There is no exception being
made as long as there is self-cherishing. How could those actions be
beneficial?  Those actions would even harm one self, forget about
benefiting others. However, in the case of someone who has completely
abandoned the self-cherishing attitude, and whose focus is on benefiting
others, then there is an exception being made to engage in some of these
bodily and verbal non-virtues if there are benefits. It seemed like the
exception or permission is granted on the basis on whether one has self-
cherishing attitude or not.
There is an account in the teachings of how Buddha in one of his past lives
killed a person on board a ship. At that time, when the Buddha was in one
of his past lives, saw that this person who was going to kill everyone;
about 500 people on board. Motivated out of great compassion for that
person, the Buddha-to-be decided to kill that person before he could commit
the murder. The Buddha-to-be saw that if that person was to commit murder,
he would have be born in the lower realms and suffer for a very long time.
The Buddha-to-be thought “If I have to bear the negative result of killing
that person, so be it.” He sacrificed himself. So motivated out of great
compassion, he decided to kill that person. Of course he has no self-
cherishing attitude. He did kill that person and he did it completely
motivated out of concern for others. It is said in the teachings that that
act in fact helped and speeded up his accumulation of merits. He was
liberated from samsara even more quickly than if he hadn’t killed that
person.
The point to understand is if a person who does not have any self-
cherishing attitude at all and have completely abandoned it, and his focus
is only on working for the benefits of others, this special people has the
permission to commit some of the physical and verbal non-virtues. But for
people who have not abandoned their self-cherishing attitude, i.e. people
who has self-cherishing, then there is no exception whatsoever. You must
understand that there is no permission whatsoever.
As last line of verse 6 says: “Willingly embracing the afflictions, the
hero shall conquer the poison” - these bodhisattva superiors are able to
utilize object of enjoyment because it doesn’t harm them. If fact, by
utilizing the object of enjoyment, the bodhisattva superiors are able to
finish the accumulation of merits. The experience of taking the object of
enjoyment as an aid to benefit sentient beings and they don’t get harmed.
They are able to utilize the object of enjoyment because they never ever
come under the control of desire. They will never be influenced by desire
because they are always aware of the faults of desire and attachment.
Because they see the faults of desire and attachment, they will never ever
come under the influence of their attachment and desire. As such they are
able to use the object of enjoyments to benefit others and to finish their
accumulation of merits.
Verse 7
The ego-clinging of the helpless wanderer in cyclic existence is the
messenger of the devil. Distance yourself from the savor of selfishness and
hedonism, and willingly embrace hardship for the sake of others.
“The ego-clinging of the helpless wanderer in cyclic existence” - in this
context here the thing that is causing one to circle in cyclic existence is
the self-cherishing attitude.
In this context, the ego clinging refers to the self-cherishing. In
general, the apprehension of the self is the root of circling in samsara.
Even the hearers and the solitary realizers would have to abandon the
apprehension of a self.
“The ego-clinging of the helpless wanderer in cyclic existence is the
messenger of the devil” - as explained in the commentary, “the devil” is
the self-cherishing, and “the messenger” is the self-grasping or the
apprehension of a self.  So we should distance ourselves from the self-
cherishing and self-grasping which make us look for happiness in samsara.
The verse is saying to distance ourselves from self-cherishing and self-
grasping and to work for the welfare of others, in particular to
voluntarily embrace the hardships that come in the process when working for
others.
An essential point to understand/and realize are:
- what are the disadvantages of following our self-cherishing attitude?
- what do we stand to lose if we follow the self-cherishing attitude?
It is said in the mind training teachings that the self-cherishing attitude
is the source of all the problems. For example, the seven-point mind
training starts with the statement “Put all the blame on to one.” The “one”
is basically the self-cherishing attitude.
The teachings tell us that if we were to think/and analyze carefully, we
will be able to see that it is our self-cherishing attitude that is behind
all the sufferings that we have experienced since beginningless time up to
the present moment. We regard cherishing others as something not beneficial
as the enemy; and we regard selfishness, self-cherishing as our love one.
The teachings tell us that since beginningless lifetimes, we have been
regarding sentient beings that are actually the source of happiness as the
enemy. We have been regarding our self-cherishing attitude, which is the
actually the real enemy, to be the most important thing such as our love
one or the precious one.
If we think about it, in the context of this life, it is quite clear that
our unhappiness and our problems come from our self-cherishing attitude.
Let’s say somebody criticizes us, or say something unpleasant about us, of
course we don’t like it and we suffer. When we hear it, we become very
disturbed, we don’t like it. But why do we get disturbed in the first place
when we hear such remarks/or criticism? It is clear that we get disturbed
because of our self-cherishing.
Whether it is some sickness, pain, or even spirit harm, if we analyze and
think about it, the root cause of all these undesirable experiences is our
own selfishness, our own self-cherishing.
It is very clear that even as a Buddhist, whatever vows or commitments we
take on, whether it is a vow of a lay person or the bodhisattva vow, the
reason why we aren’t able to keep them properly and the reason why our
action don’t become dharma is all again due to our self-cherishing.
So self-cherishing leads to all the problems in this life. If we were to
think beyond this life, the reasons why we go to the lower realms or even
if don’t go to the lower realms, the reason why we are in samsara, and as
long as we are in samsara, we have to experience all the different
problems/and difficulties. If you analyze/and think about it again, all of
these originate from our own selfishness.
If you think about all the problems that we have experienced as human
beings such as disharmony between people, fighting, quarrel, and
disagreement, all of these again comes back to selfishness. It is also very
clear that because of our selfishness, our self-cherishing attitude makes
us regard ourselves as more important than others, and in fact, the most
important one among all the people. Because of that, we work so hard for
the most important person on earth, which is ourselves. With that attitude
then people strive in making money for the most important person - I want
this and that, I want to be famous, I want to have good reputation. In
order to achieve all these, we will do everything - we cheat, we compete
with others in a negative way, we disregard people, we look down on people.
The thing that is responsible for all of these is selfishness, self-
cherishing attitude.
Sometimes we can be jealous of others who are more materially well off than
us because they have more good things of life than us. We envy them and
become jealous. Why? Again, because of the self-cherishing! If our self-
cherishing is very strong, all it takes is for somebody to point out a
small little fault in us or just to say something very insignificant but
unpleasant for us to get very upset. Again, because this is due to self-
cherishing!
From our own experience, the evidence/is very clear that the stronger our
ego and selfishness is, the more difficult it is for us to get along with
people. It doesn’t matter what organization, society, community, friends,
relatives or family, because we holds ourselves/as the most important
person. All it takes is something quite insignificant but nevertheless
unpleasant, we don’t like it because the “I” is so strong, and everybody
will appears as our enemy. We will find faults with everybody. We will have
difficulty to live with anybody. This is very clear.
All the disharmony in relationships between parents,/children, partners,
friends, people in a community, or even between teacher (guru) and
disciples, ultimately this comes from selfishness, self-cherishing. All the
unhappiness that comes due to the difficulties in the relationship between
the various types of relationship comes from self-cherishing.
In the saying of the Kadampa masters, it mentioned “Until we see ourselves
as enemy”, here what it means is that until we see our own self-cherishing
as the enemy. Until then, no matter who we take as our guru, conventionally
can be very good teachers, they will not be able to benefit us. The point
is to recognize our self cherishing as the enemy. If we can recognize our
self-cherishing as the enemy, then the possibility for positive change can
exists.
As the seven point mind training says “Put all the blame onto one”, so we
should put all blames onto our self-cherishing attitude. The teachings tell
us that the self-cherishing attitude, our selfishness, is responsible for
all the problems we have in this life. It is that which send us to the hell
realms, hungry ghosts and animals and which cause us problems in all our
future lives. This is what the teachings say, but we have to see for
ourselves whether that is true or not. We have to think about and analyze
them. So to think for ourselves is the very important step.
If our self-cherishing attitude has all these faults/and disadvantages,
then cherishing others must result in the opposite. Even in this life if we
have the thoughts of benefiting and cherishing others, then we would have
less problems and would have more happiness. Likewise, that must be the
case for our future lives. In our future lives we will have less problems
and more happiness. A good rebirth in the future as a human or a celestial
being will come from cherishing others. Likewise, the happiness of
liberation and full enlightenment comes from cherishing others.
It is mentioned in the mind training teachings and also in The Stages of
the Path to Enlightenment that we have to consider the faults/and the
disadvantages of self-cherishing from various angles, and we have to
consider the profits/and the advantages/gains from cherishing others from
all angles. These two reflections are critical/and essential. We must think
deeply. It is only on the basis of seeing the faults of self cherishing and
the benefits of cherishing others, then talking about the practice of
tonglen – taking on sufferings of others and giving our happiness to others
- make sense. The rest of this text is basically talking about the practice
of taking on the sufferings of others and giving our happiness to others.
This will not make any sense at all if we have not sorted out for ourselves
all the problems we have for not agreeing that self-cherishing is harmful
and not feeling that cherishing others is so important and doesn’t make
sense.
If you remember the first verse of the Eight Verses of Thought
Transformation that talks about how sentient beings are more precious than
wish-fulfilling jewels, and by seeing that, may we always hold them as
superior and supreme.
Lama Atisha said that we all regard the object of refuge as being very
important and very precious. When we think of the Buddha, we say “the
Buddha is so precious.” We also think our meditational deities are so
precious. Lama Atisha said that in fact sentient beings are more precious.
Anyway, sentient beings are definitely equally precious because our
meditational deities and the Buddhas that we take refuge in all came from
sentient beings.
The teachings point to us that we take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and
Sangha, we make request to the meditational deities, and we rely on the
gurus, and essentially all these are to achieve enlightenment for sentient
beings. So the teachings tell us that if we can take care of others and
cherish others, then the attainment of enlightenment will be granted to us.
The teachings also say that if we cherish others, we will accomplish all
the aims of this life and all the aims of future lives, and every single
thing can be achieved.
The teachings also state that if we generate love and compassion for
sentient beings, the merit of generating those attitudes surpasses the
merit that we get from making the usual offerings to the Buddhas and
bodhisattvas. In fact, generating love and compassion for sentient beings
is said to be supreme offering.
The essence is that we have to think deeply over and over again until we
are ascertained and really believe that our self-cherishing is really
indeed the source of all our problems. Likewise, we also have to think very
deeply over and over again until we are utterly convinced that the mind
that cherishes others is the main cause of all the success and happiness.
Verse 8
May the suffering of all beings, who, like myself, are driven by their
karma and their habituation to the afflictions, be heaped upon me, the
hedonist.
We sentient beings circle in cyclic existence mainly due to our self-
cherishing. We accumulate karma because of our self-cherishing. So that is
one thing. We circle in cyclic existence due to our karma and also due to
our habituation/familiarity with our afflictions.
The verse says that “may the suffering of all beings, who, like myself”
–means that may we take on all of that sufferings and throw them onto our
self-cherishing to make it powerless. The point is to destroy our self-
cherishing. Here we take on the suffering of all beings and then direct and
throw them onto our self-cherishing.
But we have to understand the discussion that we had in the previous
lesson. There is a difference between ourselves (the person) and our
afflictions. There is a distinction between us and our self-cherishing. So
the target here is our self-cherishing. We are not destroying ourselves. We
are destroying our self-cherishing. What we are aiming here is not to
destroy ourselves but just to destroy our self-cherishing. That is the
first thing that you need to understand.
In order to even entertain the thought of taking on all these sufferings
and then throwing it at our self-cherishing, we first must be convinced
that our self-cherishing is a problem. When we have these two
understandings, then the verse says “may the suffering of all beings be
heaped upon me”, it means that may it be thrown/directly at my self-
cherishing.
We must understand the distinction between “me” and “my faults, my
afflictions, my self-cherishing”. Sometimes we regard these two as
inseparable as one. But that is not the case. We are not out here to
destroy ourselves, but rather, we are destroying our self-cherishing. If we
think we are inseparable from our afflictions, and our self-cherishing and
me is the same thing, then we are going to meet with a lot of problems.
Since we have studied the Tathagata Essence (lineage), we know that the
nature of mind is clear light and our defilements are adventitious. As
such, we should be able to see the distinction between we ourselves and our
self-cherishing. Since the nature of the mind is clear light, and
afflictions have never ever resided in the nature of our minds, as such we
are not our afflictions. If we think about the “I”, what is the “I” that is
imputed in dependence upon? Essentially it is the mind’s factor of
luminosity and awareness. We do not impute “I” in dependence on the
afflictions. It is the “I” which is imputed in dependence upon the mind’s
factor of luminosity and awareness. If we probe further and think deeper,
in essence, the “I” is imputed in dependence upon the mind’s emptiness of
true existence; not somebody else’s mind but our mind’s emptiness of true
existence.
If we talk about the great seal or Mahamudra, from the sutra point of view
we talk about the objective great seal or objective Mahamudra that is none
other than the mind’s emptiness of true existence.
When people hear of the word Mahamudra, they think it is something very
great, but from the sutric point of view, Mahamudra as an object is the
mind’s emptiness of true existence.
This objective Mahamudra or great seal as an object, the mind’s emptiness
of true existence is also the basal Mahamudra or the Mahamudra of the
basis.
The Mahamudra of the path would be the mind that realizes the mind’s
emptiness of true existence.
The resultant Mahamudra would be the resultant wisdom, the Dharmakaya,
which is simply the resultant wisdom that realizes the mind’s emptiness of
true existence.
If we talk about the resultant Mahamudra, the resultant objective Mahamudra
would be the natural purity that is nature body.
If we look at from the subjective point of view, from the perspective of
the mind realizing it, that would be the Wisdom Truth Body.
Verse 9a
When I become enmeshed in selfishness, I will offer my own happiness to
living beings so as to counteract it.
It is quite impossible for bodhisattvas to be selfish i.e. to have self-
cherishing. Let us just assume that we allow for that possibility, what the
bodhisattvas do if that happens? Anyway, the bodhisattvas always think
about the faults of self-cherishing, the selfishness. They understand it
fully. Let’s just look at it theoretically, if it does happen, what should
he think or what should he do? The bodhisattvas should offer all his
happiness to others in order to counteract that selfishness.
Basically, the practice of tonglen is described as the practice where the
bodhisattvas take on all the sufferings and problems of all sentient beings
onto themselves. To weaken and destroy their own self-cherishing attitude,
they give their happiness and dedicate it to others.
Verse 9b
In the same way, should a companion be ungrateful to me, I will be content
in knowing that this is in retribution for my own inconstancy.
[BP1: At times when our companions, friends or entourage become ungrateful
to us, then we have to understand that this is the result of our own
inconstancy due to our own self-cherishing attitude. ‘Inconstancy’ here
refers to the self-cherishing attitude, which is reluctant to work for the
benefit of others.]
The situation mentioned in verse 9 is similar to the one in the Eight
Verses of Thought Transformation. When somebody whom we have benefited
returns and causes us harm, the teachings tell us that we should feel happy
because this is the result of my own doing and my own self-cherishing.
Because of that, it is now coming back to us. With that recognition, then
we should feel happy and derive some kind of satisfaction from that, as
described here, experiencing somebody harming us in return for the benefit
that we have extended to them.
We usually feel good when we see our enemies suffer. When something bad
happens to the people that we don’t like (our enemies), we feel we have
achieved something and have some satisfaction. Here, it is similar but the
difference is that the thing that is receiving the harm is our own self-
cherishing attitude. If we have already acknowledged and ascertained that
our self-cherishing attitude is indeed the source of our problems, so when
we see our self-cherishing attitude being harmed, we should be satisfied
and happy.
In this example, when somebody is ungrateful to us despite us having done
something beneficial or extended some help to them, and if we can ascertain
and acknowledge that is the result of our own doing due to our own self-
cherishing, then we can use that as a reminder to ourselves “In the future
I will not follow my self-cherishing.  I’m in this situation today because
of my own doing which is due to my own self-cherishing. As such, I will not
follow after self-cherishing from now”. We need to understand the harms and
problems that we received are the results of our own self-cherishing.
Verse 10
When my body falls prey to terrible sickness, it is the weapon of my own
evil deeds turned upon me for injuring the bodies of living beings. From
now on, I shall take all sickness upon myself.
When our body falls prey to terrible sickness, or when we experience some
physical pain, we have to remind and tell ourselves that this is a result
of having harmed others physically, having put others in prison or in
captivity and so forth. We have to tell ourselves this is the ripening
result of our own negative karma.
Here in the practice of taking and giving, when something like that happens
to us such as get very physically sick, then we make request to the Buddhas
and the meditational deities for them to grant their blessings for us to be
able to take on the similar sufferings of others, the sickness of others,
and all their problems and we experience it ourselves. We take on that
sufferings and directly throw at the suffering that we are already
experiencing.
You must not forget the point behind such visualization. As we have seen
earlier, all of our problems including sickness are the results of our own
self-cherishing attitude. First, we have to acknowledge and accept that.
Once we see that, here the practice of taking and giving is an exercise to
develop the courage to destroy our self-cherishing. That is why we make
request to the Buddhas and the meditational deities to grant their
blessings and we then take on all the sufferings and problems of others and
experience it by ourselves. The whole point is to destroy our self-
cherishing.
In the context of the practice of tonglen, taking and giving:
    - as we breathe out, we visualized dedicating all our happiness, virtues
      and all the positive things to sentient beings thinking that all of
      these are given in the form of white light that leave us,
    - as we breathe in, we breathe in all of their suffering, problems and
      causes of their problems and so forth in the form of black smoke, and
      direct that at our self-cherishing attitude.
So that is the practice of tonglen. Of course, this is related to the
practice of exchanging self and others.
Let’s say that is not possible, what we can think is “Whatever problems,
sicknesses I’m experiencing are the results of my negative karma. So it is
the wheel of the sharp weapons of my negative karma returning to haunt me.”
By accepting that this is the result of our own negative karma, then at
least we try to stay pretty much undisturbed, and not to be so affected by
that problem.
When people get sick, then they will say “Why is it me? Why do I get sick?
I’m so careful with my health and I take so good care of my health. I do
this, and I do that, but then how come I still gets sick?” That is the
answer.
If we have some faith of conviction in karma, and when a problem like we
get sick happens, we can see this is the ripening effect of our own
negative karma. Then the mind doesn’t get disturbed. That is the difference
in being a real Buddhist. We have at least minimum some real faith in
karma. If we think “This is my negative karma ripening, and with this, I’m
purifying my negativities and one negativity is down, so to speak”, then at
least we would not get so disturbed. We can at least remain quite cool
about it. If we don’t think of karma and if we don’t have faith in karma,
it doesn’t matter whether we call ourselves Buddhist or not, there is no
difference. Even if we call ourselves Buddhist but if we don’t think of
karma, there is no difference and we still become disturbed and upset.
Whether it is a sickness or a particular suffering or problem, once it
happened it is done. There is nothing we can do much about it. It doesn’t
matter what we think. The problem will not go away as it has happened. But
there is a huge difference in having a positive mindset in that if we can
think that this is the ripening result of our negative karma, then at least
we will not get so disturbed, or we may not even be disturbed and not
giving ourselves more problems. So there is some peace. On top of that, if
we can do what this text is telling us to do: “May I use this experience to
experience all the sufferings of sentient beings. May this be the
substitute for the suffering of sentient beings”, then it is even better
and you can achieve much more happiness.
[BP1: “From now on, I shall take all sickness upon myself” - We can do the
following a visualization:
We visualize, in the space in front of us, our own guru and meditational
deity. We make a heartfelt request to them to be able to do this practice
of taking on all the sicknesses of all sentient beings. We visualize light
rays emitting from our bodies and shining on all sentient beings. The light
rays are absorbed by them and hook back all their sicknesses, in the form
of black smoke, which then dissolves into us. We collect all the sicknesses
together and direct them against our self-cherishing attitude. We then
think that the self-cherishing attitude has been completely destroyed.
We then visualize giving whatever happiness and joy we have to all sentient
beings. The joy and happiness appear in the form of white light rays
emitted from our bodies and going out to all sentient beings. This is the
practice of giving.
We need to understand the advice of this verse: that all our sicknesses are
the karmic results of having caused physical harm to other sentient beings.
 Therefore, we must set a determination to stop harming other sentient
beings from now on. ]
Verse 11
When my mind falls prey to suffering, it is surely the weapon of my own
evil deeds turnedCupon me for troubling the minds of others. From now on, I
shall willingly take all suffering upon myself.
When our mind falls prey to suffering because somebody is disturbing us or
we just feel weird, uncomfortable, mentally upset for no reason, we must
think that this is the ripening result of having disturbed the minds of our
gurus in the past, having disturbed the minds of our parents, having
disturbed the minds of our friends.
Whatever it may be, we use this experience to take on the sufferings of
others and take it upon ourselves to experience that. There are many verses
here. Essentially, they are all designed for meditation on taking and
giving. With each verse, one makes request to the guru deity to be able to
take on the sufferings of others and dedicate our happiness to others. Then
we think about the meaning of the verse and then with the visualization of
taking and giving and then we engage in the practice.
Verse 12
When I am tormented by extreme hunger and thirst, it is the weapon of my
own evil deeds turned upon me for swindling, stealing, and acting miserly.
From now on, I shall willingly take all hunger and thirst upon myself.
[BP1: When we cannot get food or drink when we are extremely hungry or
tormented by thirst, we need to know that this is the karmic result of
having cheated and stolen from others in the past. All of these actions are
in relation to the possessions of others. In relation to one’s own
possessions, one is miserly.
When we are able to reflect on this well and feel it from the bottom of our
hearts, we then generate the thought, ‘This is the karmic result of my own
actions.  Through experiencing this extreme hunger and thirst, all this
karma that I have accumulated in the past is now completely purified and I
will not have to experience this again in the future.’
The experience of extreme hunger and thirst is the fruitional effect of
having created such actions in the past. Once we experience the fruitional
effect, we can say that it is finished.
Again, we can make request to our guru and meditational deity followed by
the visualization of giving and taking. In the end, we make the pledge not
to commit such actions again in the future in relation to the possessions
of oneself and others. ]
Verse13
When I am powerless and suffer enslavement, it is the weapon of my own evil
deeds turned upon me for despising my inferiors and enslaving them. From
now on I shall make slaves of my body and my life for the sake of others.
[BP1: At work, when we meet with a difficult boss who keeps piling work
upon us and the work is never-ending, we do not have to put up with this
situation all the time. There is a way out. We can resign and find another
job. But when we cannot quit and have to stay in that position, then the
best way to think is this: ‘The reason I am suffering in this way is
because of having despised my inferiors and enslaved others in my past
lives.’ When we can think in such a way, we will probably feel less
resentment towards our bosses and the quality of our work will also
improve.
In essence, the reason we are powerless and suffer enslavement by others  is
due to having done the same to others in  our  past  lives.  Since  we  have
committed such actions ourselves, we have to experience  the  results.  Now,
if we are doing the same things to others again, i.e., putting down,  making
use of or enslaving others, we should set the determination  to  stop  doing
such things from this very moment on.]
Verse 14
When insulting remarks assault my ears, it is the weapon of my own evil
deeds turned upon me for my verbal offenses of slander and so forth. From
now on I shall condemn my own verbal faults.
[BP1: When we hear insulting remarks, are accused for doing something which
we did not do or others engage in divisive speech, trying to separate us
from our friends and so forth, this is the result of our past negative
action of slander and so forth. If one can stop such remarks, one should do
so. But when one cannot do anything, the best way to think is, ‘This is my
negative karma. Whatever is happening to me is the result of having engaged
in the negative karma of slander, harsh speech and criticizing others,
etc.’ By reflecting along these lines, we can, at least, weaken our
aversion or resentment towards the person making those remarks.  Thinking,
‘Why is this person doing this to me?’ and trying to counter those remarks
only serves to increase hatred and to exacerbate the situation.
This reasoning makes sense. But, when it comes to putting it into practice,
it is very difficult. For example, someone says something untrue about us.
Since there is no truth in what was said, we have no reason to get upset.
If the person is saying something truthful, such as pointing out faults
that we have, again, there is no reason to be upset, since that person is
speaking the truth.  When we think about both scenarios, they make a lot of
sense.  But because we do not think in such a way, when we are wrongly
accused, we immediately get very upset.
When we feel hurt by others’ remarks, it is important to think about what
has happened from different angles. When we reflect in the normal negative
way, we will only get upset. But when we look at it from all the different
perspectives, even if we cannot stop anger from arising, at least the anger
can be weakened.
When the person is saying something, which is untrue, we have to think that
what he has said is false and, in reality, I am not like that. When one
reflects on the fact that the experience is the result of the negative
karma we had accumulated in the past, it helps to develop our faith in
karma.
Bodhisattvas, who have absolutely no self-cherishing and are solely
interested in accomplishing the welfare of others, when they meet with such
people, they never get angry. Meeting such people only serves to increase
the compassion in their minds. They will only think, ‘This person is saying
these untrue things due to their ignorance, and by saying such things, this
person is only creating causes for going to the lower realms.’ Because of
understanding this, the bodhisattvas have even greater compassion for such
people. Bodhisattvas take such negative experiences and use them on the
path.
The main reason why we become so upset when we are criticized is due to the
self-cherishing attitude in our minds. Even when someone says something
that is only mildly unpleasant, we are unable to bear it. This is because
we hold on so strongly to this fixed concept, ‘I did nothing wrong. I am
completely innocent. I am correct.’
Even if the person is saying something that is not true, how do we account
for the experience of hearing such insults? There must be a cause. It is
only because we have accumulated the negative karma in our past lives. When
we think about the situation in a broader way, we cannot claim to be
innocent victims because we have created the cause for that particular
experience ourselves due to something we did in our past lives. There is no
way we can prove that we were always innocent, in all our past lives.
When we examine the experience through a variety of perspectives, at the
very least, we get some mental relief and feel less angry. The wider the
perspective we take on any issue, correspondingly, there will be less
mental suffering and stress; the mind becomes more relaxed. When we focus
on just a tiny aspect of the problem and completely decide that that is the
problem, we will most likely be stressed by our narrow view.
Mahayana thought transformation is an instruction to help us make our minds
more expansive. In our daily lives, when we encounter problems, we should
try to remember some of these points. We need to do this ourselves because
no one can do it for us. ]
Verse 15
When I am reborn into an impure land, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds
turned upon me for always cultivating impure vision. From now on, I shall
cultivate only pure vision.
[BP1: An ‘impure land,’ refers to a difficult environment where we have to
experience suffering.  We need to understand that this is the result of
having habituated our minds to seeing everything as impure. Whether the
land is pure or impure depends on our outlook. When one’s mind is pure, one
is able to see everything as pure; when one’s mind is impure, one will see
everything in a negative way. When we experience problems such as being
unhappy with our homes or difficulties with our partners, such problems are
all are due to having impure vision. Therefore, from now on, we should try,
as much as we are able, to cultivate only pure view.]
The meaning of the verses is not difficult to understand. But the most
important thing is to think over and over again about the faults of self-
cherishing and how our self-cherishing is the source of all the problems.
We have to accept that from the heart to see that that is so. Likewise, we
have to think the gain, the profit, and the benefit of cherishing others
from all angles and to really see how that is so. That is the most
important thing.
All the verses here always talks about specific sufferings and the causes
for those sufferings. They are all negative karma, but it is specific
negative karma. We see what those causes are, we accept them for what it is
and if we do not want to experience that in the future, we just have to
tell ourselves and make a promise to ourselves to not to do those actions
again in the future. That is essentially what all these verses are all
about.
Since we don’t have much time, we will just read and go through the text
quickly. Do your own reading and if you have any questions from your
reading you can bring it up in class.
Student: Last week you mentioned about bodhisattva superiors utilize
attachment and take rebirth as universal monarch and some of them have
fathered many children to benefit sentient beings. How do having many
children benefit sentient beings? I was thinking if some of the children
turn out to be bad children, then it would do more harm to sentient beings.

Khen Rinpoche: If you can produce thousand children, then maybe ten would
be fantastic.
Do you know the story of Asanga and Vasubhandu? They are brothers. Their
mother was a nun. Of course she didn’t give birth to them as a nun but she
gave back her vows.
Children don’t turn out well because, in the first place, their parents
made them because of self-cherishing. For those bodhisattvas who don’t have
self-cherishing, I guess is a different case. Great beings like the
bodhisattvas have very big mind to benefit sentient beings and also they
can make very powerful prayers, in a way the conditions for them to produce
children would be beneficial as they probably have some control over the
conditions and they can make that happen.
Khen Rinpoche: You can think about it. Tibetan say ???  which when
translate directly is “make the baby”. I think in English, they don’t say
that.
[BP1: Verse 7:  Sometimes self-cherishing attitude and the self-grasping
conception seems to be talking about the same thing when we look at the
terms.  It also becomes less clear-cut when we examine our own feelings and
experiences. But we must posit a difference between the self-cherishing
attitude and the self-grasping conception since they are different in the
way they apprehend their objects.
The self-grasping conception is a wrong consciousness. Its object of
apprehension is the ‘I,’ which it grasps at as being established by way of
its own character. It is the mind, focusing on the ‘I’ which it apprehends
as existing from its own side. Although this is how the self-grasping
conception believes the ‘I’ to exist, does the ‘I’ actually exist in this
way? The answer is definitely, ‘No.’
The ‘I’ does not exist in the way that the self-grasping conception
believes it to exist. Such a mind is a wrong consciousness because an
inherently existent ‘I’ that exists from its own side does not exist in
reality.
The self-cherishing attitude also observes the ‘I,’ but in a different
aspect.  It observes the conventionally existent ‘I’ and cherishes it. It
is not that it grasps at it as being inherently existent all the time.  The
self-cherishing attitude can be a mind that accords with reality eg. the
self-cherishing attitude that cherishes the merely labelled ‘I.’
I think we can say that the self-cherishing attitude is a factually
concordant mind because the conventionally existent ‘I’  (or the merely
labelled ‘I’) does exist in reality. There is a mind that focuses on the
merely labelled ‘I’ and wishes it to be happy,  ‘I want to be happy.’ It
accords with reality because there is this ‘I’ that wants to be happy.
Therefore, this mind is concordant with reality.
If we take the position that there is no common locus between the two, ie.
that there is nothing which we can point to that is both a self-cherishing
attitude and a self-grasping conception,  then we have to say that:-
    - the self-grasping conception is necessarily a wrong consciousness;
      whereas,
    - the self-cherishing attitude is necessarily a factually concordant
      mind.
I am not saying that this is absolutely correct. We have to think about
whether there would be any fallacies to our position that these two
mentalities are mutually exclusive.
Is the self-cherishing attitude necessarily a factually concordant mind?
One can say that one can have the self-cherishing attitude which cherishes
the inherently existent ‘I.’ But we do not  have to call that mind the self-
cherishing attitude; it can be called ‘a self-grasping mind.’
Another example: is an eye consciousness apprehending blue necessarily a
factually concordant consciousness or not? Not necessarily so because an
eye consciousness apprehending an inherently existent blue is a wrong
consciousness.
When self-cherishing is present, it is does not necessarily mean that self-
grasping is also present and vice versa. Self-cherishing is not necessarily
self-grasping. Self-grasping is also not necessarily self-cherishing.

Is there something that is both self-cherishing and self-grasping?
Although it is not clear in the text or commentaries, I put it to you that
there is such a thing.
Let us look at the different possibilities:-
(i) Where there is self-cherishing but  not self-grasping
Example: The self-cherishing attitude in the mental continuum of the arhat
who has achieved liberation: The arhats have no self-grasping conception
but they have do have self-cherishing.
Why do arhats have self-cherishing? If they did not have self-cherishing,
they would not remain in the sphere of peace (the state of liberation which
they have achieved) for eons and eons.
(ii) Where there is self-grasping but not self-cherishing
Example: In the mental continua of some bodhisattvas who still have the
conception grasping at the ‘I’ as being inherently existent.
(iii) Where there is both self-cherishing and self-grasping
Example: all of us
(iv) Where there is neither self-cherishing nor self-grasping.
Example: the Buddha  ]












































