Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson15_rev.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.602754
================================================================================


Related to our previous discussion on disintegratedness, if we do compare
these two phenomena -illumination and darkness- when there is strong
illumination, darkness is overcome. So, if there is very strong
illumination, then it illuminates the darkness right away.  So when the
darkness is overcome by illumination, is there a continuum of that
darkness?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Any scientist here?
Ven Gyurme: Quantum physics, discussion about light, whether it’s a
particle or…..
Khen Rinpoche:  What I think is that when there is strong illumination, the
darkness is overcome. It ceases, and there is no continuum of darkness.
Ven Gyurme: You turn off the light.
Khen Rinpoche: When you turn off the light, the darkness returns. So, is
that the new darkness or the continuum of the previous darkness? What do
you think?
Ven Gyurme: Is darkness a positive phenomenon or not?
I tend to believe that when darkness ceases, the continuum of darkness
ceases.
Likewise, I think similar to this example of light illumination overcoming
darkness is when the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness is generated with
the attainment of the Path of Seeing, that particular mind on the
uninterrupted path becomes the final antidote to the Path of Seeing
abandonments. It is a forceful antidote. Through the force of that
uninterrupted path, the Path of Seeing abandonments together with its
continuum cease.
I have not seen it mentioned clearly in the treatises. This is what I
think.
So back to that question from the collection of qualms from the exam, one
of the questions was on the defilements.
Does the disintegratedness of defilements exist or not?
When the defilements cease, I think perhaps it is better to say that the
disintegratedness of the defilements do not exist when the defilements are
removed through the force of the respective antidotes.
Do you see any fallacies to this position?
Student 1: If that is the case, it is said that when we do Vajrasattva
purification, we will purify and the karma becomes lessen, like instead of
going to hell we may just suffer slight headache. So, if it is completely
purified, then there is no disintegratedness, then it should be completely
gone. But why is there still a residue effect?
Ven Gyurme: Your answer is in your question.
Student 1: I’m saying that maybe there is some kind of disintegratedness of
the defilements. That is why we suffer a slight effect after that.
Khen Rinpoche:  That experience is a very clear sign that you haven’t
purified fully that negativity. That is why your answer is in your
question.
Student 1: So there is disintegratedness of the defilement and that is why
you suffer a side effect such a small headache.
Khen Rinpoche: You can say that.
Student 1: So the disintegratedness of defilement exists?
Khen Rinpoche: That is why you get a headache.
Student 1: So in the previous example, you cannot say that there is no
disintegratedness i.e. when the light comes on, the darkness completely
disappeared. In this case, it does not disappear completely.
Ven Gyurme: That is an analogy for the Path of Seeing.
Khen Rinpoche: There is no correlation to the analogy of illumination
versus darkness to your example of purification of a specific negativity.
The analogy works for my position when one generates the uninterrupted Path
of Seeing which acts as a final antidote to the Path of Seeing
abandonments. They ceased completely.
Student 1: I see what you mean. Because the antidote is not strong enough
so there is actually still a side effect, and disintegratedness of
defilement exist.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Still there
What about if you have purified the negative karma completely? Is there any
disintegratedness or not?
Student 1: Don’t have.
Student1: You talked about disintegratedness of karma, and how the Middle
Way School posited that negative karma, they experience the effect is due
to the disintegratedness after they have committed the action. Is it the
case because of this action, the karma grows overtime? For example, when
you kill a mosquito today and 10 days later, it becomes the effect of
killing a man; because of this disintegratedness, it produces its effect
continuously more and more. However, if you follow the lower school, the
karmic effect is actually deposited on the continuum. So in that case, it
can’t grow overtime.
Ven Gyurme: So you are saying according to lower schools, karma doesn’t
increase, and according to the higher schools, karma increases.
Student 1: Base on lower school, you cannot explain that increases, whereas
you can explain that increases base on Middle Way School. Because it is
composite phenomena, it can grow.
Ven Gyurme: So you accept that the lower schools say that karma increases
but they don’t know how to explain?
Khen Rinpoche: When an action ceases, it produces disintegratedness and
then there is a continuum of the disintegratedness. Of course we accept
that. But how can you claim that just because it continues, it will become
stronger and stronger from moment to moment? How to account for that
increase?
Student 1: The way to explain it is like this. There are two ways of cause
and effect. One is, for example, a seed grows into a sprout. In that kind
of cause and effect, the seed must cease then the sprout is produced. Once
the sprout is produced, the cause ceases. There is another kind of cause
and effect, for example, a child is produced from a mother. Even though the
mother is said to be the cause of the son, after she gave birth to the son,
she did not die, and the cause is still there as she continues to produce
other sons. That is the other cause and effect, meaning that the cause
doesn’t cease and it continues.
Ven Gyurme: The mother is the substantial cause?
Student 1: This is the example of the cause and effect where the cause
doesn’t really ceases after it produces its effect, it continues to produce
other effects.
Ven Gyurme: Then the mother didn’t disintegrate, right?
Student 1: So, based on that disintegratedness, the functioning thing
actually continued to produce the effect as long as it is not purified
completely, and overtime it will produce more and more effect. That is why
after the killing of a mosquito, it can produce the effect of killing a man
after sometime. Anyway, this example of mother and son doesn’t really come
from me. I think I just read it in lesson 19 of the last module and it came
from Khen Rinpoche. I just read it, so it cross my mind maybe that is why
the effect gets more and more serious after some time.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I said mother and son?
Student 1: Yes, lesson 19.
Ven Gyurme: What is the context?
Student 1: It is talking about different kinds of cause and effect. One is
that the cause ceases, and the other kind is that the cause doesn’t cease.
Ven Gyurme: The substantial cause, the cooperative condition. That is no
problem with that.
Student 2: For those superior bodhisattvas who have completely ceased all
the afflictive obscurations (the pure ground bodhisattvas), how would they
be able to use afflictions which they already completely abandoned to
benefit sentient beings like the impure ground bodhisattvas? Also when they
enter the tantric path, how would they be able to utilize afflictions like
desire on the path to enlightenment since they cannot generate those
afflictions anymore?
Khen Rinpoche: It is said that the bodhisattvas who are of the definite
lineage do not purposely focus on abandoning the afflictions, partly
because the afflictions cannot harm them, and also partly because they can
use some of the afflictions as an aid to benefit others. Having said this,
it is not necessary the case that all bodhisattvas use afflictions as an
aid to benefit sentient beings. That is why it comes back to what Student 2
is asking about: What about the bodhisattvas on the pure grounds?
Those bodhisattvas on the pure grounds don’t use afflictions as an aid to
benefit others because they don’t have any afflictions to use since they
have already abandoned them.
Student 2: Perhaps this question is not so much pertaining to the current
module on sutra. We understand that eventually all bodhisattvas must enter
the tantric path and utilize that. As far as utilizing desire on the path
to enlightenment, every sentient being needs that to attain enlightenment.
So if the superior bodhisattvas have already abandoned that on the 8th,
9th, and 10th ground, and eventually enters into tantric path, then how
would they be able to utilize that?
Khen Rinpoche: There are qualms on this point, so we will look at it in the
future. Perhaps in the tantric module, we will look at the meaning of
taking afflictions as the path.
Student 3: In general the entire spectrum of phenomena is divided into two
classes - impermanent phenomena and permanent phenomena. It is not possible
for an impermanent phenomenon to become a permanent phenomenon and a
permanent phenomenon to become an impermanent phenomenon. So when it comes
to the disintegratedness of a mental obscuration, if you say that the
continuum of the disintegratedness stops, it is equivalent to saying that a
functioning thing has stopped functioning and become a non-functioning
thing; a permanent phenomenon. So this is where the fallacy could arise if
you posit that the disintegratedness of a mental obscuration stops, the
continuum is stopped when the antidote is applied.
Khen Rinpoche: When you think of the example of illumination, when there is
very strong illumination, there is no darkness at all, and the darkness has
ceased to exist.
Student 3: Yes, yes, the darkness has ceased to exist.
Khen Rinpoche: So where is the function of the darkness? It is not
function.
Student 3: Because the Prasangika posit the disintegrated of an event that
happened in the past, so the function of that disintegratedness is to
produce the next moment of disintegratedness in the context of something
that has happened in the past. So the continuum of the past cannot become
non-existent. It is like that. That is one theory.
Ven Gyurme: So what you are positing is any composed phenomenon that ceases
necessarily produces disintegratedness?
Student 3: Any functioning thing necessarily produces a result, so that
this disintegratedness is sort of like used to explain the continuum of
something that has already happened in the past. It is sort of like used in
the context of the explanation of time, not so much so as the normal
concept of time that is thought of in a linear fashion.
Ven Gyurme: Basically your fundamental premise is: The cessation of any
composed phenomenon necessarily produces disintegratedness. Therefore, you
cannot accept that the Path of Seeing abandonment do not produce a
disintegratedness, right?
Student 3: I mean the disintegratedness of a mental obscuration is
different from the disintegratedness of the cessation of a mental
obscuration. The words are different. Are “the disintegratedness of a
mental obscuration and disintegratedness of the cessation of a mental
obscuration” the same?
Khen Rinpoche: If you think of a butter lamp or flame that burns for an
hour, and up to the last moment before the hour ceases, in every moment, it
is basically a continuum of disintegratedness producing all the way up to
the last moment. But in the last moment of the flame, the flame ceases to
exist, and the flame does not continue.
Student 3: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: The continuum of the flame is severed, right?
Student 3: I mean the moment of disintegratedness follows after the
cessation of whatever phenomena we are talking about. If it is a flame,
then the cessation of a flame, and if it is the cessation of a mental
obscuration, then we talk about the cessation of the mental obscuration.
I’m talking about the disintegratedness is not the literal translation as
the cessation of the flame. I take the definition of disintegratedness as a
functioning thing that has the ability to produce the next moment of its
disintegratedness. Not that meaning of disintegratedness as in something
that has ceased; that is coarse level. If you look at impermanent phenomena
at deeper level, the continuum of an impermanent phenomenon, there is no
beginning and there is no end. I mean if there’s an end to an impermanent
phenomena, then that would imply that the impermanent phenomena, a
functioning thing, has stopped functioning and therefore it has become a
permanent phenomenon. So just like to find out from Khen Rinpoche is that
how to reconcile this qualm.
Khen Rinpoche: When we talk about functioning thing, there are basically
two”
   1. There is a functioning thing in which there is a continuum of it.
   2. You can also talk about functioning thing in terms of its continuum
      being severed.
So when a functioning thing exists, it exists in a continuum. But there are
also functioning things whose continuum is ceased. So the question here is:
For the functioning thing whose continuum is severed, in the next moment,
does it produce disintegratedness or not? That is what we need to think.

The Wheel Weapon
Vere 49
Since that’s the way it is, I seize the enemy! I seize the thief who
ambushed and deceived me, the hypocrite who deceived me disguised as
myself. Aha! It is ego-clinging, without a doubt.
Ven Gyurme’s translation:
Since that’s the way it is, I recognize the enemy! I recognize the robber
who ambushed and deceived me, the hypocrite who deceived me disguised as
myself. Aha! It is self-cherishing, without a doubt.
[BP1 Module 6: ‘Since that’s  the  way  it  is,’  summarizes  what  we  have
discussed so far, the enumeration of the different kinds of sufferings,  the
actions that brought them about and how these actions had been motivated  by
our self-cherishing attitude. It also  suggests  that  we  acknowledge  this
presentation to be the  way  things  are,  without  any  superimposition  or
denial on our part.]
Prior to this, there is a lot of discussion on the faults of self-
cherishing. The first part of this verse is expressing one’s
acknowledgement, one’s understanding, one’s recognition, “This is really
true, my self -cherishing has all these faults.”
The author is saying “All these faults of self-cherishing, and I have now
recognized it as such.”
Just as a robber or bandit or thief comes and takes away our possessions
and we may not be even aware of it. Likewise, our self-cherishing destroys
us, and takes away our good qualities and so forth. The author is saying:
“Now finally I have finally seen what self-cherishing is.”
When we talk about robbers or people who plunder our wealth, we can talk
about it being as an outside job or an inside job. If it is an inside job,
it is more difficult to recognize. If your loved ones or family members or
people that you trust do take things from us secretly or steal our stuff,
it is more difficult to discover. Likewise, this inner robber is like our
self-cherishing attitude who takes away our virtuous thoughts.
The author is saying that prior to this, he thought the self-cherishing as
a loved one and makes friends with it and believed in it. Just like an
insider job, somebody who takes things from us and since it is an inside
job, we don’t recognize it. We actually think that person is just so good.
Likewise, with regards to our self-cherishing attitude, we think of our
self-cherishing attitude as somebody close to us, and as a friend. The
author is saying “Now I finally see the truth.”
At most of the time, many of us do not regard our self-cherishing as an
enemy. There is no way that we believe our self-cherishing is our enemy.
Even at those times when we have some inkling of the faults of self-
cherishing or we have some idea that our self-cherishing may be bad, but we
still have very strong doubts as to whether the self-cherishing is really
that bad. How can the self-cherishing be so bad? That is why we have
doubts. But here, the author is proclaiming this sense of wonder and
feeling kind of happy “Finally, due to the kindness of the guru and the
dharma, I have finally removed all doubts as to whether my self-cherishing
is the enemy or not.”
[BP1 Module 6: ‘The hypocrite who deceived me disguised as myself’:  We  are
also able to recognise that the self-cherishing attitude  and  self-grasping
conception is like a hypocrite, someone who has  cheated  us  by  disguising
themselves as us, as  ‘me’.  This  line  is  also  saying,  ‘Now  I  finally
recognize you.’]
Verse 50
Now, O Yamantaka, raise the weapon of action and spin it furiously over
your head three times. Spread apart your feet, which are the two truths,
open wide your eyes of method and wisdom, and bare your fangs of the four
powers and pierce the enemy!
Here, essentially one is making a request to the deity, the wrathful
Yamantaka, to destroy completely our self-cherishing.  The main object of
fury or wrath is the real enemy, our self-cherishing. We are supplicating
the wrathful deity, Yamantaka, to wield his weapon over the head,
literally, the head of this enemy.
Now, Yamantaka raise the weapon of karma and spin it furiously over the
head three times, the head of the enemy being the self-cherishing. Why
three times? Three times here symbolizes:
   1. The conventional bodhicitta
   2. The ultimate bodhicitta
   3. The practice combining the conventional bodhicitta and the ultimate
      bodhicitta
Yamantaka, the wrathful deity, stands with his legs spread apart, with his
right leg bent and left leg extended.
The right bent leg symbolizes the conventional bodhicitta.
His out stretched left leg symbolizes the ultimate bodhicitta.
His two legs represent the two truths, and here meaning the two bodhicitta.

Both his eyes of method and wisdom are wide open. That symbolizes the
practice of method and wisdom – the practice of conventional bodhicitta and
ultimate bodhicitta- in equal measure.
‘And bare your fangs’ -there are four fangs that symbolize the four powers.
With these four powers then one pierce the enemy of self-cherishing.
[BP1 Module 6: In order to destroy the two conceptions, the self-cherishing
attitude and the self-grasping perception, one needs to practice the union
of both conventional and ultimate bodhicitta, coupled with the perfection
of the four powers. The powers that are required here for purification
practices, which have already been covered in the Lamrim, refer to:
   1. The power of reliance,
   2. The power of eradication,
   3. The power of applying the antidote and
   4. The power of turning away from wrong doing.]
Verse 51
O King of Spells who torments the enemy, summon that vow-breaker who is
destroying me and others, that savage called “Ego-Clinging, the Enchanter,”
who, brandishing the weapon of action, runs uncontrollably through the
jungle of cyclic existence.
Ven Gyurme’s translation:
O King of Mantras who torments the enemy, summon that vow-breaker who is
destroying me and others, that savage called “Self-Grasping, the
Enchanter,” who, brandishing the weapon of action, runs uncontrollably
through the jungle of cyclic existence.
‘O King of Mantras who torments the enemy’ - the enemy here is the self-
cherishing attitude. The King of the Mantras refers to the attitude of
cherishing others - the one who prioritizes others above oneself, the
attitude that discards one self and cherishing only others.
There are so many mantras that are recited including some supposedly very
wrathful and powerful mantras. However, no matter what the mantras may be,
and we can recite it on and on, the recitation of mantras cannot even touch
our self-cherishing and can never harm our self-cherishing. The only
solution to our self-cherishing is the attitude of cherishing others. So,
reciting all the mantras, all these powerful mantras and wrathful mantras,
put aside harming the self-cherishing attitudes, many a time such so-called
practices only increase our self-cherishing.
Our enemy - self-cherishing attitude- has bound us to cyclic existence and
has made us wander in cyclic existence without a choice, just like a slave
who is under the control of his master. It is saying that our self-
cherishing attitude has made us circle in cyclic existence from the lowest
of the lowest hells, Avici, up to the Peak of Cyclic Existence. So, it is
our self-cherishing attitude that has kept us going on over and over again
in cyclic existence.
We do have the self-grasping (the apprehension of the self) and then we
have the self-cherishing attitude. There is a discussion of the
relationship between these two: which is the master and which is the slave.
According to this particular commentary, the self-cherishing is the master
and the self-grasping is the slave. In the earlier part of this text, there
was a statement of how the self-grasping is the master and the self-
cherishing follows the self-grasping. But here in the commentary, the
status of the role is reversed. Here the self-cherishing is said to be the
master and the self-grasping is the slave to the self-cherishing.
Self-grasping (the apprehension of the self) or and the self-cherishing are
different. They are not the same. For us, we have not abandoned any of the
two, and all the times, these two goes hand in hand.
Those who enter the Hearers Path and then progress towards the Hearers Path
of No-More-Learning where they will become an arhat (foe destroyer), that
Hearer abandons the self-grasping (the apprehension of self) but the self-
cherishing is still in the mental continuum. So in order for that Hearer’s
arhat to achieve Buddhahood, he needs to enter the Mahayana Path. Of
course, he needs to generate bodhicitta (mind of enlightenment) to enter
the Mahayana Path. So, when that Hearer arhat generates bodhicitta, he
enters the Mahayana Path. With the generation of bodhicitta, we could say
that the self-cherishing in his mind is destroyed. Such an individual who
enters the Mahayana Path after becoming an arhat is somebody who does not
have self-cherishing and self-grasping.
For someone who enters the Mahayana Path from the onset (without traversing
the Hinayana Path), when he generates bodhicitta he enters the Mahayana
Path and achieves the Small Mahayana Path of Accumulation. The self-
grasping is still there but the self-cherishing is very weak. Then the
bodhisattva moves on to the Middle Path of Accumulation. I think that on
the Middle Path of Accumulation, the bodhisattva by then definitely would
have realized emptiness. Because of his realization of emptiness, his
bodhicitta is being accompanied with this wisdom. As his bodhicitta is
accompanied by the wisdom realizing emptiness, his bodhicitta henceforth
will not degenerate. It is said that from the Middle Path of Accumulation,
the bodhisattva’s bodhicitta will never degenerate.
What I am saying is that for someone who is of the definite lineage enters
the Mahayana Path from the onset, there is self-grasping (apprehension of
the self) even upon entering the Mahayana Path. In fact, from entering the
Mahayana Path all the ways up to the 7th ground, the bodhisattva is not
able to abandon the self-grasping.
Anyway, the point is that the self-cherishing and the self-grasping are not
the same and this is according to what is presented in the great treatises.
Maybe it is better or perhaps it is easier to assert that the self-grasping
is the master and the self-cherishing is the slave. The very root is the
apprehension of the self. It is something to think about because sometimes
the roles seem to be reversed. Sometimes in the text you see that the self-
cherishing is liked the master and the self-grasping is liked the slave.
‘Summon the vow breaker who is destroying me and others’ -  that it is the
self-cherishing and the self-grasping that destroy ourselves and destroy
others. It is very rare for people who have self-cherishing to benefit
others. Even if people who have self-cherishing do try to benefit others,
and when you look at it, the benefit that it is effected is not really
perfect and ideal. When we have self-cherishing, we cannot benefit
ourselves and we cannot benefit others. So, here we are asking the wrathful
deity to summon the vow (samaya) breaker who is destroying me and others.
Verse 52
Call him, call him, wrathful Yamantaka! Beat him, beat him, pierce the
heart of the enemy, Ego! Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer,
false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy,
Ego!
In the text is “call him, call him”. I don’t think it is calling him as you
call, he won’t come. It is to hook and literally is to summon. You don’t
call but you summon them.
Ven Gyurme’s translation:
Summon him, summon him, wrathful Yamantaka! Beat him, beat him, pierce the
heart of the enemy, Ego! Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer,
discursive/evil thought! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the
enemy, Ego!
We summon the enemy two times and that means applying the two bodhicitta
-the conventional bodhicitta and the ultimate bodhicitta- to overcome the
enemy of the self-cherishing. We are imploring the wrathful Yamantaka to
summon the enemy of self-cherishing. We are also asking the deity to pierce
the heart of the enemy with the two bodhicitta. We also asking the deity to
roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, the one who brings about our
downfall, which is this evil thought of self-cherishing.
‘Mortally strike’ means to kill.
“Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!” – ‘the
enemy’ is the self-grasping and ‘the butcher’ is the self-cherishing
attitude. In order to kill somebody and to make sure the killing is done
completely, one either stab the person’s heart or shoot the person at where
the heart is, and the person will definitely be killed.
 “Mortally strike at the heart” - it is the analogy but the meaning is
this: with the conventional and ultimate bodhicitta, we strike at the heart
of the self-grasping and the self-cherishing. What does “to strike at the
heart of the self-cherishing and the self-grasping” means? It is to know
exactly what is their own uncommon mode of apprehension, i.e. how do these
two minds operate? What is the view of the world? In technical language, we
say their mode of apprehension. With the conventional and ultimate
bodhicitta, we strike at the mode of apprehension of the self-cherishing
and self-grasping attitude.
When we see words such as to kill, strike at the heart of the enemy, smash
them and hammer them and so forth in the Buddha’s teachings, we have to be
careful not to misinterpret them or to take them literally. The target is
never on somebody on the outside. It is not the external enemy but it is
always the inner enemy, the afflictions, and in this case are the self-
cherishing and the self-grasping.
How do you overcome afflictions? How do you overcome this wrong conception?

You have to target their mode of apprehension.
How do you overcome a particular affliction or a wrong concept?
It is through getting rid of the conceived object of the wrong concept.
That is how you overcome a wrong concept or an affliction or self-
cherishing or self-grasping.
Verse 53
Hum! Hum! O great tutelary deity, produce your miraculous apparitions! Dza!
Dza! Bind the enemy tightly! Phat! Phat! I beseech you to release me from
all fetters! Shig! Shig! I beseech you to cut the knot of clinging!
Ven Gyurme’s translation:
Hum! Hum! O great deity, produce your miraculous apparitions! Dza! Dza!
Bind the enemy tightly! Phat! Phat! I beseech you to release me from all
bondage! Shig! Shig! I beseech you to cut the knot of grasping!
This verse is pretty much the same as the previous verse.
‘Shig! Shig!’ - represent the conventional and ultimate bodhicitta. With
that “I beseech you to cut the knot of grasping”- here the “grasping”
refers to the self-grasping and the self-cherishing.
How do you cut the knot of clinging? Just like what I said earlier, you
have to get rid of the conceived object of the particular affliction or
wrong conception.
[BP1 Module 6: The first line is as if we were persuading the holy mind of
the deity, Yamantaka, to subdue our self-cherishing and self-grasping
attitudes. If the “Hum” is recited twice, it is same as before, i.e.
represents the way to subdue the self-cherishing and self-grasping
attitudes through the development of the two bodhichittas.
The second line is quite similar to the first. “Dza” is the syllable for
hook, which means to summon. It means to bring in or summon forth the enemy
and to bind him tightly.
“Phat” means to place the enemy in one particular position. For the third
line, Tibetan version is different from the root text, which reads “Phat!
Phat! I beseech you to release me from the Lord of Death, Yama.”
Here in this context, we are interested in the real meaning of Yama, i.e.
not-so-much the person’s name but rather our self-cherishing and self-
grasping attitudes. We are requesting Yamantaka, who is the antidote or
slayer of the Lord of Death, to free us from Yama (our self-cherishing and
self-grasping attitudes).
As mentioned in previous classes, when we look at the deity, Yamantaka,
there is the Yamantaka of the interpretive level and of the definitive
level. The definitive Yamantaka, which is the “real” Yamantaka or real
meaning of Yamantaka, is the wisdom that realizes emptiness. In this
context, we also identify the definitive Yamantaka as the altruistic
intention to become enlightened for the benefit of all sentient beings.
Hence, here we’re making this request to the definitive Yamantaka, which is
the two bodhichittas, to destroy the real Yama, which is our self-
cherishing and self-grasping.
For the fourth line, the knot of clinging refers to the knot of self-
cherishing and self-grasping.
Q&A:
Student 4: Just now you say it is better to say that the self-grasping is
the boss.  If we say that up to 7th grounds, the bodhisattva superiors
still have self-grasping, isn’t it implied that if the master is around,
the slave will be still around?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Boss can be alone. Do you understand what she
asked? She was asking the bodhisattva up to the 7th ground, you have the
self-grasping but you don’t have the self-cherishing. So, she thinks if you
have self-grasping, must have self-cherishing. I said not necessary as boss
can be alone.
Student 5:  I would like to ask about verse 50.
Now, O Yamantaka, raise the weapon of action and spin it furiously over
your head three times. Spread far apart your feet, which are the two
truths, open wide your eyes of method and wisdom, and bare your fangs of
the four powers and pierce the enemy!
Why it is called the weapon of karma? How is self-cherishing the boss of
self-grasping? As you mentioned earlier, the role can be changed.
Khen Rinpoche: Many a time, it is from an attitude of self-cherishing that
self-grasping comes. When we cherish the ‘I’ strongly, it is the negative
way, we prioritize ‘I’ over others and then the self-grasping comes. For
us, we experience these two minds in both roles. Sometimes the self-
cherishing acts as the boss induces the self-grasping but in other times
when self-grasping is liked the boss then that brings about the self-
cherishing. For us, we experience both.
Student 6: Do arhat has mental body?
Khen Rinpoche: I wonder if arhat who achieved the nirvana with remainder
has mental body or not. So which tenets are you taking?
Student 6: With remainder means with this body?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): I forgot what we said in Tathagata Essence.
Student 6: The reason why I asked is if they have mental body, is mental
body means no true suffering?
Ven Gyurme: Inconceivable transference of death?
Student 6: Yes, something likes that if they have mental body. It is
possible to have self-cherishing and yet not have suffering body - the body
that is no true suffering because of mental body? Self-cherishing gives
rise of suffering? Or suffering arises from that?
Ven Gyurme: You have self-cherishing but still have mental body. Therefore,
body is not true suffering. That is what you are saying, right?
Student 6: If he has mental body, self-cherishing doesn’t necessary give
rise to suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: An arhat has no suffering. That is why he is an arhat. Does
arhat has self-cherishing? You have to say “Yes”.  So it follows that if
one has self-cherishing one doesn’t necessarily has suffering. Self-
cherishing doesn’t necessarily lead to suffering.
Although the arhats are the same liked us in having the self-cherishing,
that is about it. We have self-cherishing, they have self-cherishing. We
have self-cherishing but we have a lot of problem from that. The arhats
have self-cherishing but they don’t have any problem primarily because of
their direct perception of emptiness they have abandoned the afflictions.
Their wisdom is very powerful.
Although the arhats have self-cherishing liked us but this is not to say
that their self-cherishing is liked ours self-cherishing. Our self-
cherishing is very strong but arhat self-cherishing is so much weaker.
Although the arhats don’t have great compassion but they have immeasurable
compassion. There is debate about whether arhats have great compassion or
not.


