Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson18.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.449623
================================================================================


Student 1: I wanted to clarify the actual meaning of dull faculty and sharp
faculty. The reason I am asking this is because I am not sure whether this
is necessary the factor of being intelligent? There are very intelligent
people who have no interest in the Dharma, and don’t put much effort into
dharma practice even when they need the Dharma. Yet there are people who
are not so academically gifted have tremendous faith and determination in
their practice.
Also Khen Rinpoche previously shared with us that even for yourself, you
considered yourself not as intelligent as some of your classmates when you
were studying, but you completed your studies because you are very very
hardworking. So I thought it would be helpful to have an understanding of
what it means to be dull faculty and sharp faculty.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the difference between a person of sharp faculty and
a person of dull faculty? In the study of the Abhisamayalankara (The Study
of the Perfections), you will find these two terms;
   1. Follower of faith
   2. Follower of doctrine
The followers of faith are the dull faculty. Then the followers of doctrine
(dharma) are the sharp faculty.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): That’s it.
Khen Rinpoche: There are people who have faith in Buddha. They have
devotion towards the Buddha just because they think that Buddha is very
precious and very holy. Somebody might have told them that the Buddha is
precious and holy and they just believed it. They don’t actually think much
about why the Buddha is precious and holy. They just believe that the
Buddha is precious and holy. Such people are the examples of the followers
of faith. Then there are people who don’t believe right away just because
someone says the Buddha is very precious and very holy. Rather, they would
analyze and think; “Why is the Buddha holy? Why is the Buddha precious?”
After having sorted it out, or when they are able to find the answer, they
then develop faith in the Buddha. These people are said to be the followers
of doctrine, or literally followers of Dharma.
When we think about the difference between these two types of people, the
followers of faith are those who just believe, as they don’t really know
why they believe as such and they don’t have a real valid reason but just
believe. If we do compare the faith of the followers of faith and the faith
of the followers of the doctrine, whose faith is of a better quality? It
would be the faith in the mind of those is the followers of the doctrine
because the followers of the doctrine don’t just have faith in the Buddha
without thinking. They think about it; “Why is the Buddha precious? Why is
the Buddha holy?” Once they sorted it out, then they know. Because they see
the reasons, then they develop faith in the Buddha. So the faith of the
followers of the doctrine is definitely more stable and of much better
quality. That is real faith.
In the teachings it is mentioned that the faith in the mind of the
followers of the doctrine is the irreversible kind. Once they have
developed faith through thinking, nothing can change their mind. So the
faith in the mind of the followers of doctrine is very stable and is
irreversible. Although the faith in the mind of the followers of faith is
faith, but it is not stable at all as it is subject to change. Therefore,
the faith in the followers of the doctrine wills necessary not change.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Clear?
Student response inaudible
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t worry, don’t worry. Yes.
Student response inaudible
Student 2: In one of the lessons it was mentioned that the practice of
exchanging self for others does not fit the mind of those of dull faculty
bodhisattva. How do I relate this to what was being said about being dull
or sharp faculty?
Khen Rinpoche: In the practice of the sevenfold cause and effect
instruction for generating bodhicitta, one has to train according to the
steps starting from:
   1. Recognizing all sentient beings as one’s mother,
   2. Remembering their kindness,
   3. Having the wish to repay their kindness,
   4. Generating the love sees that all sentient beings are very precious
      and very pleasant
   5. Compassion
   6. Pure superior intention
   7. Bodhicitta
For the person who is training to develop bodhicitta through exchanging
self for others instruction, actually when you train your mind of
exchanging self and others, the essentials of the sevenfold cause and
effect are contained in the exchanging self and others.
The sharp faculty trainees have the wisdom and are able to reflect on the
essential points of the sevenfold cause and effect instructions while they
are training their minds in the system of exchanging self and others.
The very step in the training the mind in exchanging self and others is to
equalize self and others. So we have to wonder whether one would need the
view of emptiness in order to be able to fully equalize oneself with
others.
Do we need the view of emptiness to be able to fully equalize oneself with
others by seeing how in emptiness one self and others are equal in the
ultimate sense? So that is something to think about. Normally it is said
that the sharp faculty trainees generate or realize emptiness first before
they generate bodhicitta (mind of enlightenment). They are sharp faculty
because of that reason as well.
It is said in the Lamrim text. Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand, the
essential points of the sevenfold cause and effect instruction are
contained in practice of exchanging self and others; but not necessarily
the other way round. The quality of the compassion and so forth that is
generated through training the mind in exchanging self and others is very
different. The compassion is very powerful, especially if it is influenced
by the view of emptiness. Those people who have the view of emptiness
realized the root of samsara, the root of all the problems and how due to
ignorance, sentient beings circle in cyclic existence. That kind of
understanding induces very strong compassion in the trainees when they
focus on how sentient beings are suffering. That kind of strong compassion
comes about because it is influenced and backed up by the view of
emptiness.
Those trainees who have realized the emptiness of inherent existent see for
themselves what ignorance believe in actually does not exist, has never
existed, and will never exist. Technically, we say that they conceive the
object of ignorance does not exist whatsoever as inherent existence has
never exist and will never exist. But because of the fundamental mistake of
not realizing this then one self and others have been circling in cyclic
existence and suffer. Just because of that mistake alone by believing in
something that never exist, one suffers and taking on rebirth over and over
again in cyclic existence. If the compassion is influenced by such a view,
then the compassion that is generated on the basis of such an understanding
would be much stronger. As such the strength of bodhicitta that is induced
by that kind of strong compassion will be stronger. Their wish of
enlightenment or the wish to achieve omniscience is much stronger because
it is influenced by the view of emptiness. As a result of this, one can see
or posit that the speed of achieving enlightenment of such trainees would
be faster than others.
In the common usage of word of being dull and sharp, the person who is
sharp is someone who understands right away when we tell him something and
when we explain this and that to him, he gets it. Generally, we call this
people very sharp. Then there are others whom we may need to explain things
for eighteen times or twenty times before they get it. Such people are
called slow even by the people of the world “This person is quite slow and
is a bit dull”.
For those who are of sharp faculty and have joyous perseverance will
definitely achieve their goals very quickly.  Even if one has very sharp
faculty but are not very hardworking and don’t have much joyous
perseverance, that person isn’t really going to achieve the goal.
Although dull faculty trainees may take a longer time to achieve the goal,
but if they work hard at it, they will still achieve the goal provided they
continuously joyously persevered. They may take a longer time but they will
definitely achieve the goal. It is better than someone who have sharp
faculty but doesn’t do anything about it. They are not going to achieve the
goal. In general, if you look at people, the intelligent ones usually a
little less hardworking than those who are not so intelligent. Generally
speaking, I am not saying that it is necessary so.  Those who are not so
intelligent tend to work harder because they know that they are not as
quick as others so they put in more effort.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): There is one story about the rabbit and the
tortoise. You know the story? Who win? Rabbit or tortoise wins? There is a
competition. F1 racing for them. The tortoise wins. He gets the first.
Rabbit, he go quickly, he rest there and fall asleep or something like
that. The tortoise walked slowly and then he wins the first prize.

Wheel- Weapon Mind Training
Verse 67
All desires enter into me and I blame all my quarrels on others for no
reason. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction!
Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme: I am not sure about “all desires entered into me.” What it
means is that we desired the best of everything. We want everything.
In the context of Mahayana mind training, one is doing pure practice. Just
as it is said in one of the verses of Eight Verses of The Thought
Transformation, when others insult or abusing us out of jealousy, we should
accept the defeat and offer the victory to others. In the context of mind
training, pure practitioner of the mind training does that.
We are the complete opposite of that as we don’t want any loss. We only
want victory and the best of everything for ourselves. We don’t wish for
any loss or loss for ourselves. We wish that it doesn’t happen to us, and
“if it is has to happen, may it happen on somebody else and not on me”.
It is like when someone point out our mistake or somebody accuses us for
being responsible for something bad that had happened, usually what we do
is that we do not accept the responsibility. Instead of accepting the
responsibility, we said “No, I didn’t do this. It is somebody else fault.
This person did this, he said that….” Basically we shift the blame to
others. It is our self- cherishing that motivate us to act like that. As
such, we need to destroy our self-cherishing.
[BP1 Module 6: ‘All desires enter into me’ means that instead of taking on
all losses and giving the victory and profit to others in the spirit of
training to be a bodhisattva, we are the complete opposite of this. We
cling to profit and victory for ourselves from the depth of our hearts.
Because of this, ‘I blame all my quarrels on others for no reason,’ eg.
when someone says something unpleasant to us and something undesirable
happens, we are quick to totally place the  blame on others.]
Verse 68
Although I have put on the saffron robe, I appeal to evil spirits for
protection. Although I have taken religious vows, my behaviour is demonic.
Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally
strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
“Although I have put on the saffron robe, I appeal to evil spirits for
protection” - this refer to the conduct of some ordained people. The vows
of ordination, the pratimoksha vows, are taken on the basis of taking
refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. Although one may have taken on the
ordination vows, starting from the novice ordination, but instead of
entrusting whatever wishes one has or entrusting oneself to the Three
Jewels, the object of refuge that one entrust self is the spirits. Then it
is incorrect. Again that is the behaviour of self-cherishing.
It also applies to all Buddhists. A Buddhist is someone who has taken
refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. So as Buddhist, we should only
completely entrust ourselves, our hopes, and everything to the Three
Jewels. But instead of doing that, people who entrust themselves and rely
on spirits and worldly beings.
In the precepts of having taken refuge, one of the things that one should
not do after having gone for refuge to the Buddha is that one should not
take refuge in spirits and worldly beings.
We may have taken on the different classes of vows; pratimoksha vows,
bodhisattva vows and the tantric vows. But instead of living our lives
according to the boundaries set up by these different vows, we do not pay
attention to them. We do not keep the vows, instead our conduct and our
action of our body, speech and mind are contrary to the vows. In fact, our
body, speech and mind may be like those of the spirit and demons. Such
demonic behavior again is the result of our self-cherishing. As such, we
must destroy our self-cherishing.
Verse 69
Although the gods give me happiness, I worship evil spirits. Although the
Dharma guides me, I deceive the Three Jewels. Roar and thunder on the head
of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the
butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme: Not sure whether “evil” [in evil spirit] is necessary as we are
not supposed to worship spirits.
When we talked about the enlightened activities of the wisdom truth body,
there are two divisions:
   1. There is the enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body abiding in
      the truth body itself.
   2. There is the enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body abiding in
      the sentient beings itself; who are to be helped.
The first line of the verse 27 of the Tathagata Essence: Because a perfect
Buddha’s body is pervasive talks about how the enlightened activities of
the Dharmakaya reaches out to sentient beings. Sentient beings can receive
the enlightened activities of the wisdom truth body because the enlightened
activities of the Dharmakaya do engage in sentient beings. From that
perspective, sentient beings possess the buddha nature (tathagata essence).
The teachings say that every single virtue in the continuum of sentient
beings is the enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body, and it arises
due to the blessings of the wisdom truth body. Earlier on we said there are
two kinds of enlightened activity and one of them is the enlightened
activity of the wisdom truth body that exists in the sentient beings who
are to be helped.
The happiness which all of us are looking for is the product of its cause;
which is virtue. Happiness arises from virtue. Every single virtue in our
continuum arose due to the blessings of the wisdom truth body; is the
enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body.
Although all our happiness which came from virtue and itself is the
enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body, we are not aware of that.
Instead we seek refuge and entrust ourselves to spirits. We worship spirits
and worldly entities. Sometimes, in fact is very common, we pray to all
kinds of spirits, believing that our prayers to them bring a lot of
success. As said here from our perspective is that every single happiness
that we experience is the result of our virtue which itself is the
enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body. This is something that we
really need to thing about: every single virtue in sentient beings
continuum is basically Buddha’s activity.
It is said very clearly in the eighth chapter of the Ornament of Clear
Realizations on the topic of the wisdom truth body that every virtue in the
continuum of sentient beings is the enlightened activity of the wisdom
truth body. In reality, the main thing that protects us from all the
unpleasant and undesirable effects and all the suffering is the Dharma.
However, we don’t accept it. We don’t believe in it, and we think it is not
the Dharma. We think it has to be something else such as because of that
person, or this being or something else but never the Dharma.
Verse 70
Although I have always resorted to secluded places, I am carried away by
distraction. Although I request instruction in the holy Dharma and the
religious sciences, I cherish divination and shamanism. Roar and thunder on
the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart
of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme: “Secluded places” are isolated places. “Divination” is mo.
“Shamanism” includes rituals, prayers and pujas.
Although we may resort to physical isolation and live in isolated place for
the purpose of training our minds or for the purpose of practicing the
Dharma, although our bodies may be isolated but our minds are always “going
to town”. Again this is due to our self-cherishing.
Although one may come to a place for learning the Dharma and may be
physically present, but again the mind is somewhere else.
The supreme Dharma to be learned and practiced is the Lamrim, Stages of the
Path to Enlightenment, and the Mahayana mind training. What ideally should
be done is that we engage in the extensive learning and then reflect on
what we have learned so that we can internalize it and use it to train the
mind. Although that is how we should go about doing things, i.e. we study
and reflect, but when it comes to putting them into practice, we do
something else such as learning how to do mo and do divination for people,
learning astrology and all kinds of things to foretell the future and
spending time doing pujas here and there.
[BP1 Module 6: ‘Although I request instruction in the holy Dharma and the
religious sciences, I cherish divination and shamanism,’ refers to how, in
the beginning, we listen to many teachings, requesting many different
teachers to give expositions on the scriptures and classical texts.  But
even though we have such knowledge and understanding, we continue to focus
on the worldly or minor sciences such as performing divinations, magic and
astrology. Distracted from the primary teachings, we dabble constantly in
these subjects. This is also due to the self-cherishing mind.
The main advice here is that when we are in physical seclusion, our minds
should likewise be in solitude. When you have physically distanced yourself
from the objects of distraction, likewise the mind should not move from the
object of concentration and meditation. We should not let our minds wander.

The second advice is that we should always engage in hearing, contemplating
and meditating on all the major scriptures and classical texts. We should
focus on the teachings of the Buddha. We should not allow ourselves to be
distracted and sidetracked by subjects other than such teachings.
This verse refers to how we are deceived by different distractions into
abandoning our Dharma practice. This is due to being deceived by the self-
cherishing mind. The self-cherishing mind encourages us to place more
emphasis on the concerns of this life while abandoning the greater goal of
our future lives, which can only be accomplished by the holy Dharma. We
must not succumb to such deception.]
Verse 71
Forsaking the moral path to liberation, I cling to my home. Pouring my
happiness into the water, I run after suffering. Roar and thunder on the
head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of
the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme: “moral path” is ethical discipline which is the path to
liberation
Here is referring to people who get ordained. To get ordained, one needs to
have some thought of renunciation on the basis of which then one seeks
liberation. The point of becoming an ordained person is the method to
achieve liberation with that kind of lifestyle. But after becoming
ordained, one doesn’t keep the ethical discipline and at the same time one
doesn’t have any wish for liberation. Subsequently, one disrobes and
becomes a lay person again. Because of that, then so many complications
arise in life with all kinds of problems and so forth. This happens as a
result of self-cherishing.
[BP1 Module 6: ‘Forsaking the moral  path  to  liberation,  I  cling  to  my
home’: The main cause of our liberation is morality and  ethics.  Setting  a
life of ethics aside and clinging to our home therefore becomes an  obstacle
on the path. This seems to be a reference to ordination. The  ordained  will
attain the state of liberation as well the state of non-abiding  nirvana  by
keeping pure ethics. Due to the self-cherishing mind,  however,  instead  of
cherishing the ordained life, they enter into lay life.
Then, even though one is pursuing the bliss and joy of liberation, one is
constantly creating the causes of suffering referred to in the next line,
‘Pouring my happiness into the water, I run after suffering.’ This line
means that even though one may aspire to and wish for the happiness of this
and future lives, by moving away from ordained life, one is pursuing only
suffering and not achieving happiness.
We can also apply this verse to Buddhists in general. Once we become a
Buddhist, we take on the commitment of abandoning the ten non-virtuous
actions. By not cultivating such abandonment, one goes further away from
the state of liberation as one would not have the cause for achieving
liberation from samsara. On the contrary, one is only pursuing suffering in
this and future lives.
The main advice in this verse is that as Buddhists, we should seriously
engage in the practice of ethics because such practice is the cause for
happiness in this and future lives. It will enable us to practice the
Dharma and achieve superior rebirth and the goal of liberation and
buddhahood. When we do not practice morality and ethics, then it is like
discarding our happiness of this and future lives into a flowing river,
like waste.]
Verse 72
Turning away from the gateway to liberation, I wander in remote places.
Despite acquiring the precious jewel of a human body, I wind up in hell.
Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally
strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme: “gateway to liberation” is door to liberation.
The gateway, the door or the entrance to liberation, is the practice of the
Dharma. In order to achieve liberation from cyclic existence which is real,
ultimate, and permanent happiness, one has to practice the Dharma. Although
one may be looking for liberation and one may wish to achieve liberation,
instead of practicing the Dharma, one wanders all over the place. It says
here, “wander in remote places” for the sake of achieving the happiness of
this life alone, then one may even disregard non-virtue and end up
accumulating all kinds of negativities which are causes for the lower
realms.
Instead of going to where the teachings are given by our teacher, we
wanders in the town. That is again result of our self-cherishing attitude.
What I have just said goes with verse 73.
[BP1 Module 6: ‘Despite acquiring the precious jewel of a human body, I
wind up in hell’: ‘The precious jewel of a human body’ refers not only to
the ordinary human body but to the precious human rebirth that is endowed
with the 8 leisures and 10 opportunities. Despite having acquired such a
precious state of rebirth, which is comparable to a precious jewel, instead
of practicing Dharma continuously, day and night, we are only creating the
causes to be reborn in the hell realm.
This line refers to the contemplation on the rarity of acquiring the
precious human rebirth with its leisure and opportunities, which appears in
the beginning of the Lam Rim. When we do not reflect on the value and the
rarity of this precious human rebirth, then this extremely precious
condition, acquired through the accumulation of merits in previous
lifetimes, would be wasted by engaging in negativities from morning till
night.
When you do not apply this precious human rebirth to Dharma practice but
use it to accumulate negative karma, then that is extremely inappropriate.
It is a great loss and a great shame. Therefore one should constantly be
mindful and contemplate over and over again the rarity of achieving such a
precious human rebirth.
Using this precious human rebirth for nothing but negativities is a great
shame because once we fall into the lower realms, it will be too late for
regrets. Once there, it is very difficult to be freed from those states and
to achieve a human rebirth again.
Therefore, during this time when we still have the precious human rebirth,
we should remind ourselves over and over again of its benefits and rarity
and to constantly encourage ourselves to practice the Dharma.
The essence of this verse is this: Having met the buddhadharma, which is
the main gateway to the city of liberation, we continue to wander outside
the vicinity of Dharma practice. Having achieved this precious human
rebirth with its leisure and endowments, we continue to be concerned solely
with the affairs and the benefits of this life, engaging only in negative
actions. The thing that causes all this, that destroys our true happiness
is this ego or self-cherishing mind. So this ego, the self-cherishing mind,
is the true enemy, the true butcher. (‘Butcher’ here can be interpreted as
an assassin, someone assigned to kill). ]
Verse 73
Putting aside the particulars of spiritual development, I engage in
business. Leaving my guru’s school, I idle about the town. Roar and thunder
on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the
heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme: The meaning is there but I guess there are some differences in
the various editions of the Tibetan text. Sometimes the verses are ordered
in different ways. Anyway it is a technical thing.
[BP1 Module 6: This  verse  is  referring  to  how  we  set  aside  hearing,
contemplation and meditation of the Buddhadharma and engage  solely  in  the
affairs of this life, such as engaging in business and so  forth.  By  doing
business using underhanded methods, we constantly engage in  negative  karma
in our pursuit of the happiness of this life.
‘Leaving my guru's school, I idle about the town’: One has  the  opportunity
to listen to the Dharma but one chooses  to  engage  in  other  distractions
instead. One should be practising the Dharma but one does not practise.  One
should be listening to the Dharma but one does not listen.   One  should  be
meditating on the Dharma but one does not meditate. So, instead  of  putting
one's  time  and  effort  into  learning,   listening,   contemplating   and
meditating on the Dharma, we  go  off  to  other  places  and  pursue  other
distractions. Once again, this verse mentions that such  faults  are  solely
the result of our ego, the self-cherishing mind. ]
Verse 74
Abandoning my own livelihood, I plunder others’ property. Forsaking my
parents’ food, I rob others of sustenance. Roar and thunder on the head of
the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the
butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme’s translation: Abandoning my own livelihood, I plunder others’
property. Forsaking my own food, I take the properties of others. Roar and
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike
at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme: Here it is translated as “Abandoning my own livelihood” but the
meaning is not like that. In Khen Rinpoche’s text in Tibetan, the word
“parent” or “father” is not there. Anyway, it is language thing.
There are possessions that are collectively owned by an organization; that
means by a group of people. Let’s take the Sangha community’s possession as
an example there are common or shared possessions of the Sangha community
of which an individual member of that community may not use it without
prior permission. If one were to use the shared or common property without
permission, instead of using one’s own (i.e. something which one possess),
one uses the common possessions of the community. In the case Sangha
community, as mentioned in the Lamrim, the act of using without prior
permission, the negative karma is extremely heavy. The fruitional effect of
which is something that one will and must definitely experience. One cannot
escape from experiencing the effect of such an action.
“Plunder” here refers to the act of using the shared possessions, and in
this context, using the shared possessions of the Sangha community without
prior permission. It is the same thing with using the shared properties or
possessions of an organization such as a Dharma center. If one uses such
things without the proper permission, it is also negativity.
There may be occasions where we actually have enough for ourselves, and we
can actually survive on our own. We can use our own possession such as
food, money and so forth but we don’t want to use our possession. We may
then take or steal the possessions of others. Again this is the result of
our self-cherishing.
Verse 75
Aha! Although my endurance for meditation is small, my precognition is
sharp. Though I have not realized even the beginning of the path, I run
around to no purpose. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false
construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Ven Gyurme’s translation: Aha! Although my endurance for meditation is
small, I have a wish to develop clairvoyance. Though I have not actualized
any path, I run around to no purpose. Roar and thunder on the head of the
destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher,
the enemy, Ego!
There are people who seek to be clairvoyant because they want to read the
minds of others or they want to see what others are thinking. Anyway, to
achieve any clairvoyance, one has to strive at the method for developing
clairvoyance over a long period of time; for months and years. Although one
may have the desire to develop clairvoyant powers, but one’s endurance for
the practice or meditation is small. After just practicing for maybe one or
two months, and nothing happens. One then goes around giving people the
impression that one has develop clairvoyance although one has none. Out of
giving people false impression and telling lies that one has clairvoyance,
one ends up telling lies saying this and that.
It is not unusual to have different kinds of meditative experiences. In the
view of meditation, one sees all kinds of things. A lot of times people
think that seeing all kinds of things in their meditation or having all
kinds of experiences are something very special and good. Then they feel
very good as if they are progressing well and developing some kind of
special abilities and powers. They may even think that they are beginning
to have some kind of clairvoyance. They then go around telling people “I
see this. I see that. I have all kinds of these” and basically wanting
people to agree that is really true, valid and correct. But most of the
times, all these are due to the influence of spirits or maras.
“Though I have not realized even the beginning of the path, I run around to
no purpose” - that is not the intended meaning of the verse and it
shouldn’t be translated like that. Literally the Tibetan word means to be
quick-footed.  As a practitioner, our goal here is enlightenment and
omniscience. What we should do is to move quickly or run quickly towards
enlightenment. In order to do that, our mind must be conjoined with the
path and must enter the path to achieve the path. That is the way to
progress towards enlightenment. Instead of doing that, we may look for
instructions for developing those common worldly attainments such as the
attainment of quick-foot. By depending on certain practices and substances,
one can develop the ability to be able to walk very quickly and be able to
cover a huge distance over a short period of time. Instead of developing
the path in our mind, we pay our attention to all these unimportant things
like developing all these powers to be able to walk quickly.
Verse 76
When someone gives me useful advice, my hostile mind takes that person for
an enemy. When someone deceives me, I repay that heartless one with
kindness. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false
construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
Here the verse is saying that when people like our teachers and parents
gives us useful advice or point out our faults and mistakes with a thought
to benefit us but we regard them as enemies. Then there are people who
agree with all the things that we do or say, even though they may be wrong.
Just because they accord with our wishes, we regard those people who are
actually deceiving us as kind.
“The heartless one” in Tibetan is an adjective that does not qualify the
person who deceives us but actually it qualifies the person who is being
deceived. What it means is that we lose common sense and are not able to
recognize what is right, what is wrong, what is beneficial for us and what
is harmful to us.
Verse 77
I tell my intimate friends’ secrets to their enemies. I shamelessly take
advantage of my acquaintances. Roar and thunder on the head of the
destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher,
the enemy, Ego!
[BP1 Module 6: 'I tell my intimate friends' secrets to their enemies':
People may treat us like very close relatives, with affection and intimacy,
and entrust us with their secrets. But, not respecting their privacy, we
expose their secrets to others freely, including their enemies.
'I shamelessly take advantage of my acquaintances':  In Tibetan,
‘acquaintances,’ has the connotation of someone who is very close and
intimate to us. We harm them by taking advantage of their weaknesses and
deceiving them. The reason why we engage in such despicable behavior is due
to our self-cherishing mind.
Verse 78
My frustration is intense and my thoughts are coarser than everyone else’s.
I am hard to get along with and I continually provoke others’ bad
character. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false
construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!
“My frustration is intense” means that there are people who are very short-
tempered. It doesn’t take much to agitate them. It just need someone to do
or say something or maybe looks at them in a way. They get agitated and
then bear grudges easily with a lot of resentment.
“My thoughts are coarser”, there are some people who have a lot of
discursive thoughts and have a lot of worries. In fact they think too much:
“If I say this, what would this person think? What will he do to me? If I
do this, what would this person think?” Basically is overkill of thinking,
until so much that one finds it very difficult to do anything. People who
are like that generally find it difficult to get along with people.
Again it is our self-cherishing attitude that makes us very short-tempered,
easily agitated, makes us hold on to grudges and also makes us think
unnecessary without any purpose.
[BP1 Module 6: ‘I am hard to get along with and I continually provoke
other's bad character’: In Tibetan, instead of, ‘provoking other’s bad
character’, it can refer to our own bad character or habits continuously
surfacing. Because of our self-cherishing minds, we become very difficult
people to get along with and people would keep away from us, finding us so
disagreeable. The reason for this is also due to the self-cherishing mind.
This verse is exhorting us not to be so easily irritable or frustrated. We
should not be neurotic or phobic and easily fearful of the outcome of
things.
We should avoid having negative and disagreeable characteristics that make
us difficult to get along with. All these three things are caused by self-
cherishing mind.

Announcement: There will be class on Thursday. Otherwise, we will not be
able to finish the text as we don’t have much time left.
