Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson22.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.580822
================================================================================


Student 1: Last week Khen Rinpoche asked us a question and I didn’t
understand the answer. My question is: Is it possible to take on the
suffering of others and topping up their merits. I understand this practice
is instrumental in developing bodhicitta, but does it really work and can
it really actualize this top up?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): That was my question. What is your answer?
Student 1: I think that was not possible. I think people suffering come
from their own karma. So giving them merit is good to develop bodhicitta
but does it really work?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You should ask a different question. Don’t ask
my question to me. Maybe somebody give some idea. Then after that I talk.
The senior one, come and give answer to that. Hear your view to the
question.
Student 2: I think on one level we are always told that we have to
experience whatever karma we ourselves have created, which is similar to
the point that this classmate brought up. But I believed, just on a belief
level without any reason, if someone who is highly spiritually
accomplished, like our lamas, are able to take on our sufferings. The
reason I said that is because I remembered at that time Geshe Lama Konchog
passed away and he manifested illness as from stomach cancer. It is hard to
reconcile how someone who is so pure could really still have this remaining
karma of experiencing illness. Of course, Lama Konchog was very well known
for his practice of Medicine Buddha and so on. I believed for someone who
is spiritually accomplished which oneself currently is not, then, something
happened, and I don’t know what but something happened.
Related to this question, I actually wanted to ask for tonglen, if we are
not quite ready yet and we don’t have such strong compassion and bodhicitta
to take on the suffering of others because the self-cherishing is so strong
and somehow there is an irrational part of our mind that thinks “If I take
it on, will it really will happen to me?” Can we just do half of it for the
time-being like giving our good health, giving our merits to the person who
needs it, until our mind is strong enough then we do the taking part? So
that is actually a question.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): My question is you give but others don’t
receive, so what is the point? The question is that. You give but other
people receive or not, and that is his question is all about that.
Student 2: If you have a very powerful karmic connection with that person,
for example, because of the relationship we have with our parents and if we
do prayers for them, they will receive it. Is it related to this or are we
just talking specifically of tonglen? If we are talking about doing prayers
and so forth for our parents because of our strong karmic connection, they
do receive the merits of doing those practices. If not what is the point
doing pujas? Also if we pray for the long life of our gurus, because of the
power of this guru-disciple relationship, I think Lama Zopa had said many
times before that there are definitely some benefits; not because of the
power of one’s prayer but because of the power of the nature of the
relationship.
Ven Gyurme: Then you are just contradicting yourself. The prayers have no
power….
Student 2: The prayers have some powers but at our level, when we do it, it
is not very powerful, but definitely because of the karmic connection,
there is certainly some kind of an effect.
Khen Rinpoche, can you please answer my question of whether can do half of
tonglen until we are ready?
Khen Rinpoche: For the word “tong”, when you add the word “pa” behind it,
it becomes empty.
Student 3: I kind of disagreed with Student 2 because one the
characteristic of karma is that you actually do not received the results of
what you did not create. There is a verse which says: “Buddha does not wash
away the sins of anyone”. Buddha has so much merits and he could have given
it to anyone.
Ven Gyurme: There are numberless Buddha but we are still suffering now.
Student 3: We are still suffering. They didn’t take away anything and they
didn’t give us the merits.
Ven Gyurme: How you know they never give you?
Student 3: At end of the day, you got to explain how dedication works. If
not, then you will have a problem between dedication and auspiciousness
verse.
Ven Gyurme: And prayers.
Student 3: At the end of the day, probably I don’t think it is that we
actually give the merits per se. It is more like maybe create a condition
for that person’s own positive karma to ripen, and vice versa the taking
part will be like it causes our own negative karma to ripen so that we
could purify it faster or we just create more merits because of that
attitude of taking. Maybe that is why it manifests when whoever is the one
who takes on other people’s suffering; not so much of really taking on
people suffering per se.
Student 4: If you read Liberation in the Palm of Your hand, there is a
famous story of a lama who is a great practitioner and he was teaching in
the hall. Outside the hall, there was a dog that was hit by someone. At
that time, he was actually practicing tonglen and he actually absorbed the
pain of the dog. That is what I understood from the story. So my question
is: How tonglen will benefit someone, for example, if a person is dying or
is very sick. Let’s say that we have a karmic connection with that
particular patient. If we are practicing tonglen at the side of the person,
I think that at that moment that person would definitely feel the loving
kindness, that kind of energy that you are exuding. It will definitely give
some kind of calmness to that person. I agreed with what Student 3 said
that we kind of ripening the person positive karma. Especially like during
the time when the person were to be passing away and we will be able to
practice tonglen or whatever, that will kind of helping that person to have
a virtuous mind. With such a virtuous state of mind, definitely it will
induce his positive karma to be ripened. Secondly, how would tonglen
benefit a particular person when we are using tonglen to practice
bodhicitta? If we are using tonglen to practice bodhicitta with a
particular person at that time of practice and in the long run it will help
us to achieve enlightenment. Even if in this lifetime it does not benefit
the person, definitely in future lifetime, it will create a connection for
us to benefit the person in another space and in another time.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You got your answer. No?
Student 1: I like to hear your answer.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): I have no answer.
Khen Rinpoche: Recently I have mentioned about some of the prayers that the
bodhisattvas have made. Because of their bodhicitta, they have so much
courage and determination to benefit sentient beings. Even for the sake of
one sentient being, they are willing to stay in the hell for very long
period of time just to benefit one sentient being. They have that kind of
determination, courage and, in fact, intention. They made all these very
big prayers to achieve that but these prayers somehow don’t work. They want
to go to the lower realm just to benefit one sentient being and they prayed
to achieve that but somehow they will never ever get born in the lower
realm. However, the force of their determination and courage to benefit
sentient beings enable them to achieve enlightenment much quicker. Because
of their courage and determination to benefit sentient beings, everything
that the bodhisattvas do for sentient beings including all the merits that
they have accumulated, they always dedicate for the happiness of all
sentient beings. When they made all these kinds of prayers from the heart
all the time, obviously it is going to make a difference for them to
achieve enlightenment quickly. So it is clear that through the practice of
taking on the sufferings of others, giving one happiness and virtue to
sentient beings, one can achieves enlightenment much more quickly.
Likewise, one achieves enlightenment much more quickly when one dedicates
all of one roots of virtue to others from the heart to other sentient
beings. That is clear.
If you look at Amitabha Pure Land, Sukhavati, the pure land is actually the
result of Amitabha’s bodhicitta which he generated while he is on the path.
Also he dedicated all of his merits that he had accumulated for the
creation of the pure land. Sentient beings can pray to create the causes to
be born in Amitabha Pure Land. The fact that sentient beings can be born in
Amitabha Pure Land is actually the result of the dedication prayers made by
Amitabha himself when he was on the path before becoming enlightened.
In the Lama Tsongkhapa treatise, The Great Treatise on the Stages of the
Path, in the section on karma, he mentioned that from the Buddha side, the
Buddha has created the cause for sentient beings to experience the results
of whatever prayers they have made. From sentient beings own side, we have
to create some of the causes in order to experience the effect. So through
dedicating one’s merit to sentient beings and doing the practice of tonglen
does make one’s achievement of enlightenment much quicker. If that is the
case, then it is needless to say that this will all be of great benefit to
sentient beings.
If you think about the practice of taking on the suffering of others as to
whether that will actually happen in reality or not, because of the force
of courage and determination of the bodhisattvas’ bodhicitta, they really
mean it. So when they made prayers of really want to go the lowest of the
hells even just to benefit one sentient being, they will do that. They made
many of these prayers all the time from the heart but they won’t end up
there. In fact, because they do it out of their very strong bodhicitta,
that makes them achieve enlightenment quicker. So I think one would not
actually experience the actual taking on sufferings of others even if one
does the practice of taking on the sufferings of sentient beings by
visualizing taking on their sufferings. Otherwise, we would have quite a
difficult time of putting this and the workings of karma together as it is
said that we cannot experience the result of an action that we didn’t
create, isn’t it? So what has been said is an answer in general.
With a good motivation and attitude of benefiting the other person, if one
show a pleasant demeanor and speak in a polite and nice manner to another
person, somehow the other person will like it. If a pleasant physical
demeanor and a pleasant speech can have a positive effect on another
person, maybe one can also say that by having a good attitude and positive
vibration from one’s own side, having a good heart and good motivation can
also have a positive effect on another person. So I think our own positive
attitude and our positive vibration with good heart and so forth will
definitely be a condition for another person to transform their mind as
well and also somehow to feel the good heart.
I really wonder whether dedication of merit means taking our merits as if
it is something tangible and give it to another person and then the other
person receive it. Although it is a difficult to really explain, in
general, it is for sure that you can feel it and also experience the power
of positive intention and the power of prayers. So with virtuous intention,
good heart, and with sincerity making prayers to benefit others, we can
feel it that it does have an effect on the beneficiary. It works, but how
it works is a big question mark. I don’t think it works in the sense that
our merits being transferred to another person. I don’t think so.
Our sincere and virtuous prayers to benefit other person do act as a
condition for that person to generate virtuous thought. Maybe we can say
that.  Even if we cannot accept the idea of taking the suffering of others
and if we just want to do the giving part, then there is no loss but is
only profit. If we can really dedicate our merits for the happiness of
others from the heart and have the intention to make that kind of
aspirational prayers “Due to my merit may this happen,” then there is only
benefit and no loss. We can make prayers and send our wishes and our
dedication, for example, “Whatever happiness I have now such as good health
or whatever good things, may he or she and others also experience the same
kind of happiness”. Or, let’s say, we are experiencing a particular problem
or suffering, we can also wish from the heart “May others not experience
what I am experiencing.”

Wheel- Weapon Mind Training
[BP1 Module 6: These preceding verses are all aspirational prayers.
Verse 103: Having done so I will crush the enemy.  Having  done  so  I  will
crush conceptual construction. After cultivating selflessness  through  non-
conceptual wisdom, how can I not obtain the causes and effects of  the  form
body?
From the very beginning, the text has been pointing out the many  faults  of
self-cherishing and talking about the different methods to counter the self-
cherishing  attitude.  When  we  recognize  these  faults  and  we  practice
correctly the methods taught, then we will be able to crush the enemy, self-
cherishing, as mentioned in the first line, ‘Having done  so  I  will  crush
the enemy.’
‘Having done so I will crush conceptual  construction’:  We  would  also  be
able to crush all the discursive thoughts; all the  negative  thoughts  that
arise from the self-cherishing attitude.
‘After cultivating selflessness through non-conceptual  wisdom,  how  can  I
not obtain the causes and effects of the form body?’: In  general,  when  we
look at the achievement of enlightenment from the  sutric  perspective,  the
practice of method is responsible for the achieving the  form  body  of  the
Buddha. By meditating on emptiness, which is  the  practice  of  wisdom,  we
will achieve the truth body (or the mind of the Buddha).
The collection of merit leads to the attainment of the form body.
The collection of wisdom leads to the attainment of the truth body.
From the perspective of tantra, there is this non-conceptual  wisdom,  which
refers to the mind of great bliss realizing emptiness.  The  mind  of  great
bliss is the method and it realizes emptiness which is the wisdom.  This  is
the union of method and wisdom.
Here from the sutric perspective, through meditating on  the  non-conceptual
wisdom, one ultimately achieves enlightenment with  the  form  body  of  the
Buddha. As to how that happens, one has to be able  to  explain  it  from  a
sutric perspective.
The first two lines of this verse points to  the  practice  of  the  method,
when we  forsake  our  personal  interests  and  in  their  place  cultivate
bodhicitta for the benefit and  interests  of  other  sentient  beings.  The
third line shows the practice of cultivating wisdom. Through  the  union  of
such method and wisdom, by engaging in such practices, how  is  it  possible
that one will not achieve the form body? This is my interpretation but I  am
not certain it is correct.
When we contemplate this verse, we may have qualms  such  as  why  only  the
achievement of the form body is mentioned in this case. How about the  truth
body, the mind of the Buddha?
The above verses are talking about the aspirational prayers and  dedications
made by the bodhisattvas which we should also emulate.   When  it  comes  to
aspirational prayers and  dedications,  we  are  advised  to  make  them  as
extensive as  possible,  to  make  very  courageous  prayers.  Whether  such
prayers will be actualized or not is another question.]
Verse 104
Now hear this! Everything is dependently co-arisen. Being dependently co-
arisen, they are not independent. Changing this way and that, they are
false appearances and illusions; they are images that appear like a
whirling firebrand.
Ven Gyurme: “Dependently co-arisen” literally is dependent related
The “I” that is the object of observation of self-grasping and also the
self-cherishing arises from that self-grasping. Similarly, all other
phenomena, the “I” that is the focal or the object of observation of the
self-grasping and the self-cherishing together with all other phenomenon
are all dependently arisen.
The Tibetan word tandrel literally means dependently related. If you
translate it as dependently arisen, it means that all phenomena are
dependently arisen. What is the meaning of dependently arisen? What is its
connotation? What it means is that all phenomena are mere appearances.
That is the power of the word “dependently arisen”. “Dependently arisen” is
implying that all phenomena are mere appearances. What it means is that all
phenomena are empty of independently establishment.
So the implication of the word “dependently arisen” is the emptiness of
self or independent establishment. So that is the meaning. So the word
“dependently arisen” leads to that there isn’t any phenomenon that can
exist without depending on something else. That means all phenomena are
empty of self-establishment or empty of independent establishment.
So that is the power of the word “dependently arisen”. The meaning of
“dependently arisen” is empty of self-establishment or empty of independent
establishment. This means that everything is dependently established,
dependently arisen. So all phenomena are just mere appearances. They do not
exist as independently created or independently established.
In the Lama Tsongkhapa’s “Three Principal of the Path" which says;
“Furthermore, the appearances clear away the extreme of existence.”  This
is according to the view of the Prasangika, CMWS.
The Particular Special Quality of the Prasangika View
[13] Furthermore, appearance eliminates the extreme of existence
And emptiness eliminates the extreme of non-existence.
If you realize how emptiness manifests in the manner of cause and effect
Then you are not captivated by wrong notions holding extreme views.
The word “dependently arisen” means there is no independent existence.
Whatever that exist, it exist dependently arisen and are mere appearances.
As such, the phrase “dependently arisen” clears away the extremes of
existence in that it clears away the possibility of things and events can
exist from their own sides. So what Lama Tsongkhapa eliminates is he
eliminates the existence from its own side.
In the Three Principal of the Path, “Furthermore, appearance eliminates the
extreme of existence”, there are two extremes: the extreme of existence and
non-existent. How do appearances clear away the extreme of existence? This
is what we are talking about here.  So everything that exists is
dependently arisen. So the word “dependently arisen” means that there is
nothing that exist on its own, there is nothing that can exist independent
of other factor. There is no self-establishment. There is no independent
establishment.
So the meaning of dependently arisen means empty of independent
establishment, which means things exist but they exist as dependently
arisen; things are mere appearances. So if things are mere appearances that
mean phenomena do not exist from their own side, they don’t exist in and
off themselves. So that is how appearances clear away the extremes of
existence.
So that is why the word “dependent arising” (dependent origination) is used
and is emphasized in Lama Tsongkhapa’s presentation of the ultimate nature
of reality. So instead of just using the word “emptiness” right from the
beginning, he stresses the approaching the topic of emptiness through
understanding dependent origination (dependent arising) because if we start
off with just focusing on emptiness, emptiness, emptiness, then many people
will make the mistakes of thinking that emptiness means non-existent or
emptiness means there is nothing. That is why Lama Tsongkhapa emphasizes
seeking the view through dependent origination (dependent arising).
In the very same verse in the Three Principal of the Path, after
“Furthermore, the appearances clear away of extreme of existent” there is
“And emptiness eliminates the extreme of non-existence”.
The word “emptiness” means is the absence or the lack of independent
establishment or the lack of self-establishment. That is there is no
independent establishment.
So if “empty” means empty of independent existent, what it is implying is
that there is dependent establishment.
Empty means lack of (empty of or absence of) independent establishment. So
there isn’t any phenomenon in existent that can exist independently without
depending on any other factor. So the meaning behind that is there is
dependent establishment.
So “empty” means empty of independent establishment. What it means is that
there isn’t any phenomenon out there that is independently established.
Therefore, it means that everything that exists is dependently established.
So there is something there, things do exist, and they exist as dependently
established. So that is why the correct understanding of emptiness would
clear away the extreme of annihilation (extreme of non-existent) or falling
into the wrong view of “emptiness” means there is nothing. This is the
meaning of dependent arising. The word tandrel, dependently arisen
(dependent origination), means of what I have just said.
There are different levels of meaning behind the word “tandrel or dependent
arising (dependent origination). There are coarser levels of meaning and
there are subtle levels of meaning.
The coarse meaning of dependent origination is that which is found in the
explanation of the Hinayana tenets like the Great Exposition School (GES)
and the Sutra School (SS). They explain dependent origination in terms of
the dependent on cause. Then the explanation on dependent arising becomes
more subtle and more profound when we look at the presentation of the
Mahayana tenets. There is the explanation of dependent arising in terms of
dependency on parts, the concept of whole is dependent on parts and how
parts come together to constitute a whole and so forth. The most profound
explanation of dependent arising is found in the CMWS in that things exist
in mere name; things are dependently designated, things are depending on
the basis of designation, things are dependently designated and things just
exist in mere name.
This is the meaning of dependent arising. Dependent origination (dependent
arising) mean there is no self- institution. The meaning of dependent
arising cannot accommodate the meaning of self-institution. Things cannot
exist in and of themselves. They cannot stand on their own on its own feet.
The most subtle meaning of dependent origination (dependent arising) means
nothing that can exist in and of itself. There is no self-establishment.
Things are not self-instituted. This applies to everything that exists,
including ourselves, the “I”, the self, the person. But if we look at our
own experience, how do we think of ourselves? How do we exist? We have the
appearance and the belief that we, the “I”, the self, the person is able to
stand on its own feet, is created in and of itself. There is something
there that is able to stand on its own two feet independent of any other
thing. This is self-instituted “I”.
While there isn’t such a phenomenon in reality, but nevertheless we have
that experience and we believe the “I” is self-instituted, it exists in and
of itself. Now we need to check whether we really exist in that way or not.
 For example, just look at ourselves, we are human beings. Why do we
consider ourselves human beings? The word “human being” is related to the
human body that we have. Because of having a human body and with this
particular make up with the human flesh, skin, blood and so forth, on the
basis of this human body, the basis of designation, therefore we designate
human. But when we look for the human being in the body, where is this
human being? Obviously it is not the blood, not the flesh, not the bone,
and not the skin.
We talk about the “I”, the person. In this lifetime, we are human being. Of
course, when we think of ourselves as human beings, we are human beings.
But this identity as a human being, this specific “I”, this specific
person, is only limited to this lifetime in that because it exists in
relation to the human body that we have. Based on the human body, we
designate human being and we have this identity as a human being. So there
is this specific person of this lifetime. But when this lifetime comes to
an end, this specific identity as a human being ceases to exist.
Does the part of us that is a human goes to the next life? That is why we
need to differentiate between the specific identity of one particular
lifetime and the person that pervades all the lifetime that covers the
person that exists from beginningless lifetime. There is a difference,
right?
There is an “I” that goes to hell, and there is an “I” that goes to
enlightenment, right? The specific personal identity that is related to a
specific lifetime such as a human being, like us of this life, which is a
specific person at a specific time related to this human body, such an
identity ceases to exist when the lifetime comes to an end.
For example, let’s take the situation that you are now. You are now here
sitting and listening to the teaching. There is an “I” that is listening to
the Dharma but the “I” will cease to exist later on when you are not
listening to the Dharma when the class comes to an end. Does the “I” that
is listening to the Dharma cease to exist or not?
The discussion here is that the “I”, the person and everything else,
nothing is established from its own side. If you look for the “I” of this
life, the person in the body, you will not be able to find. The blood is
not the “I”, the flesh is not the “I”, the bone is not the “I” and the skin
is not the “I” - none of it is the “I”. That is very interesting. If you
look for the “I” within the basis of designation, the body and mind, you
cannot find the “I” there. You cannot find any of it which is the “I”. You
will not be able to find an “I” that exists outside of the body and mind
which is of a different entity from the body and mind.  It is not this, it
is not that. Although you cannot find the person, the “I” within the body
and mind, neither can you find it outside of the body and mind, yet we
cannot say the “I” does not exist, because if we say that, it goes against
common knowledge. It goes against the worldly convention.  The “I” does
exist but it is not the body and mind, neither is it different from the
body and mind.
Although you cannot find the “I” within the basis of designation, neither
is there an “I” that is separate from the body and mind, yet you know and
experience that there is an “I”, so obviously there is a person. Definitely
the person exists. Therefore, in conclusion from the CMWS' presentation,
the “I” does not exist from its own side but the “I” does exist. How does
it exist? It exists in mere name, something that is dependently designated;
designated in dependence upon the basis of designation. It exists in mere
name. If you really think about it, this is about the only answer that you
can come out with. That is the reality. No matter how you think, your
answer will not transcend this. That is what you have to say. But yet this
is the most difficult point and the most difficult thing to understand and
to realize.
It is really the most difficult thing to understand the uncommon position
of the CMWS that nothing exists from its own side, nothing exists from the
side of the basis of designation. If you look within the basis of
designation, you will not be able to find the imputed object, neither can
you find it outside of the basis of designation, and yet the thing exists.
How does it exist? It exists as dependently designated. It exists in mere
name and is dependently designated in relation to the basis of designation.
This is the most difficult point to understand. Everybody else, all the
Buddhist tenets starting from the AMWS, the MOS, the SS and the GES say
that there is definitely something that you can point to that is the “I”.
Anything that exists including the “I” must exist by way of its own
character. There is something from its own side. Basically what they are
trying to say is that if you look for the imputed object, you will be able
to find it among the basis of designation.  There is something among the
basis of designation that you can point to that is the object. Basically,
that is what everybody else says and believes in. Perhaps the Prasangika,
CMWS, say; “No way, it is not like that.” They have their own reasons. They
show through reasoning on how that cannot be the case.
When you hear the word “selflessness”, you need to understand what is it
that does not exist? Selflessness is lack of a self, isn’t it? What it
means is that whatever that self is apprehended by the apprehension of a
self, that self does not exist.
We have an apprehension of a self, self-grasping. The object of this mind
is the self, isn’t it? We must think the meaning of the word “self” in
philosophical term; not the English term. Selflessness means that the self
that is apprehended by the self-grasping does not exist. For example, there
is an apprehension of a self of person. What is this mind apprehending?
This mind is grasping at an inherently existent person. This inherently
existent person that is being grasped at by this self-grasping does not
exist.
We used the terms “self”, “person” and “I”. The self exists, the person
exists, the “I” exist. But it is important to understand that we exist and
not to confuse and not to mix this up with what we think is the meaning of
selflessness. Usually when people hear the word selflessness, they think
that the self doesn’t exist, the person doesn’t exist, the “I” doesn’t
exist. No, that is not what it means. Selflessness doesn’t mean the person
doesn’t exist. It doesn’t mean that. The “I” exists, the person, the self
obviously do exist.
The “I” exists, the person exists, the self exists, but the self in the
word “selflessness” refers to the “I” or the person that is grasped at by
ignorance. Ignorance is the apprehension of a self or self-grasping. It is
holding on to something. The thing that is held on or grasped at by
ignorance is the self in the word “selflessness”. That kind of self does
not exist. It means that. Selflessness doesn’t mean in general there is no
“I”, no person or there is no self. Yet, the object of observation of self-
grasping does exist. You must also be clear of that.
What is the object of observation or the focal object of ignorance?  There
is this mind - the apprehension of a self. What is it focusing on? What is
its object of observation? The object of observation is the “I” that
exists. The conventionally existent “I” does exist. Ignorance focuses the
“I”, the conventionally existent “I”, but apprehends it to be inherently
existent, apprehends it to be existing from its own side while the “I”
doesn’t exist in that way.
We need to think about the difference between self-cherishing and self-
grasping. The object of observation of self-grasping is the “I” that exists
but it apprehends the “I” to be inherently existent, to be existing by way
of its own character, existing from its own side. That is what self-
grasping does. When one realizes emptiness directly, in the perspective of
that consciousness, there is no inherently existent “I”. That mind realizes
that there is no inherently existent “I”. It realizes the emptiness of an
inherently existent “I”.
When a person realizes emptiness or selflessness directly, he realizes the
emptiness of an inherently existent “I”, but that realization would also
induce an understanding that the “I” does exist conventionally. If you
remember the earlier discussion, those people who have achieved liberation
from cyclic existence and become arhats have eliminated their self-
grasping. But they still have self-cherishing. The arhat has no self-
grasping. As such, he doesn’t have the self-cherishing which is
apprehending the inherently existent self as the basis and then holding
that self to be the most important thing in the world. The arhat has no
more self-grasping, but arhat still has self-cherishing. So what is the
basis for his self-cherishing? He is focusing on the conventionally
existent “I”, the “I” that does exist and then considers that “I” which
does exist conventionally to be the most important thing in the world; more
important than everybody else.
If you think about it in this way, then you have an idea how arhats still
have self-cherishing. Because there is nothing that is self-instituted,
therefore phenomena do undergo change, as says in the verse “Changing this
way and that.”
The talk of the town now is the haze. How does the haze appear to us?  We
have this belief and it appears to us as if the haze will never ever go
away as it has been there for such a long time. Weather conditions do
change. Because of the change in wind direction, the haze goes away and the
situation improves and we see the clear sky. Again, how does the nice
weather appears to us? How the clear sky does appears to us. Again, as if
there is something from its own side, right? It appears as if it will
always be like that. Whatever appears to us always appears as if it will
always be like that, something right there from its own side.
Air pollution and clear weather happen because of the sky. The sky makes it
possible. The sky, the space is the basis. What is it that is being
obscured? The sky. What is it that is clear? The sky itself. What makes it
possible is the nature of the sky itself which by nature is clear. Its
nature is clear, it is empty, it is a vacuity. This is the analogy.
Likewise, phenomena do not exist inherently. Because phenomena are empty of
existing inherently, therefore, change is possible. Because things don’t
exist in and of themselves, therefore change is possible. Because phenomena
are dependently arisen, they are empty of existing inherently. Because
things do not exist inherently, therefore there is this whole variety of
appearances.
Verse 104
Now hear this! Everything is dependently co-arisen. Being dependently co-
arisen, they are not independent. Changing this way and that, they are
false appearances and illusions; they are images that appear like a
whirling firebrand.
Verse 105
Like the plantain tree, life has no inner core. Like a bubble, a lifetime
has no inner core. Like a mist, it dissipates upon close examination. Like
a mirage, it is beautiful from afar. Like a reflection in a mirror, it
seems as if it were really true. Like clouds and fog, it seems as if it
were really stable.
If you take a piece of stick and light it or set it on fire, and then you
twirl it quickly, it sparkles and it looks as if there is this whirling
fire brand. It looks like there is a wheel on fire that is turning.
Although in reality there isn’t any turning fire wheel over there,
nevertheless there is an appearance of it. Likewise, although phenomena do
not exist from their own side, phenomena appear to be truly existent.
Although there isn’t a burning wheel, nevertheless, there is an appearance
of a burning wheel. Likewise, although phenomena do not exist truly, they
appear to exist truly.  Phenomena exist but as a mere appearance.
A plantain tree looks very sturdy on the outside and it looks as if it will
last forever. It looks as if there is a very solid core. If you cut it, it
is actually quite hollow. There is really nothing inside. Likewise,
although our life force appears as very stable, as if we will live for a
very long time, but actually this is not the case. It is just a matter of
some conditions coming together and then we are dead.
Our life force is similar to a bubble. A bubble looks very nice and it
seems as if it can stay for a long time. But actually it is not. These
analogies serve to illustrate the fact that there is nothing really
concrete about our existence, nothing has concrete existence including the
self and the “I” and the person. Although it appears to be truly existent
and we believe that it is truly existence, so real, so stable, but in fact
in reality that is not the case.
If you observe mist, maybe like a fog, from far, it looks as if there is
something really there, but when you enter into the fog or mist, you don’t
see the mist. Likewise, if we look how the “I”, the self or the person
appears to us, if we think of it, if we just look at the level of mere
appearances without checking and without investigating how this “I” is and
just leave it at the level of appearances, there is this appearance of
really something there, so real. Then if we check in detail and analyze,
what is this “I”,  where is it, then definitely we don’t find it, what we
believe was so solid earlier on dissipates and we lose the sense of
concrete identity. We look for the “I”, it cannot be found.
A mirage is formed under certain weather conditions. Under extreme heat,
sometimes we get this appearance of a body of water. While there isn’t any
water there, but nevertheless there is the appearance of a body of water
there.
Like a mirage, all phenomena which arise from causes and conditions, of
which there are many to which we ascribed to the terms “beautiful” and
“attractive”. Yes, there are attractive, pleasant, beautiful objects and
phenomena, but they are not inherently beautiful. They are not beautiful
from their own side. Rather the existence of a beautiful object is only
dependent on causes and conditions.
Like a mirage which does not exist in the way it appears, likewise,
although there are phenomena that appear to us as beautiful, those are just
mere appearances. There is no real, inherently existing beauty.
[BP1 Module 6: ‘Like the plantain tree, life has no inner core’: Over time,
water will seep into the core of the tree trunk of a tree that is submerged
in water. When that happens, the tree will rot and disintegrate.  Though it
looks very tough, the tree in the water is not stable. In the same way,
although our lives appear to be solid and enduring, it is not the case.
We can also take ‘life’ to mean a person or ‘I’. We can apply this  line  to
the subject of emptiness. For example, when we see ourselves, the person  or
‘I’ appears as a solid, enduring, able to stand  on  its  own  feet  and  is
really right there. This is how we  see  ourselves  and  how  we  appear  to
ourselves. In reality, such an ‘I’, does not exist.  For,  if  such  an  ‘I’
exists, then it will not be subject to disintegration and change.  But  that
is not the case, isn’t it? The ‘I’ or the person does change. Since the  ‘I’
or the person does undergo change, it does not exist in the way  it  appears
as solid, standing alone, without depending on something else.
‘Like a bubble, a lifetime has no inner core’: When we  look  at  a  bubble,
the bubble looks very real and as something right there, but all we need  to
do is poke it and it will disappear straightaway. It does not exist  in  the
solid way it appears to us.
It is the same  with  our  lifespan.  When  we  do  not  meet  with  adverse
conditions, we feel very strong and solid as if we can  last  forever.  But,
on the onset of even the slightest adversity, we may even  lose  our  lives.
This shows that our lives are not able to stand on their  own  and  are  not
independent. They do depend on  something  else.  Since  our  lives  undergo
change, there is really no real ‘inner core,’ no real essence in life.
‘Like a mist, it dissipates  upon  close  examination’:  When  we  see  mist
gathering from afar, it looks very real, but the closer you get to  it,  you
feel you are losing it and you are unable to find it.
Whether we talk about the body or the person or the ‘I’ or  any  phenomenon,
it appears real and solid as if we can point our  fingers  at  it  and  say,
‘That is the thing that I am talking about.’ Although this is  how  a  thing
appears to us, when we actually investigate to see  if  it  exists  in  that
way, we are not able to point to the very thing that we are  talking  about,
just like the dissipating mist.
‘Like a mirage, it is beautiful from afar’: When we see a  mirage  of  water
in a desert, obviously, that water does not exist. Phenomena are  like  that
too. The water does not exist although we see the appearance  of  water.  In
the same  way,  all  compounded  phenomena,  though  they  appear  to  exist
independently from their own sides, without relying on  anything  else,  can
only come about through depending on causes and conditions.
When we look at beautiful things, they seem inherently  beautiful.  Although
beautiful things come about through causes and conditions, but when we  look
at them, they appear to be really beautiful from their own sides.  But  when
we look and search for that beauty, we are unable to point  to  it.     This
is not to say that beautiful  things  do  not  exist.  Inherently  beautiful
things do not exist from their  own  sides,  but  we  are  not  saying  that
beautiful things do not exist.
‘Like a reflection in a mirror, it seems as if it were  really  true’:  When
you stand before the mirror, you cannot say that you are in the mirror.  You
are not there but it appears as if there is a  person  right  there  in  the
mirror. Although it appears that way, in reality, there is no such thing.
All the analogies here are stating that although  all  things  or  phenomena
appear to exist from their own sides, to truly exist, they do not  exist  in
the way they appear to us.
‘Like clouds and fog,’ they seem as if they will remain  forever.  But  when
the wind blows, they slowly start to dissipate and  disappear.  In  reality,
it is like that, but that is not what appears to us  when  we  look  at  the
clouds and fog. In the same way, when we compare the  bodies  that  we  have
now and the bodies we will have tomorrow, we may  feel  that  they  are  the
same. When we do not check, then this is what we  think  and  this  is  what
appears to us. In reality, our bodies are  disintegrating  and  changing  in
each and every single moment since they are compounded phenomena.

Examination : After Chinese New Year
Khen Rinpoche (in English): If you want the exam after the new year, please
put up your hand. You want the exam on Sunday or after the new year? Those
who really want to study, best is after new year. If you don’t want to
study, then Sunday.  You win. It is very good that you want to take the
exam after the new year. It is wonderful. The whole point is you want to
study. It is not postponing for it to be longer. I don’t think so. That is
very good. We do it after the new year.
