Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson23.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.543338
================================================================================


Verse 106
This butcher, the enemy Ego, is just the same. It seems as if it really
exists, but it has never really existed. It seems as if it is really true,
but it has never been really true anywhere. It seems as if it is vividly
appearing, but it is beyond the realm of affirmation or denial.
“This butcher, the enemy Ego, is just the same. It seems as if it really
exists, but it has never really existed” - if we stand in front of the
mirror, we will be reflected on the surface of the mirror, and it looks as
if we exist right in the mirror. However it is just a reflection and we are
not in the mirror.
Likewise, when the sky is very cloudy, let’s say you climb a mountain and
when you reached a certain height in which you are truly above the cloud,
and when you look down, you will see the whole space is covered with clouds
and it appears as if the clouds will be there forever.  Although it looks
as if the clouds will remain unchanging forever but in reality, change is
happening in each and every single moment because there is air movement,
wind and so forth. So change is happening. Basically all composite
phenomena undergo momentary change although they appear as if to be
unchanging and stable and are always there; in fact composite phenomena
undergo momentary change.
These are the analogies. The point is that the self-cherishing and the self-
grasping do not exist truly as well. They exist because of the mistake in
our mind. So by depending on those earlier analogies, one comes to
understand that phenomena including our self-cherishing and self-grasping
are just mere appearances and they do not exist in and off themselves.
“It seems as if it is really true, but it has never been really true
anywhere. It seems as if it is vividly appearing, but it is beyond the
realm of affirmation or denial”
When all phenomena are brought to the attention of our minds, they appear
to our minds as truly existent, although in reality, they do not exist
truly, they do not exist inherently. Nevertheless, when anything that
exists appears to our minds, they appear to have that concrete existence
and appear to exist truly. In reality, inherent existent has never existed.
There is never been such a thing as inherent existence.  Regardless of
place and time, inherent existence has never come into existence.
Whether it is our self-cherishing or self-grasping together with the person
or the ‘I’ that is observed by the self-grasping, when we bring these
different objects to the attention of our mind, they all appear to be truly
existent and we believed that they are truly existent. Their appearing to
us as inherently existent doesn’t mean that they are inherently existent.
The appearance of phenomena as inherently existent to our mind is not from
the side of the object, but rather it is due to the wrongful projection
that comes from the mind.
“Phenomenon is beyond the realm of affirmation or denial” - the phenomenon
that is designated and the thing that designates as phenomenon do not exist
truly.
Our self-grasping together with the self-cherishing induced by the self-
grasping together with the karma that we have accumulated motivated by
these attitudes together with the results of those karma which is suffering
have never existed inherently, never exist truly. They do not exist in and
of themselves. They are all mere appearances of the mind.
Up to this point in the text, starting on the section on ultimate
bodhicitta, many examples and lines of reasoning were given in order to
basically delineate the view of emptiness.
There are different examples and analogies that we can think of in order to
understand how things do not exist truly. Take for example our dream
experience. When we are dreaming, we do see many things in our dreams. We
experience many different kinds of objects. Nevertheless, these are just
mere appearances to the dream consciousness. Likewise, when we see the
illusion that is created by a magician or an illusionist, the illusionist
can conjure an apparition of an elephant. Because we are not aware that it
is just an apparition, we think there is a real elephant, but in reality,
there isn’t any functional elephant.  It is just an apparition (an
illusion) which looks exactly like an elephant. If you look for the
elephant, there is no elephant right there. There isn’t any functioning
elephant. It is just an appearance to the mind that has been affected by
the illusion.
In the dream, we may see different kinds of things such as an elephant or a
horse. There is an appearance of a real horse or a real elephant right
there but those are not real elephants or horses as they are not functional
and they do not qualify as a horse or an elephant.  But there is still the
appearance and it is just an appearance to that particular dreaming
consciousness.
Likewise, in the magic show, we see the illusion that is created by the
illusionist, and there is the appearance of a horse or elephant but those
are not real horses or elephants as they are not functional elephants or
horses. It is just an appearance and it is an appearance to the mind that
is affected by the illusions
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You must understand the example, otherwise
meaning not okay later.
You do see things in your dreams such an elephant. That elephant is an
appearance to that dreaming consciousness, so there is a dream elephant.
What exactly is a dream elephant? It is just the mere appearance to that
dreaming consciousness.
Likewise, all that exist, oneself and others, samsara and nirvana, all
phenomena exist in mere name. All phenomena exist in mere name and
everything that exists is merely imputed by thought. All phenomena are mere
appearances. They are merely designated in dependence upon the basis of
designation. The phenomenon in question, whatever it maybe, does not exist
from the side of the basis of designation, it doesn’t exist in the basis of
designation, and it doesn’t exist on the basis of designation. There is
nothing from the side of the basis of designation that is the phenomenon.
What the teaching is saying is that everything that exists, basically all
phenomena, have never existed and they do not exist from the side of the
basis of designation.  There is nothing from the basis of designation that
is the object. But rather, phenomena exist as mere appearances, something
which is merely posited by thought and exists in mere name.  Why we say a
particular phenomenon, the one that we choose to investigate, doesn’t exist
from the side of the base, the basis of designation?  There is nothing from
the basis of designation that is the object. There is nothing in it, there
is nothing on it, and the basis of designation is not the object in
question. Why? Because if phenomenon exists from its own side, this means
that the phenomenon in question exists within the basis of designation.
Then from the side of the basis of designation we should be able to find it
if you look for it. But when we analyze and investigate closely, we cannot
find it. That is the funny thing. Since it cannot be found, that is why it
is said that the phenomenon do not exist from the side of the basis of
designation. This is the ultimate nature of all phenomena. This is actually
how it has been and has always been. We say this is the mode of abiding of
phenomena. So this is really the nature of phenomena in that nothing exists
from the side of the basis of designation, and phenomenon does not exist
from the side of its basis of designation. If it exists, then it can be
found. As it cannot be found, therefore it doesn’t exist from its own side.

Although this is the nature of phenomena, but why do we not realize it? Why
this ultimate nature of phenomenon does not appear to us?  That question
then arise: If this is how things are, then how come reality doesn’t
present itself to us as it is? Why things do not appear back to our minds
in that way? Why do we see things as truly existent?
The mistake comes from our side because our mind is polluted by the stains
- the predisposition of ignorance- just like how we see all kinds of weird
stuffs and things which are not true in a dream consciousness. Likewise,
due to the mistake in our minds, particularly this ignorance, and due to
the pollution of ignorance then anything and everything that appears to us
appears as truly existent while they are not truly existent. So basically
the mistake comes from our mind because our mind is polluted by the
predisposition or the latencies of ignorance. All the faults of the
mistaken appearances of true existence are the makings of the
predispositions of ignorance.
To the mind that is polluted by the predispositions of ignorance, there is
the appearance of true existence. Whether we call this factor of appearance
the object of negation or not, it is the object of negation. When we say
the thing that we have to realize that does not exist is the object of
negation and this is what we need to target at.
The few examples given in the text will help us to understand how phenomena
are not truly existent.
Verse 107
And as for the wheel of actions, it is just the same; though it lacks an
inherent nature, yet it appears, like the reflection of the moon in water.
Actions and their consequences are a variegated multitude of falsehoods.
Even though they are just appearances, I urge you to embrace virtue and
avoid sin.
Ven Gyurme:  “I urge you to embrace virtue and avoid sin” as I urge you to
adopt virtue and abandon negativity.
The CMWS says that although all phenomena are not truly existent,
nevertheless, the presentation of cause and effect is feasible
conventionally. Conventionally, there is an agent, action, and object.
For example, when there is a meeting of a body of water and moonlight, then
there is the appearance of the moon on the surface of that body of water.
So as long as there is moonlight, which means there is the moon up there
shining and as long as there is the body of water, when these two come
together, there will be a reflection of the moon on the surface of that
body of water. It is something that is unstoppable. We cannot stop the
reflection from appearing.  Similarly, when we engage in virtue, we will
experience happiness, and when we engage in non-virtue, we will experience
suffering.  Although nothing exists truly, everything that exists is empty
of existing inherently. Nevertheless, it is impossible for suffering to
arise from virtue and happiness to arise from non-virtue.
Verse 108
When in a dream a peat fire blazes, we are terrified by the heat, although
it is without substance. In the same way, although the hell realms and such
are without substance, we fear the smelter’s fire and other tortures. As
that is so, we should forsake evil actions.
It is possible to dream of oneself being caught in the midst of fire, such
as up in the mountain and when suddenly everything is on fire. When you see
that happening in your dream, you will become afraid and experience fear in
the dream. You may even sweat or scream in the dream although it is just a
dream. If you happen to sleep with someone and you start screaming in your
dream, the person beside you will know that you are screaming but he or she
does not see any fire.  Although it is just a dream fire and there isn’t
any real fire or any functional fire out there, nevertheless, you
experience fear and physical and mental suffering. Although there isn’t any
real fire there or functional fire there, suffering still does arise.
Likewise, in the hell, the hell fires, the hell guardians and all the
terrifying weapons that hell beings see do exist but they don’t exist
inherently. Nevertheless, they bring about fear, suffering and great pain.
All these are also mere appearances and are a projection of a non-virtuous
mind.
The point here is that not to misunderstand mere appearances to mean
nonfunctional. It is not to look down on mere appearances. A mere
appearance does not mean it doesn’t function. It still gives rise to
result. The point is not to disregard karma and its effects. Although
everything that exist, it exists as mere appearances but nevertheless they
function. Virtues lead to happiness and non-virtues lead to suffering.
Verse 109
In a feverish delirium we may feel as if we are wandering around
suffocating in a deep cave, even though there is no darkness at all. In the
same way, even though ignorance and the like are without substance, we
should get rid of our delusions through the three wisdoms.
Ven Gyurme: “even though ignorance and the like are without substance” is
even though ignorance and the like do not exist inherently
Here it is said that sometimes when people have heat disorder in the body
due to very high fever, they may have the appearance of seeing the
environment as being enveloped by darkness; like seeing dark clouds or fog
although in reality, it is not like that.
Similarly, due to ignorance, everything that appears to us as truly
existent while they are not truly existent. Although all that exist are
mere appearances, nevertheless, mere appearances do function conventionally
and they do give rise to their respective results. In order to understand
how all phenomena are mere appearances, we have to cultivate the three
types of wisdoms. We usually call the three wisdoms as:
   1. The wisdom arisen from hearing
   2. The wisdom arisen from reflection
   3. The wisdom arisen from meditation
First, we have to pursue extensive hearing and learning of emptiness or
selflessness. Then we develop some idea of emptiness or selflessness. That
is the wisdom arisen from hearing.
Then, whatever we have heard and have studied, we have to reflect and
analyze the information that we have collected over and over and over again
until we develop an ascertainment and a definite certitude in our own
hearts about the subject, and in this case is selflessness or emptiness. So
that is the wisdom arisen from reflection.  The best kind of wisdom arisen
from reflection is the inferential cognition of emptiness.
Whatever the certitude and ascertainment we have developed with regards to
emptiness by familiarizing over and over and over again with that meaning,
then we come to develop the wisdom arisen from meditation.
Of the different kinds of wisdom arisen from meditation with respect to
emptiness, the best is the direct realization of emptiness. With that, then
we have the tool to uproot ignorance and also to overcome the
predispositions or the latencies of ignorance.
Verse 110
When a musician plays a melody on a lute, the sound lacks inherent nature,
if we analyze it. But when the sweet sounds emerge, their unanalyzed
aggregate eases the anguish in people’s hearts.
When someone plays the guitar well and it is pleasant to the ears, then one
will enjoy it. If one will to analyze where that pleasant sound is coming
from:
- does it come from body of the guitar alone?
- does it come from the strings alone? Or
- does it come from the side of the person playing the guitar?
No, the sound doesn’t come from any of these factors alone but rather they
come from that aggregates of all these factors coming together.
When somebody plays the guitar well, it will sound very beautiful and nice.
If we will to go beyond that appearance of the sound and to look for what
exactly is that sound and where exactly is it coming from then we will not
able to find it in the player or in the guitar or any part of the guitar.
If we look for it, it cannot be found in any of these parts that make up
the composite or aggregate. However, if we just leave it at the level of
appearance and are just aware of that sound without investigating and
analyzing, that pleasant sound does bring comfort. So if we do not
investigate and analyze, the pleasant sound exists and does functions.
Verse 111
When we analyze all causes and effects, they lack inherent nature as either
identical or different. Yet phenomena vividly appear to arise and perish,
and we experience pleasure and suffering as if they really existed. Even
though they are just appearances, I urge you to embrace virtue and avoid
sin.
If we do investigate and analyze all causes and effects, we will not be
able to find a truly existent cause and effect. We will not able to point
to something that a cause and effect that exist in and all itself. If we do
not investigate and analyze but just leave it at the level of appearances,
they exist and function. The point is that at the level of mere appearance,
cause and effect is feasible.
[BP1 Module 6: Verse 110 is the analogy for Verse 111. Cause and effect is
karma: From the cause of virtuous action, comes the result of happiness;
from the cause of negative action, comes the result of suffering.
Karma does not exist inherently as it is neither identical nor different.
Nevertheless, karma exists as mere appearance like the coming together of
the conditions producing the beautiful guitar music. In the same way, karma
exists conventionally, as it says here: ‘Yet phenomena vividly appear to
arise and perish, and we experience pleasure and suffering as if they
really existed.’]
Verse 112
When drops of water fill a jar, the first drop does not fill it, nor the
last, nor each drop individually. Yet the dependently arisen aggregate
fills the jar.
The meaning of the analogy in verse 112 are in verse 113.
[BP1 Module 6: It is not just the first drop of water that fills up the jar
nor is it the last drop that is the drop that fills up the jar. It is also
not each drop individually. It is the coming together of every drop.]
Verse 113
Similarly, when someone experiences their reward of pleasure or pain, it is
due neither to the first moment of the cause, nor to the last moment, and
so on. Yet the dependently arisen aggregate makes us experience pleasure or
pain. Even though they are just appearances, I urge you to embrace virtue
and avoid sin.
Ven Gyurme:  “I urge you to embrace virtue and avoid sin” as  I urge you to
adopt virtue and abandon negativity.
Verse 114
Aha! The appearance that delights our mind, though independent when
unanalyzed, definitely lacks an inner core. However, the fact that
phenomena appear as if they exist is profound and difficult for the dull-
witted to understand.
Ven Gyurme:  “Dull-witted” literally means the lowly one.
Here it is translated as ‘Aha’ and in Tibetan it is ‘Emaho’ which is a
positive proclamation of one’s amazement.
It is like ‘Wah, how wonderful!’ What the author is proclaiming is that how
wonderful it is to have realized that there is no contradiction between
appearance and emptiness. These two are not contradictory but in fact they
are mutually complementary.
What is needed is the correct understanding that appearance and emptiness
are not contradictory but rather they are mutually complementary. That is
the understanding that one needs to derive at.  Due to the fact that things
are not truly existence therefore they are mere appearances. Because they
are mere appearances therefore they are empty of existing truly. So, in
reality, the meaning is that they are mutually complementary.
But it is difficult for most people to understand that because when we
think of emptiness, we do not know how to posit the existence of phenomena,
and we do not know how to posit how things are merely appearances.
When we think of how things are appearances and how they exist, we then
lose the part about things being empty of truly existence. So, it is very
difficult for most people to bring these two together.
If we were to relate phenomena at the level of appearances, that is, if we
are satisfied with the mere appearance without investigating and analyzing
then there is a whole variety of appearances. Things exist conventionally
and function. We are able to posit a whole multitude and variety of
phenomena. But if we are not satisfied with the mere appearances and go
deeper and beyond the level of appearance and to look for the final nature
of phenomena then we are not able to find anything that is truly existence;
but yet things exist. That is why it is said that if we are satisfied at
the level of mere appearances, things do function. But if we are not
satisfied and go deeper then we will not able to point to anything that is
the phenomenon in question.
We have to understand that whatever conventional phenomena that brings to
the attention of our mind will necessarily appear to us as truly existence.
Although they are not truly existence but they will appear to us as truly
existence because our minds are polluted by the predisposition of
ignorance. As long as the predisposition of ignorance is still in the mind,
all phenomena will continue to appear to us as truly existence.  So, it is
extremely difficult to see that appearance and emptiness are mutually
complementary instead of being contradictory. It is extremely difficult to
see how they are mutually supportive.
It is very difficult to be able to posit that things exist conventionally
at the level of appearances and yet it functions. It is very difficult to
have these two realizations and understanding with the exception of the
CMWS or those who have understood the CMWS. As in the text, the “dull-
witted” or the lowly one do not understand this and perhaps we can take the
lowly ones to mean those who follow the AMWS and the schools below it.
Verse 115
Now, when you are absorbed in meditative equipoise on this, what is there
really to a mere appearance? How can either existence or non-existence
exist? How can anyone anywhere assert “it is” or “it is not”?
This verse is saying that in the perspective of that wisdom of a person who
is realizing emptiness in the meditative equipoise, there is no appearance
of conventional phenomena whatsoever. So, in the perspective of this
meditative equipoise focusing emptiness, while there is no appearance of
conventional phenomena that doesn’t mean that there is nothing that is
appearing to this meditative equipoise.
“How can existence exist?” - The existence here refers to conventional
appearance. So, conventional appearances do not exist in the perspective of
the meditative equipoise realizing emptiness.
“How can non-existence exist?” - Although conventional appearances do not
exist in the perspective of the meditative equipoise realizing emptiness,
what appearing is emptiness. So, it is not non-existence i.e. it is not
that nothing is appearing.
Verse 116
Subject and object lack ultimate reality. If your mind remains in its
innate nature, uncontrived and shining, free from all discrimination and
conceptual proliferation, you will become a great being.
Ven Gyurme’s translation: Subject and object lack ultimate reality. If your
mind remains in its innate nature, uncontrived, to be freed of the objects
that is to be adopted and that is to be discarded in the ultimate sense and
freed of all elaborations, you will become a great being.
Just as phenomena or objects do not exist truly, the emptiness itself does
not exist truly. Nothing exists ultimately and nothing is ultimately
established including the objects to be adopted and the objects to be
discarded. As such, in the perspective of the meditative equipoise focusing
on emptiness, there is freedom of all elaborations of conventional
appearance. So, without any distraction, one enters into meditative
equipoise focusing on emptiness and through familiarizing oneself with the
realization over and over for a long period of time, it will come a time
when emptiness will be directly perceived. Then come that time one will
become a great being, an arya or a superior.
Verse 117
Thus, by practicing the conventional and ultimate bodhicitta, and thereby
uninterruptedly carrying the two accumulations through to completion, may I
perfectly realize the two aims.
Ven Gyurme: “two aims” as two purposes
As I have mentioned before, first we have to think very deeply about the
faults and the disadvantages of our self-cherishing attitude from many
angles and from many perspectives to derive at that understanding. We also
have to think very deeply and to realize the advantages and the benefits of
cherishing others. We have to think about these from many angles. Only
based on those two understandings or realizations then one comes to train
the mind in developing bodhicitta through the system of exchanging self and
others. Through that then one will come to develop the mind of
enlightenment or conventional bodhicitta. With this conventional bodhicitta
one can finish accumulating the virtues or merits.
Through using analogies and reasoning, one comes to realize emptiness
through hearing, reflection and meditation.  Then one develops the wisdom
realizing emptiness. Comes the time when one realizes emptiness directly
then ultimate bodhicitta is generated in one’s heart. With ultimate
bodhicitta, one accumulates the collection of wisdom.
Through the union of the practice of method – conventional bodhicitta- and
wisdom – ultimate bodhicitta- one then accumulates the two collections.
When one finishes the accumulating the two collections, one achieves the
two bodies – the truth body and the form body. Through that one
accomplishes the aims of oneself and others.
Now, you have become achieved the perfect and complete full enlightenment
like what is said in the Heart Sutra.
Lama Atisha had relied on many teachers. He had many gurus and he had also
received tantric empowerments from many of his gurus. But among all of his
gurus, he considered a few of them to be the most kind and precious and one
of them was Dharmaraksita.
Lama Atisha considered the author of this text, Dharmaraksita,to be one of
his most precious and kind teachers because of having received the
teachings or instructions on cultivating and developing the two types of
bodhicitta – conventional bodhicitta and ultimate bodhicitta. Why? Because,
at the end of the day in order to achieve enlightenment, we need different
kinds of teachings and instructions to achieve enlightenment and the
essence is these two bodhicittas. Without cultivating and developing
conventional and ultimate bodhicitta there is no enlightenment whatsoever.

All of us have been tortured and tormented by our afflictions since
beginningless lifetimes up to now. So, if we really sit down and analyze
and think well, at the end of day, what is it that will enable us to
overcome and defeat our afflictions? It is the two bodhicittas –
conventional bodhicitta and ultimate bodhicitta.
What should we focus on in the practice?  The whole point is to learn about
these two bodhicittas and, as much as possible, to cultivate and develop it
and to experience it. If we are able to do so then we will have peace in
our heart and experience happiness. We will also be able to destroy our
ego, our afflictions, and our ignorance. So, that is really the focus. What
we need is to gain mastery or to control of our mind because since
beginningless lifetimes up to now, we have not gain controlled over our
minds but rather our afflictions have gained the upper hand. In order to
gain control or to master our mind we need to cultivate and develop these
two bodhicittas.
Many people ask this question:  ‘What should I practice?’ or ‘What is the
main practice?’ The answer is what I have just said. The heart or the
essence is the two bodhicittas. That is nothing more and it is just that.
We have always been given advice to be a good person with a good heart. It
is true that we have to have good heart. But there are different levels of
good heart as well. The ultimate level of good heart is bodhicitta. One of
our primary focus to aim for bodhicitta; to learn, to train and then to
move closer to actualize bodhicitta. Once we have the good heart and in
particular once with have the ultimate good heart - bodhicitta - it doesn’t
matter where we are born. There is only happiness for that person whether
the person is in pureland or in hells. Because he has bodhicitta then he is
happy everywhere.
Many a time people think the main practice is tantra - deity yoga
meditating on some deities. While deity yoga is really good but in order
for the practice of deity yoga to be correct, one must have bodhicitta
first. Without the practice and experience of bodhicitta then there is no
way for any deity practice to become a correct and real practice. So,
without bodhicitta, there is really no tantric practice.
When we talk about bodhicitta, we are talking about the two types of
bodhicittas – the ultimate good heart plus the understanding and experience
the realization of emptiness. So, without these two types of bodhicittas,
it is not possible at all to do tantric practice. If tantric practice is
done on the basis of having an experience of the two types of bodhicitta
then the tantric practice itself will become beneficial in that it can also
act as an antidote to our self-cherishing and self-grasping. If one is
doing tantric practice without any experience of bodhicitta and meditation
on emptiness, the tantric practice instead of decreasing our afflictions,
our self-cherishing and self-grasping there is a possibility and the danger
that tantric practice increases or strengthens our ego and our self-
cherishing. So, our focus is to learn and think about these two bodhicitta
and as much as possible try to integrate them in our life and practice it.
If we practice like that then our life will become meaningful.

The end of Module Seven -Wheel of Sharp Weapons.


