Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson14_rev.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.661435
================================================================================


Verse 40
When none of my practices reach their goal, it is the weapon of my own evil
deeds turned upon me for internalizing a pernicious view. From now on,
whatever I do shall be solely for the sake of others.
In the course of one’s practice such as doing retreat or whatever it may
be, if one doesn’t fulfils the purpose or the aim of that practice, then
what is the cause of such an experience? It is said that such experience is
the result of having followed a pernicious view (lower view or bad view).
This pernicious view refers to cherishing oneself and forsaking others.
The teachings tell us that if we want our practices to fulfill a certain
goal, then what we need to do is to do the practice with the thought of
benefiting others and only for the sake of others; not for oneself.
Verse 41
When I cannot control my own mind even though I engage in religious
activity, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me for
concentrating on my own aggrandizement in the present life. From now on I
shall concentrate on the desire for liberation.
The main purpose of engaging in virtue with our body and speech is to
subdue and discipline our mind. If we find our mind not improving but
instead it may be even getting worse despite doing prostrations, making
offerings and so forth, then what is the cause of this?
When we are unable to discipline our mind even though we may engage in
virtue, this is the result of just focusing on the happiness of this life.
One may engage in virtues with body and speech but it is done primarily for
the happiness of this life, to obtain respect, to gain reputation and so
forth. In short, it is motivated by any of the eight worldly dharmas.
The solution is that whenever we engage in virtue such as prostrations,
making offerings, recitation and so forth, it is important to make sure
that it is not m`ixed with and not contaminated by the eight worldly
dharmas. But rather, whatever virtues we may engage in including
prostrations, making offerings, doing recitation and so forth, we should
think that those practices are for the sake of subduing our mind, for the
sake of reducing our afflictions and for the sake of achieving liberation
(nirvana).
Therefore, it is emphasized in the teachings that whenever we engage in any
activity, in particular practice in virtue, we must examine and adjust our
motivation. That is to have correct motivation for doing the practice. That
is very important. Otherwise, even though we may think we are engaging in
virtue, and we may think that we are doing something really, really
virtuous, such as doing many prostrations, reciting many Om Mani Padme Hung
and so forth, and if we don’t examine our motivation and then adjust the
motivation accordingly, those practices may end up not contributing to the
pacification or subduing or disciplining of our minds. So, whatever
practice we do, we should least adjust the motivation by thinking, and
wishing that the practice becomes a cause for subduing our minds.
Verse 42
When I despair as soon as I’ve sat down and reflected, it is the weapon of
my own evil deeds turned upon me for shamelessly flitting about from one
new friend of high status to another. From now on I shall be serious about
my friendships with everyone.
The example cited in the commentary is that there could be times when we
may actually stay in the retreat for a certain period of time and even for
months. But towards the end of the retreat, when one looks back at one’s
retreat, one might feel “Nothing much has happened for this retreat. I
didn’t really do a good job.”  One may even think “I have wasted my time.
If I had known earlier I would not have done this retreat.”  One feel
regrets.
This happens to us in various aspects of life. We usually undertake certain
activity and after a while when we look back and then regret for having
started it in the first place. This is said to be the result of having
shamelessly flitting from one friend to another in the past.
This situation also applies to running after gurus. One may see some good
points in a prospective guru and gets very excited. Then one forms a
relationship with that guru and gets some instructions from that guru. But
after a while, maybe one or two months, one gets bored and think “He is not
so good any more.” Then when one sees another person and thinks that is
better a better guru. One then run to the guru and forsake the earlier
guru. But then the same thing repeats itself and after a while one moves on
to the next one and so and so forth.
In this text, it put “shamelessly flitting about from one new friend” and
connecting it with the word “of high status to another”, but in the Tibetan
edition, these two parts can be read separately “besides moving from friend
to friend”, and not guru to guru. The second part “of high status” has to
do with not practicing the dharma according to one’s level. When we engage
in dharma practice, we are subduing our mind. We have to know where our
level is and then train accordingly. So we have to train the mind gradually
starting with the path of the person of small capacity because that is
where one’s level is. But instead of doing that, we look for the high
practices. Right away we want to do those Mahayana practices and then
secret mantra (tantra) and running after the practices that are not at our
level.
The solution is that from henceforth before taking somebody as your guru,
you will have to check carefully. Once you have made the decision and have
taken that person as your guru, then make sure that you rely properly on
the guru to the end. It is same with making friends. Before you make
friend, you will check carefully. So with regards to practice, you have to
practice according to your own level and not just running after high
practices that are beyond your current ability.
When it comes to hearing the teachings, learning and studying the dharma,
we must study extensively as possible. In fact, it would be good if you can
study everything such as sutra, tantra, and all the different aspects. So
when comes to study, we have to know everything. But when it comes to
training the mind and practice, you have to do it in a proper order and
without jumping. That is you cannot start right away with the high-level
practices. You have to start right from the beginning in accordance with
your level of mind.
The practices of the three types of persons – the person of small, middling
and great capacity - are the practices for any one person to achieve
enlightenment. This is what being said. As such, first we have to train our
mind in the practices of a person of small capacity and actualize that
before we move on to train our minds in the practices of the person of
middling capacity. And once we are trained and actualize that, only then we
move on to the practices for a person of great capacity. When it comes to
training the mind, there is no such thing as jumping.
Verse 43
When I am deceived by others’ cunning, it is the weapon of my own evil
deeds turned upon me for increasing my selfishness, pride, and insatiable
greed. From now on I shall markedly reduce all of them.
Sometimes in life, we do meet with people who take advantage of us. They
succeed in cheating us because of their deceit and guile. Sometimes we
think we are smart and will never be cheated, and nobody can take advantage
of us, but nevertheless it happens to all of us. We get cheated and being
taken advantage in different ways. When we are deceived and being taken
advantage of, we don’t feel good and feel unpleasant. This is said to be
the result of our own pride and insatiable greed and hankering for the
possessions and the wealth of others. Henceforth, we should practice
contentment.
Even in this life, when we have pride and desire, it causes us problems. It
will also bring us problems in the future lives as well. If we think about
it carefully, many of the problems and complications in life that we have
experienced, all these comes from a lack of contentment and greed. If we
think about the problems and the happenings in the family and in the world,
many of them originate from the lack of contentment and also from greed.
For example, let’s look at the environmental problems that the world is
facing today such as floods, rain not falling at the correct times and so
forth, all of these environmental problems originate from men’s greed. Many
of the problems that the human race is facing today are man-made. If we
think about it carefully, many of the problems originate from men’s greed.
The planet earth has evolved in such a way that it can accommodate all that
lives in the planet; not just human, but also insects, animals and all the
life forms that we can find in the world, Planet earth itself actually has
that natural ability to accommodate everyone. Now the human race is facing
all different kinds of problems related to survival, the environments and
so forth. Probably most of the problems that the human races are facing
today are actually originate from men’s greed.
We all need to survive. Yes, everybody needs to survive and to stay alive.
All of us have the right to stay alive. It is our right to pursue after
things that will keep us alive and living. We have a right to live, we need
to stay alive, and we pursue after things that will keep us alive. But what
about doing things or owning things that are actually not necessary for our
survival? We are doing more than what we need to survive. So there is a
difference between need and want. That is the completely different
question. If we actually possess more than what we need, are we actually
entitled to it or not? Is it really our right to just simply “I like to do
whatever I want? This is my choice”?
Yes, we need to stay alive, and of course we need to maintain our physical
body.  We need to keep ourselves alive. We have the right to do that, and
we should do that. If we are not content and we follow after greed, then
life becomes very complicated. We create problems for ourselves and others
as well.
Verse 44
When I am side-tracked by attachment or aversion while studying or
teaching, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me for not
considering my own devilish faults. From now on I shall examine these
impediments and abandon them.
When practicing the dharma, when listening to the dharma and teaching the
dharma are done under the influence of attachments, jealousy, negative
competitiveness and so forth, then all these activities of listening to the
dharma, learning the dharma, explaining the dharma and teaching the dharma
do not become an antidote to the afflictions because they have now
contributes to one’s attachment and hatred.
This does happen, isn’t it? One may be learning the dharma for a long time
and for years, but somehow the mind hasn’t improved, In fact, one may find
one have more afflictions, more anger, and more attachment. It is the same
thing that if one is teaching the dharma and explaining dharma, but instead
of contributing to the subduing of the mind, one may become more angry,
more attached, and more competitive in a negative way. These experiences
are the result of not thinking or reflecting on our own devilish faults. In
the context here, the devil (mara) is our self-cherishing. We have not
thought well the faults of our self-cherishing.
The solution stated here is that we should think well of the faults of our
self-cherishing and then abandon it.
Verse 45
When all the good I’ve done turns out badly, it is the weapon of my own
evil deeds turned upon me for repaying kindness with ingratitude .From now
on I shall very respectfully repay kindness.
Sometimes we do things with good intention but people don’t reciprocate.
This is pretty much like what is mentioned in the Eight Verses of Thought
Transformation. Despite of doing things with good intention, but it is not
reciprocated and it turns out badly. It is said to be the result of
repaying kindness of others with ingratitude in the past, such as being
ungrateful to people who are kind to us such as our parents; and also
because of harming others such as harming our friends or harming people who
have helped us.
The advice is that we should repay the kindness of those who were kind to
us and have helped us, which literally says serving the parents, i.e.
taking care of our parents and not harming others. Starting with our
parent, we respect them, and we take care of them. Likewise, we should do
the same for others.
Verse 46
In short, when calamities befall me, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds
turned upon me, like a smith killed by his own sword. From now on I shall
be heedful of my own sinful actions.
It happens to all of us that in life there are things that we want but we
don’t get it. When we don’t get it, we suffer. Also there are many things
that we don’t want in life, but they just come our way. So, not getting
things that we want and getting all the things that we don’t want just
befall us, i.e. when the undesirable befall me, it is the weapon of my own
evil deeds turned upon me, just like a smith is killed by his own sword.
That is, a smith makes sword but somehow he gets killed by the sword that
he makes.
The solution henceforth is to be conscientious and be mindful of our own
negative actions.
Verse 47
When I experience suffering in the wretched states of existence*, it is the
weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me, like a fletcher killed by his
own arrow. From now on I shall be heedful of my own sinful actions.
* Wretched states of existence - lower realms
This is pretty much similar to the previous verse.
[BP1 Module 6: We had been reborn in the lower realms, ‘the wretched states
of existence,’ and experienced many different kinds of sufferings. Now in
this life, due to the ripening of negative karma, we are again meeting with
suffering and unpleasant experiences.
All these negative experiences that we had undergone in the past and
present are the results of actions we had created ourselves. The analogy
here is of the fletcher, the arrow maker who laces the tips of his arrows
with poison so that they can more effectively kill someone, who ends up
being killed by the very same arrow he had made.
Because we had created the causes, we have to experience the fruitional
effects of these past negative actions in the form of suffering. If we do
not want such suffering again, if we do not want to go to the lower realms
again, from now on, we must be very careful with what we do. In particular,
we must stop engaging in actions that will cause us to be reborn in the
lower realms.
This is something we have seriously to be mindful of at all times,
especially since we have obtained the precious human rebirth where all the
favorable conditions for Dharma practice have been assembled. If we do not
take advantage of this opportunity and suddenly death strikes and we end up
in the lower realms, then it will be too late. Once we are in the lower
realms, it is well-nigh impossible to get out.
We can reason this out for ourselves quite easily. Even now when we have
all the ideal conditions for practice and study, it is still difficult for
us to do so and nothing gets done. If it is difficult with this rebirth,
then, obviously, once we end up in the lower realms e.g.in the animal
realm, we will not be able to do any practice at all. We will probably not
even hear the word ‘Dharma,’ or, even should we hear Dharma teachings, it
will still be quite impossible to practice. So, when we have the
opportunity and all the conditions are here, now the time has arrived for
us to do something, to practice.
It is important that we remember what we are discussing here. In
particular, remember the sufferings in the lower realms, because when we
forget what awaits us there, we neglect our Dharma practice, find it
difficult or we get stuck. But, when we reflect well on the sufferings in
the lower realms, we can ask ourselves, ‘If I were to die tomorrow and I
were reborn in the lower realms, what would it be like?’ When we are able
to reflect on this well, definitely, there will be some benefits. We will
be encouraged to practice the teachings.
Therefore, at the very least, we should develop this fear of being reborn
in the lower realms. This is the minimum motivation for our practice, be it
taking refuge in the Three Jewels or reciting, ‘Om Mani Padme Hum’ etc. If
our practice is not motivated by even this level of motivation, then we are
working only for the happiness of this life and our practice does not
become pure Dharma.  Therefore, from now on, we have to be careful about
our actions and be mindful not to commit any negativity. ]
Verse 48
When the sufferings of the householder befall me, it is the weapon of my
own evil deeds turned upon me, like parents killed by their cherished son.
From now on it is right for me to leave worldly life forever.
[BP1 Module 6: “From now on it is right for me to leave worldly life
forever” and in Tibetan edition is to get ordained.
‘Householder,’ refers to lay people, those with a family life, children  and
so on.  Householders may experience  problems  with  their  spouses  or,  as
parents, be unable to support their children and so forth.
How are the sufferings of the householder which befall  us  caused  by  such
evil deeds, ‘like parents killed by their cherished son?’ This is  not  very
clear in the commentary. It could be an analogy,  similar  to  the  fletcher
killed by his own arrow. Parents bring up their children with all  sorts  of
hopes for them but the children rebel,  disobey  the  parents’  wishes,  get
angry at their parents at the slightest provocation and even end up  killing
their parents. As an analogy, the message is the same – we  create  our  own
suffering.
I am seeing this line more in terms of an  analogy  whereas  the  commentary
lists it as an actual suffering; i.e.  when  children  actually  kill  their
parents.  We should   reflect that, ‘When the sufferings of the  householder
befall’ us, it  is  related  to  our  past  actions  accumulated  under  the
influence of our self-cherishing  attitude,  especially  the  karma  of  not
repaying the kindness of others.
Therefore, having reflected on the sufferings of the householder’s life  and
the  sufferings  of  cyclic  existence  in  general,  from  now  on,  it  is
appropriate to leave worldly life behind. Based on this  understanding,  one
develops the determination to  be  free  from  worldly  life  forever,  i.e.
getting  ordained.  Ordination  should  be  undertaken  on  the   basis   of
renunciation, the total disenchantment with cyclic existence. That  must  be
the motivation and to try, henceforth, to practice pure  Dharma.  Ordination
therefore is not a means of escape from some  temporary  suffering  or  some
small worldly problem.
Answering Compiled Questions
Question: When the defilements are completely eradicated, does the
disintegratedness of the defilements still exist? If so, what function does
it perform?
Answer: In the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, the verse deals
with the training in the perfection of wisdom on the Path of Meditation.
“Shariputra, therefore, in emptiness there is no form, no feeling, no
discrimination, no compositional factors, no consciousness” - first, the
five aggregates are mentioned.
Next are the 12 sources.
“No eye, no ear, no nose, no tongue, no body, no mind” are the 6 sense
powers which are the empowering conditions for the generation of the
different consciousnesses - the 5 sense consciousnesses and 1 mental
consciousness.
“No visual form, no sound, no odor, no taste, no object of touch, and no
phenomenon” - are the objects of observation of the 6 consciousnesses - the
5 sense consciousnesses and 1 mental consciousness.
 “There is no eye element and so on up to and including no mind element and
no mental consciousness element” – this sentence encapsulates the 18
constituents.
Of the 18 constituents, there are 6 constituents which are the empowering
conditions for the generation of consciousness. Essentially, they are the 6
sense powers – eye sense power, nose sense power and so forth.
“There is no eye element and so on up to and including no mind element” -
these are the 6 constituents which are the empowering conditions for the
production of generation of consciousnesses, both the 5 sense
consciousnesses and 1 mental consciousness.
“and no mental consciousness element” - this indicates the 6
consciousnesses which are dependent on the 6 sense powers. So these are the
other 6 constituents.
The 18 constituents are:
    - The 6 sense powers (5 sense and 1 mental sense power) which are the
      empowering conditions for the 6 consciousnesses. So there are 12
      constituents.
    - By the way, the presentation of the 6 objects of those 6
      consciousnesses is implied.
    - So, 6, 6, 6 = 18.
This is an answer to an earlier question about the difference between mind
element and mental consciousness element.
The mind element there refers to one of the 6 sense powers – the mental
sense power.
The mental consciousness element refers to the main mind. It also includes
the 5 sense consciousnesses.
[pic]
Do you have any opinions on the disintegratedness of the defilements?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Anybody else has some answers?
Student 1: When the defilements are removed, its disintegratedness still
remains. Example is the case of a stream enterer. He realizes emptiness at
that point in time, and because of that, he doesn’t arise anymore
afflictions which produce new throwing karma. However, he still needs to
take rebirth several times because of the disintegratedness of the past
karma that he had created. Those are not removed. Defilement is removed but
disintegratedness remains to produce an effect causing him to take rebirth.

Ven Gyurme: For the stream enterer, what defilement is removed?
Student 1: For example, if you have realized emptiness, there no longer
arise of strong anger and attachment which produce throwing karma. But
because of the previous disintegratedness that he had accumulated before,
those continue to produce rebirth for him. So the effects remain.
Ven Gyurme: So there is no disintegratedness of the
defilements/afflictions?
Student 1: No new afflictions are produced, whereas in the past he did
produce. So there is disintegratedness which produces all the throwing
karma.
Ven Gyurme: Does the disintegratedness of the defilements exist? You say
no?
Student 1: It does exist. After he realized emptiness, it still continues
on to produce effects.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That part is okay.  But not answering my
question.
Khen Rinpoche: How far can the disintegratedness of the obscurations go?
When one becomes a foe destroyer (arhat), does the arhat still possess the
disintegratedness of the defilements? Does the defilement still exist at
the arhathood? Yes or no?
Does the disintegratedness of the Path of Seeing abandonments exist in the
continuum of the person on the Path of Seeing?
Student 1: During the uninterrupted path the disintegratedness still exist,
but once he goes into the path of release, then the disintegratedness no
longer exists.
Ven Gyurme: Does the disintegratedness of the defilements (not the
defilements) exist or not?
Khen Rinpoche: Does the disintegratedness of the Path of Seeing
abandonments exist in the continuum of the person on the Path of Seeing?
Student 1: No
Khen Rinpoche: The disintegratedness of the Path of Seeing abandonments is
a composite phenomenon, isn’t it? Is a functioning thing, right?
Student: Yeah. I read in the text that the defilements and the seeds are
removed.
Khen Rinpoche: That one is clear. What we are looking at is the
disintegratedness of the Path of Seeing abandonments, does it exist in the
continuum of the person on the Path of Seeing?
Student 1: No, it doesn’t exist.
Khen Rinpoche: Why? Isn’t the disintegratedness of the Path of Seeing
abandonments a functioning thing?
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: If it is a functioning thing, where is it? The
disintegratedness of the Path of Seeing abandonments occurs after the Path
of Seeing abandonments have been abandoned or before it has been abandoned?

Student 1: Should be after.
Khen Rinpoche: In whose continuum does it exist? In the person who is on
the Path of Seeing, right?
Student 2: The disintegratedness of the afflictions means that the
afflictions have stop to exist. That is why the disintegratedness started.
Therefore, the disintegratedness of the Path of Seeing abandonment has to
come into existence after the path of release.
Khen Rinpoche: Basically, you just said that the disintegratedness of the
Path of Seeing abandonments exist in the continuum of that person on the
Path of Seeing, right?
Student 2: That would be a problem.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Are you saying that or not?
Ven Gyurme: You said got problem, then what is the problem?
Student 2: Can I say that the disintegratedness exists for a while then it
disappears?
Khen Rinpoche: There is no need to explain. Exist or don’t exist?
Student 2: Exist.
Khen Rinpoche: If you say the disintegratedness of the Path of Seeing
abandoning exist, this disintegratedness of the Path of Seeing abandonment
is itself a Path of Seeing abandonment or not? Or is it a Path of
Meditation abandonment? Or it is an obscuration?
Student 2: It exists in a superior’s mind and it is a Path of Meditation
abandonment.
Khen Rinpoche: Is it an afflictive obscuration or is it a knowledge
obscuration?
Student 2: I think it is still afflictive obscuration.
Khen Rinpoche: Based on what you have said, we can extend the same
conclusion to the disintegratedness of the knowledge obscuration. The
disintegratedness of the knowledge obscurations exist on the Buddha ground.

We do have to think about things. Are you saying the disintegratedness of
the Path of Seeing abandonments does not exist in the continuum of the
person on the Path of Seeing? It would seem that you would have to say
that, right? Because of your earlier position, if you reject that, then
what alternative do you have? Then you would have to say that the
disintegratedness of the Path of Seeing abandonment does not exist in the
continuum of the person on the Path of Seeing. Earlier, if you say yes,
then you have some problems. Then the alternative is no, right?
Question: When the defilements are completely eradicated, does the
disintegratedness of the defilements still exist? If so, does function does
it perform?
Student 3: I think still exist. Disintegratedness means cessation of
something, i.e. something has ceased. That is a functioning thing. That
means the cessation of the defilements happened already. It is a
functioning thing, then it has to continue to exist because it is a
functioning thing. It cannot just go into non-existence. It has to produce
something, go on and on.
Khen Rinpoche: If that is the case, then the disintegratedness of the
knowledge obscurations should exist on Buddha ground because it is
produced. The cease of the knowledge obscurations then the next moment
there is the disintegratedness, and then there is only left with the Buddha
ground. So Buddha has the disintegratedness of the knowledge obscurations
right?
Student 3: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: It follows that the disintegratedness of the knowledge
obscurations is Buddha and the disintegratedness of the knowledge
obscurations is therefore an object of refuge.
Student 3: Okay.
Ven Gyurme: Namo disintegratedness.
Khen Rinpoche: Is the disintegratedness of the knowledge obscurations
Buddha or not?
Student 3: Basis of designation of Buddha.
Khen Rinpoche: Is it Buddha?
Student 3: Have to be because everything about him is pure.
Khen Rinpoche: Then it seems that the knowledge obscurations have moved to
Buddha ground.
Student 3: Why? Knowledge obscurations and its disintegratedness are
different.
Ven Gyurme:: It is a disintegratedness of what?
Student 3: The disintegratedness of knowledge obscurations come about
because the knowledge obscurations no longer exist. If not how do you posit
the disintegratedness of knowledge obscurations?
Khen Rinpoche: The disintegratedness of knowledge obscurations is a fault
of knowledge obscurations. It is a continuum, isn’t it?
Student: Yes. But the cessation of knowledge obscurations only happens
after it cease, right?
Khen Rinpoche: When the knowledge obscurations are ceased, the continuum of
the knowledge obscurations has also ceased, isn’t it?
Student 3: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: So the continuum of the knowledge obscurations doesn’t move
to enlightenment, isn’t it?
Student 3: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Then the disintegratedness of the knowledge obscurations
doesn’t go to enlightenment, isn’t it?
Student 3: Then there is a fault because that would mean that a functioning
thing ceased to non-existence. Then how?
Khen Rinpoche: If the knowledge obscurations don’t go to enlightenment, can
the disintegratedness of knowledge obscurations go to enlightenment,
because the disintegratedness of the knowledge obscurations is essentially
a continuation of the knowledge obscurations?
Student 3: I think can. If cannot, then it has to change to something else
because it is a functioning thing.
Khen Rinpoche: Does the disintegratedness of knowledge obscurations go to
enlightenment? Essentially that is the question.
Student 4: The question is saying that the defilements are completely
ceased, right?
Ven Gyurme: Whatever level of defilements, when that defilements is
abandoned or ceased, does it produce its corresponding disintegratedness or
not?
Student 4: I take that defilements would include both the afflictions or
the knowledge obscurations together with the seeds or the predispositions.
The defilements would include the manifest obscurations. That means the
mind itself, for example, ignorance together with the seeds while you are
abandoning the afflictions obscurations. The defilements when you are
abandoning the knowledge obscurations would include predisposition as well
as the appearance. So these two come together. If you have completely
abandoned the defilements, that means, by logic, you would have abandoned
both of these.
Khen Rinpoche: The very essence of the question is the disintegratedness of
the knowledge obscurations a functioning thing or composite phenomena?
Student 4: One would have to say it is a functioning thing, it is
impermanent.
Khen Rinpoche: This disintegratedness happens before the abandonment of the
defilements or after the abandonment of the defilements?
Student 4: We have already discussed. It cannot be before. After would have
problem.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): In between?
Student 4: At the point of abandoning the defilements itself, this
disintegratedness would also be abandoned at that point. If not then would
have infinite regression which is what we discussed for factors of
disintegratedness. If we have infinite regression, then there is no end. We
cannot abandon the afflictive or knowledge obscurations. So I would take
the position that both the afflictions or the knowledge obscurations
together with the imprints or the predisposition are abandoned.
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s goes all the way to the last moment of knowledge
obscurations. At that last moment, the subtlest knowledge obscurations are
abandoned (ceased). Does the cessation of the knowledge obscurations
produces disintegratedness or not?
Student 4: What is said in Sutra path is there is no subtle mind, right?
Khen Rinpoche: Produced or not basically?
Student 4: I would take the first position it does not, it ceases together
with whatever manifest obscurations there is.
Ven Gyurme: So essentially there is no disintegratedness of knowledge
obscurations?
Student 4: Yeah.
Khen Rinpoche: There is the factor of disintegratedness of the cessation of
the knowledge obscurations. That factor of disintegration is a non-
composite phenomenon. The factor of disintegration exists. So if it exists,
it is either permanent or impermanent.
Student 4: So you are saying that it becomes permanent phenomena because it
ceases to exist.
Ven Gyurme: The cessation is permanent, right?
Student 4: The great bodhisattva wakes (???) up from there or posits (???)
there, I am not sure.
Khen Rinpoche: This is a difficult topic.  It is not clear in the great
treatises. But I incline to think that the disintegratedness of the Path of
Seeing abandonment doesn’t exist. In general, the disintegration of the
composite phenomenon does produce a continuum of disintegratedness. But
here, when we talk about the cessation of a particular defilement through
the force of a powerful antidote, that particular defilement together with
its continuum is severed and destroyed. This is what I think. When you talk
about functioning things, there are some functioning things whose
disintegration does produce a continuation of the disintegratedness. But
there are also some which the continuation of the phenomenon itself is
severed. As such, when it comes to the defilements, through the force of
the antidote, that particular defilement for which it is an antidote to
together with its continuum is severed. We have to think a lot about it.

Summary
|Present negative condition     |Karma and its effect   |Remedy                |
|When one’s practice such as    |Ripening of the        |From now on, I shall  |
|doing retreat or whatever it   |negative karma of      |do the practice with  |
|may be, it doesn’t fulfils the |having followed a      |the thought of        |
|purpose of that practice.      |pernicious view (lower |benefiting others and |
|                               |view or bad view) which|only for the sake of  |
|                               |is cherishing oneself  |others; not for       |
|                               |and forsaking others.  |oneself.              |
|When we are unable to          |Karmic results of      |From now on I shall we|
|discipline our mind even though|engaging in virtues    |engage in virtue such |
|we may engage in virtue with   |with body and speech   |as prostrations,      |
|body and speech, this is the   |but it is done         |making offerings,     |
|result of just focusing on the |primarily for the      |recitation not mixed  |
|happiness of this life.        |happiness of this life,|with the eight worldly|
|                               |to obtain respect, to  |dharmas, but rather,  |
|                               |gain reputation and so |for the sake of       |
|                               |forth, i.e. motivated  |subduing my mind, for |
|                               |by the eight worldly   |the sake of reducing  |
|                               |dharmas.               |my afflictions and for|
|                               |                       |the sake of achieving |
|                               |                       |liberation            |
|At times when we may have      |Karmic results of      |From now on, I shall  |
|embarked on a retreat for a    |having shamelessly     |be serious about my   |
|certain period of time, but    |flitting from one      |friendships with      |
|towards the end of the retreat,|friend to another in   |everyone              |
|one might feel “Nothing much   |the past. This can also|                      |
|has happened for this retreat. |apply to being fickle  |                      |
|I didn’t really do a good job. |regarding the choice of|                      |
|I have wasted my time. If I had|guru and the practice. |                      |
|known earlier I would not have |                       |                      |
|done this retreat.”  One feel  |                       |                      |
|regrets.                       |                       |                      |
|Sometimes in life, we do meet  |Karmic results of our  |From now one, I shall |
|with people who take advantage |own pride and          |practice contentment. |
|of us and succeed in cheating  |insatiable greed and   |                      |
|us because of their deceit and |hankering for the      |                      |
|guile. We may think we are     |possessions and the    |                      |
|smart and will never be        |wealth of others.      |                      |
|cheated, and nobody can take   |                       |                      |
|advantage of us, but somehow it|                       |                      |
|happens to us. We don’t feel   |                       |                      |
|good and feel unpleasant.      |                       |                      |
|In the course of listening to  |Karmic result of not   |From now on, I should |
|teachings or teaching the      |considering our ‘own   |examine the faults of |
|dharma, the mind is sometimes  |devilish faults, which |the self-cherishing   |
|overcome by attachment or anger|primarily refers to our|attitude and strive to|
|or competitiveness.            |self-cherishing        |abandon them          |
|                               |attitude               |                      |
|Despite of doing things with   |Karmic result of       |I shall repay the     |
|good intention, but it is not  |repaying kindness of   |kindness of those who |
|reciprocated and it turns out  |others with ingratitude|were kind to me and   |
|badly.                         |in the past, such as   |have helped me        |
|                               |being ungrateful to    |                      |
|                               |people who are kind to |                      |
|                               |us such as our parents;|                      |
|                               |harming friends or     |                      |
|                               |harming people who have|                      |
|                               |helped us.             |                      |
|We are not getting things what |Karmic result of  our  |I shall be            |
|we want and getting all the    |own past evil actions  |conscientious and be  |
|things that we don’t want.     |                       |mindful of my own     |
|                               |                       |negative actions.     |





