Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson21.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.520388
================================================================================


Student 1: This text is talking about all the faults of self-cherishing and
I was thinking about the two methods of achieving bodhicitta – sevenfold
cause and effect and exchanging self for others. It is generally said that
exchanging self and others is the more profound practice and is meant for
sharper faculty students whereas the other method is more for less sharp
practitioners. To me, exchanging self and others seems to be based on
thinking about oneself wants to be happy and one is not happy because of
one’s self cherishing. So it entails the reflection on thinking of the
disadvantages of self-cherishing and the benefits of cherishing others. But
to me it seems like we can say this but at the end of the day, we are
really thinking of our own happiness; whereas the sevenfold cause and
affect which entails thinking of the kindness of mother sentient beings…
Khen Rinpoche (In English): What you said….just before that…
Student 1: Exchanging self and others….
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Yeah, say again that one.
Student 1: It is thinking like oneself is one where others are many and the
practice entails thinking of all the disadvantages…
Ven Gyurme: Khen Rinpoche said the last part - despite thinking about the
disadvantages and the advantages, but at the end of the day, we are still
thinking about oneself.
Student 1: Yes, that is my personal feeling. I feel it is still ego-
centric. I mean I can say “I’m going to practice for the benefit of all
living beings” but at the end of the day, I’m thinking of my happiness,
whereas the other method where we talk about remembering that all sentient
beings have been my mothers and have been kind to me in countless
lifetimes, that to me seems like a much more powerful basis for generating
bodhicitta. Because when we actually think about the kindness of others,
and thinking of them having been our mothers, without being Buddhists, even
as a decent human being, we should think about repaying the kindness of our
parents. I think it goes beyond any sense of obligation or anything like
that.
I just feel that the foundation for thinking of the kindness of others is a
stronger basis for developing bodhicitta whereas the other method to me
still seems a bit selfish? I wanted to clarify with Khen Rinpoche, maybe
there’s something that’s maybe gone wrong in my reasoning.
Khen Rinpoche: Basically the conclusion of your question is that the seven
point mind training is better than the exchanging self and others.
Student 1: I think the basis of the practice is more powerful to me. In
essence to me it may be better but traditionally we have always been told
that exchanging self and others is more powerful.
Khen Rinpoche: The short answer is this: if the seven point mind training
suits you better starting with recognizing that all sentient beings have
been your mother then you just have to proceed with that. If through
meditating on exchanging self and others will cause your self-cherishing to
increase, then don’t do it.
It all depends on where we all are individually and at what level of
practice are we at. Whatever practice we do have to accord with our
capacity. For some people, meditation on impermanence is stronger than the
meditation on emptiness, because their meditation on impermanence helps
them to reduce their attachments.
Essentially, whatever practice we do, we have to do the practice that is
appropriate for our own level of mind. It also depends on where we are at.
It is a very personal thing. For example, as said in the teachings, in
order to help a person to recover from his sickness, we cannot just give
that person any medicine. Even if that medicine is claimed to be the best
or the most famous or the most powerful, it doesn’t mean that medicine is
necessarily effective for every individual. In order to cure a person of
his sickness, appropriate medicine has to be given. It is the same thing
here with the practice. It depends on where we are and also depends on our
level of mind. In the grand scheme of things, it is where we are in our
practice and what level are we at.
In one of the verses, it says “Due to our self-cherishing we run after all
the high practices that are way beyond our ability”. For example, we always
talk about the greatness of the Mahayana teachings, how wonderful training
the mind in bodhicitta is, and how wonderful love and compassion are. That
is spoken from the perspective of the Mahayana and for a person who is
ready for such practice. In general, it is true. But there is no way to
even start to train the mind in the Mahayana without having laid the proper
foundation. So without having trained and actualized the path of a person
of small capacity, one has no basis whatsoever to even start to train in
the Mahayana. If one starts to train in the Mahayana without a basis,
although one can say the Mahayana in general is the best and the most
wonderful thing, until one has the foundation, it will not be the best
thing for one at that moment in time.
It is called the sevenfold cause and effect instructions because there are
seven elements that make up the instructions starting from recognizing all
sentient beings as having been our mother and remembering their kindness,
then developing the wish to repay their kindness, then develop the
affectionate love and then compassion and so on and so forth. One has to
train the mind gradually in stages.
In the practice of exchanging self and other, the very first step is
equalizing self and other. In order to develop a deep profound
understanding of the practice of equalizing self and others, one would
probably need to think and reflect on emptiness, the ultimate nature of
reality.  When those of sharp faculty train their minds to develop
bodhicitta through the exchanging self and other, and because they are
sharp faculty trainees, they have a lot of knowledge and understanding and
information. So naturally they will understand that no phenomena exist
inherently, and they also understand that the samsara is no beginning
because the mind has no beginning. Since the mind has no beginning then it
is definitely the case that all sentient beings have been one’s mother. All
these understanding come naturally.
For the sharp faculty trainee who is training in the exchanging self and
other, the understanding and the realizations that all sentient beings have
been one’s mother, remembering their kindness and developing a wish to
repay their kindness and then the affectionate love that one considers all
sentient beings as very precious. Because of their reflections, that will
just come naturally.
Recently I have mentioned about those sharp faculty trainees who have an
understanding of the ultimate nature of reality. That really affects in a
very positive in their practice of equalizing self and others. Because of
an understanding of the ultimate nature of reality, emptiness, they come to
understand the clear light nature of the mind, buddha nature, and also
understand how the defilements are adventitious. That forms a basis for
them to have very strong compassion for sentient beings.
For those who have an understanding of emptiness, the ultimate nature of
reality, they realized that the minds of all sentient beings including
their own mind is actually pure by nature and is never been afflicted by
the delusions. The delusions are there but they are adventitious. These
adventitious defilements can be removed but yet because of those
adventitious defilements, then oneself and others have been suffering since
beginningless lifetime without much of a reason, and it is just for that.
So when they contemplate on how others are in this position just for this
small little mistake, then their compassion and love that they developed is
very strong. The strength of the love and compassion probably is not
induced by just a reflection on how sentient beings have been our mothers
and remembering their kindness and wanting to repay their kindness.
Those people who have realized emptiness see that all the sufferings and
all the problems arises from ignorance; which believes in something that
has never been there. Actually there is no basis. The whole problem just
comes from this mistake in the mind, the erroneous conception, the
fundamental miscomprehension of reality. That is why I think that if those
individuals who have this understanding of emptiness put their minds into
developing compassion, the compassion that they develop is very strong.
These individuals who have the understanding of the ultimate nature of
reality of emptiness, if they put their minds focus on the suffering of all
sentient beings, not only do they see suffering, they also see that all the
suffering that everybody has been experiencing since beginningless lifetime
has no basis whatsoever. It is kind of like for nothing for such a small
mistake, but yet for this fundamental mistake, ignorance, oneself and
others have been suffering since beginningless lifetime. That induces a
very strong compassion in their minds when they train their minds in
compassion. With that very strong compassion induces that wholehearted
resolve thinking: “I must do something to help others.” That wholehearted
resolve then induces them to develop bodhicitta. They then conclude “I
really must achieve full enlightenment to help others.”
But if we were to compare the strength of the compassion induced through
training the mind in the first four steps of the sevenfold cause and effect
instructions versus the compassion that arises from training the mind in
exchanging self and others, I think we will be able to see which is
stronger.
The first four steps of the sevenfold cause and effect instructions are:
   1. Recognizing all sentient beings as one’s mother,
   2. Remembering their kindness,
   3. Having the wish to repay their kindness,
   4. Generating the love sees that all sentient beings are very precious
      and very pleasant
Prior to training the mind in the sevenfold cause and effect instructions,
one must meditate on equanimity. In that context, it is to remove any sense
of biasness, feeling close to some and distant from others and that is
necessary though.
Student 2: In the last class, Khen Rinpoche differentiated between a
perfect virtue which involves renunciation and a non-perfect virtue which
does not have renunciation. What is the difference between a non –virtue
and a virtue without renunciation? What is the difference of their impact
on karma?
Ven Gyurme: In essence, the question: what is the difference between non-
virtue and contaminated virtue or non-perfect virtue.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): What is the difference?
Khen Rinpoche: In general, what is virtue and what is non-virtue?
Virtue is that which gives rise to a pleasant result.
Non-virtue is that which gives rise to a not pleasant effect.
We could engage in different kinds of virtue such as the practices of
giving and so forth in order to achieve a good rebirth in the future as a
human or a celestial being. So those practices of giving and so forth that
we are practicing here is to achieve a good rebirth are virtue.
So the practice of giving, for example, that is done in order to achieve a
good rebirth as a human or a celestial being is virtue, it is not a non-
virtue. It is virtue. But the question is, is this particular virtue a
perfect virtue or not?
What makes a virtue a perfect virtue?
A perfect virtue is a cause for liberation from cyclic existence. In order
for something to be a cause for liberation from cyclic existence, that
cause must be conjoined with the determination to be free or renunciation.
This is what I think.
In the prayers that we recite before class, that verse which starts with
“Do not commit any non-virtue”, that sentence essentially is a presentation
of virtue. Not committing non-virtue is a practice of virtue. I guess you
can relate that to the practice of a person of small capacity i.e. don’t do
bad thing but do good thing.
“Do not commit any non-virtue, engage in perfect virtue” - what it is
saying is that it is not sufficient just to engage in virtue, which is
implied by the first line. One must engage in perfect virtue. Without
engaging in perfect virtue, one will not be able to achieve liberation from
cyclic existence. So virtue alone is not sufficient to be the cause for
liberation from cyclic existence. It has to be perfect virtue and a virtue
which is conjoined with the determination to be free from cyclic existence.
As such, I think the second line could indicate the practice of a person of
middling capacity.
The third line of that verse is “Subdue your mind thoroughly” which I think
perhaps may indicate the practice of the person of great capacity. In order
to achieve full enlightenment, one must subdue one’s mind completely.
Perhaps this can mean that one must vanquish and overcome self-cherishing.
Just to achieve mere liberation is not sufficient. In order to accomplish
the perfect fulfillment of one’s goal and in particular to accomplish the
perfect fulfillment of the goal of others, one must achieve omniscience,
full enlightenment. In order to do that, we must subdue our minds
thoroughly in that we must first vanquish or overcome our self-cherishing.
We can understand the third line of the verse to mean overcoming the two
obscurations. We can take “to subdue the minds thoroughly” to mean to get
rid of all the obscurations; not just the afflictive obscurations but also
the knowledge obscurations.

Wheel- Weapon Mind Training
Verse92
I pray you, kill the enemy with your fierce wrath! I pray you, subdue my
evil thinking with your great wisdom! I pray you, protect me from my evil
actions with your great compassion! I pray you, destroy this Ego once and
for all!
Ven Gyurme:  “Kill the enemy” literally is to kill and liberate.
“I pray you, subdue my evil thinking with your great wisdom” - this
sentience is not present in Khen Rinpoche’s Tibetan text.
Essentially this is a verse of request to Yamantaka to destroy without any
hesitation on our self-cherishing and self-grasping.
[BP1 Module 6: ‘Kill the enemy,’ is a request to the wrathful deity,
Yamantaka to destroy the enemy, the self-grasping conception. He stands
with his right leg bent and his left leg out-stretched and, in his hands,
he holds all sorts of weapons. He has his fangs bared. This wrathful aspect
is directed at the self-grasping conception.
‘Evil thinking,’ again refers to the self-grasping conception.
The first two lines are requests. Although it is not mentioned in the
commentary, the first line seems to be making a request to the interpretive
deity, whereas the second is making a request to the definitive deity.
‘I pray you, protect me from my evil actions with your great compassion!’ -
We are requesting for protection from the fears of the negative actions
that we had accumulated, under the influence of the self-cherishing
attitude  and self-grasping conception.
‘I pray you, destroy this Ego once and for all!’: In Tibetan, this lines
reads, ‘Do or die, you must destroy this ego once and for all.’ So, we are
making a last vehement request to the deity. Why so emphatic? Because we
have finally identified self-cherishing as the enemy, the thing that must
be destroyed.
Verse 93
However much suffering those in cyclic existence may endure, I pray you,
heap it surely upon ego-clinging! However many of the five poisonous
afflictions anyone may experience, I pray you, heap them surely upon this
ego-clinging, which richly deserves them!
Ven Gyurme: ego-clinging is self-grasping
Essentially this verse shows the practice of taking on. One is making a
request to the deity Yamantaka to bring on all the suffering of all
sentient beings and direct it at our self-grasping.
As I said before, before one can do any practice of tonglen, taking on the
suffering of others and giving our happiness to others, one must have
thought and reflected well on the faults of self-cherishing. Until we have
developed a firm heartfelt conviction from the depths of our hearts that
our self-cherishing is our real enemy and is the cause of all our problems
of this life and the cause of all the problems and suffering that we have
experienced since beginningless lifetime, only then one does the practice
of tonglen; otherwise it is not going to work.
So we need to have that kind of realization of how terrible our self-
cherishing is, how it is our real enemy and how it has been harming us
since beginningless lifetime. It is only with that heartfelt realization
then one thus does the practice of taking on the suffering and the causes
of suffering of sentient beings. We take on their suffering in the form of
weapons, poisons and then heap or throw it onto our self-cherishing.
For a person who has the realization of the faults of self-cherishing
because of having thought about the faults of self-cherishing from all
angles and on this basis then, the person does the practice of tonglen,
taking on the suffering of others. So when they meet with problems in life
or sicknesses, instead of suffering, they feel very happy because they feel
‘My wish has come true! My prayers have come true!’ They don’t feel depress
or feel upset. In fact, they feel even more happy with ‘bring it on’ kind
of attitude.
When these people do the visualization of taking on the suffering of
others, it is not just talk but they really mean it and wish it from the
depths of their heart. Because they want it so much, so when they meet with
obstacles, they feel happy as this is what they want.
Of course we are not like that at all. Forget about meditating on tonglen,
even when we are asked to meditate on tonglen or when we are asked to think
about tonglen, we are already so fearful thinking “If I will to meditate on
tonglen, what will happen to me? This will happen to me. That will happen
to me.” Without even starting the practice, we already have all these
worries and fears.
While this is really one of the highest and best method for training the
mind to overcome self-cherishing, and as to whether such a practitioner who
can actually take on the suffering of others or not is another question. If
you think about it, it is quite difficult to prove that a sincere practice
of taking on the suffering of others does actually result one is actually
experiencing that in reality.
What do you think?
Do you think a person who is able and actually does the practice of taking
on the suffering of others sincerely does actually is able to take on the
suffering of others? Is it possible for him to free someone from cancer or
free someone from spirit harm? Is it possible or not? Yes or no?
Ven Gyurme: Follow your heart. Your heart say is possible right? That is
why not doing. That is what we believe.
Anyway, this visualization of taking on the suffering of others and heaping
it on the self-cherishing is a method for reducing the strength of self-
cherishing and eventually to the point to overcome it. So, the practice of
taking on the suffering of others is a method to increase our compassion.
For that person who has trained the mind in developing bodhicitta and has
then developed some compassion, they mean it and not just talk about it.
They really want us sentient beings to free our suffering. Because that is
their goal and is what really drive them, they mean it when they do the
practice of taking on this visualization. They have no qualm about taking
on the suffering of others as that is what they are looking for.
“However many of the five poisonous afflictions anyone may experience, I
pray you, heap them surely upon this self-grasping” - the visualization is
the same. Earlier on there was a description of taking on the suffering of
all sentient beings, and now we are taking on the afflictions of all
sentient beings which are the cause of their suffering. So one is taking on
their ignorance, anger, attachment jealousy and pride and also all of their
karma and throws it or heaps it onto our self-grasping.
[BP1 Module 6: Question: If we are to practise tonglen, will this cause our
past negative karma to ripen in the form of suffering?
Answer: That is possible. As mentioned in the first chapter of, Engaging in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, if the mere intention to relieve a single sentient
being of a headache has countless benefits, then, obviously, developing
bodhicitta will have far greater benefits and will bestow great stores of
merits. This chapter also mentions that it is the supreme method to purify
negative karma. If that is the case, it is possible that, due to practising
tonglen, because it is so powerful, it may cause a past karma, which could
have led us to experience rebirth in the lower realms, to be purified,
lessened or even experienced in the form of suffering in this life. This is
quite similar to what is mentioned in the Diamond Cutter Sutra.
It is possible that we may experience the ripening of negative karma in the
form of purification. With this understanding, when we are still afraid of
such experiences, then our emphasis is still on this life. We have not
reversed our attraction or attachment to this life. That is why we are
afraid.
We have all the causes of fear. We are attached to this life. On top of
that, we have self-cherishing and self-grasping. Of course, it is
difficult. On the other hand, for someone who is intent on achieving
liberation and enlightenment, then the small sufferings of this life are
not so important. Therefore, the very first thing that Dharma practitioners
must do is to give up attachment to this life. Otherwise, one is not a
Dharma practitioner at all.]
Verse 94
Although through reasoning I have identified without a doubt all the roots
of evil, if you judge that I am still abetting them, I pray you to destroy
the holder himself!
Ven Gyurme’s translation: the root of evil as the roots of faults
The verse is saying “Even if I have recognized the faults of self-
cherishing, I acknowledged it. But if I still follow my old ways and still
give in to my self-cherishing then you please destroy me”. How should we
understand the verse?
Here it says ‘I pray you to destroy the holder himself” - but we can’t do
that and we shouldn’t do that. Is it aright if we destroy ourselves? What
do you think? I am not exactly very clear about the last sentence. Maybe
you can think about it of what does it mean when it say ‘Please destroy
me’?  Here the holder means the person who has the self-grasping and self-
cherishing. What do you think is the meaning of that request?
It is clear in the teaching in Arya Deva’s Four Hundreds Verses which says
‘One should not put the blame on sentient beings but to put the blame on
the afflictions”. So, we should view the afflictions as an enemy but with
sentient beings, we must always view them with compassion. So we shouldn’t
be destroying anyone including ourselves.
Verse 95
Now, drive all blame onto one thing! I shall cultivate gratitude toward all
beings, take into my mind what others abhor, and turn over the roots of my
virtue to all beings.
Ven Gyurme’s translation: Now, put all the blame onto one and meditate on
the great kindness of all beings, take on what others do not desire and I
dedicate my root of virtue to all beings.
‘Drive all the blame onto one thing’ essentially is like a summary. So
whatever problems or suffering that we experience, who should we attribute
the blame to? If we want to find somebody to blame for all our problem,
there is only one thing to blame, that is our self-cherishing and never at
some other things or somebody else.
“I shall cultivate gratitude toward all beings” - always meditate on the
great kindness of all sentient beings. The teaching is telling us that all
of our happiness, every single happiness, that we experience is arises in
dependence on all sentient beings. As such, in that sense all sentient
beings are kind, so we should meditate on the great kindness of all beings.
When we meet with problems, difficulties, suffering and difficult
situation, all of us always put the blame on something else other than
ourselves. We are always all like that. When anything goes wrong, it is
somebody out there or the situation out there. That is what we do and that
is what we believe in. But the teachings here are telling us to reconsider
that carefully. The teachings are telling us “Don’t do that. The fault is
not outside. The fault is inside. If we want to blame, it is only one thing
to blame - our self-cherishing”.
For somebody who has reflected on the faults of self-cherishing from many
different angles and who has reflected on the advantages of cherishing
others from many angles, for that person, he would be able to take on what
others do not desire i.e. to take on all the problems and the suffering and
causes of suffering of others on to him. That person will always be
dedicating his root of virtue for the happiness of others.
Verse 96
Just as the pattern of colors in a peacock’s feather is due to poison, may
the afflictions be transformed into the aids to enlightenment by my taking
on the physical, verbal, and mental deeds of other living beings, past,
present, and future.
The verse here is talking about taking on all the physical, verbal and
mental karma of all sentient beings together with the afflictions of all
sentient beings on to oneself. Just as the color of the feather of the
peacock become more vibrant from taking on the ingesting poison, likewise,
here one makes prayers that through the practice of taking on the physical,
verbal and mental karma and the afflictions of all sentient beings of the
past, present and future, may this not be an obstacle for oneself but
rather only be a cause for one to achieve enlightenment quickly.
Here, one is making a prayer generating the aspiration to be able to take
on the negativities and the afflictions of sentient beings and may that
become a cause for one to quickly achieve full enlightenment.
Verse 97
I give the roots of my virtue to living beings so they may be cured, as a
poisoned crow is healed by medicine. I dedicate my life to the liberation
of all beings so they may quickly achieve the buddhahood of the Sugata!
This is a way of making a wish “May those sentient beings whose roots of
virtue are cut off and whose merit have been depleted, may their merit be
top up”, because of one’s dedication of one’s merit to that. We have a crow
that is ingested poison on the verge of dying but we save it from death by
giving medicine and help it recover slowly.
So, here one makes the prayer that through the dedication of one’s merit to
all sentient beings, as a result of one’s merit, may they quickly generates
the conventional and ultimate bodhicitta and through that may they achieves
enlightenment quickly.
Verse 98
Until I and those who have been my parents have attained enlightenment in
the Highest Realm, may we support each other with a single thought, even
when wandering about in the six states of existence owing to our actions.
Here we are making a prayer that through the practice may one and all
father and mother sentient beings achieve enlightenment together and to aim
for Akanishta. Until enlightenment is achieved in Akanishta, we and all
sentient beings have to take numerous rebirths in cyclic existence. As
such, one makes the prayer in all those rebirths may oneself and the others
be freed of attachment and hatred and may oneself and others support one
and another and be closed to one and another. May one and others become
mutual support for each other to quickly achieve the bodhicitta.
[BP1 Module 6: ‘The Highest Realm,’ here refers to the pure land of
Akanishta where only the enjoyment body resides, surrounded by an entourage
of superior beings. We can also understand ‘the Highest Realm’ to mean the
state of buddhahood, since there is no better state than that. Here, we
pray for all sentient beings to achieve that state. ]
Verse 99
When I enter the three wretched states of existence for the sake of even
one living being, may I save him or her from the suffering of that wretched
destiny without compromising a great being’s way of life.
Here, one is making a prayer that while one is on the path to enlightenment
practicing the bodhisattva’s deeds, even when there is a need to enter the
lower realms to benefit just one sentient being, may one do it
enthusiastically, willingly and happily just as how one would readily go
for a party or a picnic. This prayer says that when one is actually in the
midst of the lower realms benefitting the sentient beings, may those
situations never cause one’s bodhicitta to degenerate and may one be the
one who leads the sentient beings out of the lower realm.
Those individuals who have very strong compassion actually make this kind
of prayer. Those who have great compassion actually mean it and are happy
to go to the lower realms if there is a benefit. Even to save just one
being, they will do it. They mean it. Having said this, if one really has
this kind of aspiration, do one need to be fearful of the actual suffering
of the lower realms i.e. the fear of having actually experiencing it?  Does
it actually happen to you? The commentary here says “Don’t be afraid”.
If motivated by very strong compassion, one makes the prayer and really
aspired wanting to go to the lowest of the hells, the Avici hell, to
benefit sentient beings, and because one really mean it, and make very
strong prayer, do you think the prayer will be actualized or not?
The answer to the question is this: Instead of going to the hell, one
actually end up in the pureland.
Did you understand the answer?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): If you understand then good. If you don’t
understand, ask question.
Verse 100
At that very instant, the guards of hell will may realize that I am a guru,
and their weapons will turn into a rain of flowers. May peace flourish
unharmed!
Do you need an explanation of that verse? If not, I will just move on.
[BP1 Module 6: The previous verse mentions how the bodhisattvas enter
happily on their own accord, into the lower realms to benefit sentient
beings. They enter the hell realms without any obstructions even though
they may be engulfed by fire and the ground is made of molten iron. They
are able to do this due to their great courage and determination to benefit
others. So we make the prayer, ‘At that very instant when the hell
guardians see me, may their minds be pacified, may they develop respect and
faith in me and may they develop the recognition that I am their teacher or
spiritual master.’ We pray that, by merely seeing us, the hell guardians
will spontaneously stop their work of binding sentient beings and free
these sentient beings from bondage.

It is said that the hell guardians can cause a rain of weapons to fall onto
the beings living in the hell realms. So we make the prayer, ‘May the rain
of weapons be transformed into a rain of flowers and as soon as these
flowers touch the bodies of the hell beings, may they experience bliss. For
those in the hot hells, may the rain of flowers bring pleasant, cool
sensations! For those in the cold hells, may the rain of flowers bring
warmth.’ At the end one makes the prayer, ‘Through this prayer, may they
all experience the ultimate final bliss of full enlightenment.]
Verse 101
Even those in wretched states of existence shall obtain superknowledge and
mantras, assume the bodies of gods and men, and generate bodhicitta. In
return for my kindness, may they repay me with Dharma practice! Taking me
as their guru, may they properly attend me!
Ven Gyurme: “shall obtain superknowledge and mantras” ’is shall obtain
clairvoyance and dharanis
[BP1 Module 6: We pray that even while undergoing their wretched states of
existence in the lower realms, these sentient beings may be able to attain
clairvoyance (‘superknowledge’) and mantras (or dharanis, which refers to
retention mantras, i.e. non-forgetting). We pray that they may quickly be
freed from such horrible states, ‘May they achieve the higher rebirth of
humans and gods!”
We also make the aspirational prayer, ‘On the basis of having achieved the
higher rebirth of gods and men, may they eschew the wish to achieve their
own liberation of Hearers’ or Solitary realizers’ enlightenment. Instead,
may they develop the wish to achieve the state of unsurpassed, full and
complete enlightenment. May they develop the supreme bodhicitta.’
We continue to pray, ‘On the basis of developing bodhicitta, may they
strive to train correctly in the practices of the six perfections. By doing
so, may they repay my kindness of liberating them from the lower realms by
engaging in such correct Dharma practice.’  Then we pray that we may become
their teachers and that they shall rely on us correctly, ‘By taking me as
their teacher, may they progress along the five paths and the ten grounds
and may they reach their final goal.’]
Verse 102
Then, may all the beings in higher realms also deeply meditate on
selflessness, just as I do, cultivating the  non-conceptual meditative
absorption on the identity of existence and peace. May they recognize this
identity!
Ven Gyurme: “the identity of existence and peace” is the aspect of samsara
and nirvana.
[BP1 Module 6: ‘Then’: At that time, we pray that not only the sentient
beings in the lower realms but also those in the higher realms (humans and
gods), all meditate well on selflessness like ourselves. Through doing
this, we pray that they all develop the wisdom realizing selflessness and
that through such meditation, they will not be attached to the happiness of
cyclic existence and liberation.
To the wisdom realizing selflessness, there is no difference between cyclic
existence (‘existence’) and nirvana (‘peace’). To the non-conceptual wisdom
realizing emptiness, both samsara and nirvana are equally empty of existing
inherently. They are equal in the sense that they do not exist from their
own side and are just mere appearances to the mind. Here one makes the
prayer, ‘May they recognize the identity of this fact that, in emptiness,
these two are the same in that they do not exist inherently.’
These preceding verses are all aspirational prayers.]
Verse 103
Having done so I will crush the enemy. Having done so I will crush
conceptual construction. After cultivating selflessness through non-
conceptual wisdom, how can I not obtain the causes and effects of the form
body?
So, all the verses up to 102 is an explanation of the practice of
cultivating bodhicitta through overcoming self-cherishing by means of the
method of exchanging self and others which done on the basis of realizing
the faults of self-cherishing and advantages of cherishing others.
Now from this verse onwards, is an explanation of the practice of ultimate
bodhicitta. It is not possible to achieve enlightenment through cultivating
conventional bodhicitta alone, one must cultivate ultimate bodhicitta. In
fact, one must practice the combination of these two in order to achieve
enlightenment.
We will finish the section of cultivating the ultimate bodhicitta next
week.
Student 3: (Summarized) Clear nature of our mind is luminous and aware.
What is the meaning of luminous?
Khen Rinpoche: The mind is defined as that which is clear (luminous) and
knowing (aware), isn’t it? Perhaps we can think of clear (luminous) in
terms of the clear light nature of mind in that the afflictions have never
abided in the nature of mind.
It is easier when we can think of example or analogy. Water maybe a good
example. The nature of water is that which is clear. If we think about the
clear light nature of the mind from the perspective of tantra, for the
afflictions have never been abided in the nature of this extreme subtle
mind. This extremely subtle mind is covered by the coarser level of
consciousness. When the coarser level of minds is dissolved, they all
dissolved into the extremely subtle mind. And when one arises from the
extremely subtle mind, from the extremely subtle mind then there is the
mind of black near attainment of the reverse order follow by the mind of
red increase of the reverse order then follow by the mind of white
appearance of the reverse order.
Basically, everything goes back to the clear light and when one arises from
the clear light. Then the coarser level of consciousness comes into being
starting with the mind of black near attainment then the mind of red
increase and then the mind of white appearance and so forth, becoming
increasingly coarser.
So, the extremely subtle mind has the power to cognize any object including
the emptiness of inherent existence. According to the explanation of
tantra, it is through cognizing emptiness with this extremely subtle mind
that one achieves enlightenment. Perhaps it is easier to understand the
clear light nature of the mind if we will to relate it to the extremely
subtle mind according to the explanation of tantra.
Announcement on Exam:
There will be examination for this module but I don’t when the examination
will be as of now. But I am thinking of how to make it short and sweet. It
will not be difficult maybe something that you can complete in half an hour
let’s say.
