Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson1.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.484365
================================================================================


Reference Root Text: Wheel-Weapon Mind Training by Dharmarakshita
The subject matter for this module is The Wheel of Sharp Weapons
Ven Gyurme: In Tibetan, the word “sharp’ is not there; just Wheel Weapons.
I thought maybe to talk a little bit on the Eight Verses of Mind Training
first, which may take two lessons. Thereafter, we will proceed on with the
actual text.
The Tibetan word lojong literally means to train the mind. This particular
genre of teaching is called the mind training. It is not difficult to
explain and it is not difficult to understand, but it is very difficult to
practice.
When we talk about mind training in general, there are:
    • the mind training of a person of small capacity,
    • the mind training of a person of medium capacity
    • the mind training of a person of great capacity
When we use the word lojong (mind training or thought transformation), this
particular genre of teaching refers primarily to the training of a person
of great capacity. So the Eight Verses of Mind Training is a text dealing
with the mind training of a person of great capacity.
I guess many of you are familiar with the origin of the teachings on mind
training or bodhicitta. There is a lineage of Mahayana mind training
passing from Manjushri to Nagarjuna and Shantideva. That system of
cultivating bodhicitta is called the instructions of exchanging self and
others.
Then there is another system of generating bodhicitta that came from
Maitreya that was passed down to Asanga and so forth. That system of
cultivating bodhicitta is called the sevenfold cause and effect
instructions.
These two instructions for cultivating bodhicitta were passed down in the
respective lineages. I think it was during the time of Lama Serlingpa that
these two lineages were combined. As many of you are aware, Lama Atisha
travelled for 13 months in a boat and going all the way to the current day
Sumatra in order to receive the instructions for cultivating bodhicitta
from Lama Serlingpa. (Lama Serlingpa is also known as Dharmakirti of
Suvarnadvipa. Suvarnadvipa is referring to Sumatra a place).
If you look at the life story of Lama Atisha, he spent 13 months travelling
in a boat and putting up with dangers to his life and so forth in order to
receive the instructions for cultivating bodhicitta. This example shows us
how much hardship he was willing to endure in order to receive the
teachings. If we look at the life stories of these great masters of the
past, then comparatively speaking, whatever inconveniences or discomfort or
hardships that we may experience in learning and practicing the Dharma is
nothing. It is pales in comparison. This shows that if we don’t have strong
yearning for something, we don’t have the strong yearning for really
wanting whatever it is, we will never achieve it. So without that kind of
yearning, that kind of devotion and faith, it is impossible to develop any
experiences and realizations of the Dharma.
If we look at the situations in these days, the Dharma is readily
available. We can listen to the Dharma at anytime and at anywhere. There
are so many materials available for us to consult and to read.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So no need to go 13 months by the ship.
It happens to all of us in that after listening to the teachings, and after
a while when we again hear the teachings on the practices of the person of
small capacity, we have the attitude thinking “This is something I have
heard before.”  Also when we are learning the Mahayana teachings such as
thought transformation or mind training, we think “This is something that I
have heard before”.
What are we thinking when we have that kind of world view? What are we
thinking when we say those kind of things? Basically in one way of another,
we are saying that the teachings are of no benefit to our mind. In one way
or another, that is what we mean.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Another way of saying is boring. That maybe the
right words “it is boring.”
When we study or meet with more challenging and difficult text and because
it is difficult, we may think “This is something that doesn’t benefit me
and cannot benefit my practice. I don’t need something that is too
complicated.” Again another kind of complication arises in our mind. Then
our minds is piling with all these complications “These teachings are not
working out for me and are of no benefit to me. I don’t need these
teachings.” Then we end up with this pile of complications feeling that
none of these are effective for our mind.
The mind training teachings actually exposes all our faults. Basically, it
is telling the faults that we are having; one by one just like a doctor who
tells us all the sicknesses and the medical problems that we have. The
whole point of that exercise is to see the need to change ourselves.
As for the purpose of listening to teachings, it is mentioned at the
beginning in the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment (Lamrim) which stated
very clearly that the purpose of listening to the teachings is to rectify
our own faults on the basis of recognizing and acknowledging them. So the
purpose of listening and studying these mind training teachings is just to
recognize our own faults and then to rectify them. The purpose is not to
help us identifying the faults in others. Therefore, it is important do not
to get the purpose and the motivation wrong right from the beginning.
It is said in the teachings that if our exercise in listening and learning
the Dharma leads us into digging out the faults of others and identifying
the faults of others, then we are really mistaken. If that happens to us
i.e. if we study the dharma in order to pick up the faults and to identify
the faults in others, then the mind training becomes impossible. It is very
much emphasized in the teachings that from the beginning, we must not get
our purpose and motivation wrong for listening to the Dharma. So whenever
we are in such a situation of listening and learning to these teachings, we
should remind ourselves that the purpose is to identify our own faults and
to rectify our own faults.
Before we start each teaching session, we always recite the verse of going
for refuge to the Three Jewels and generating the mind of enlightenment.
The purpose of reciting that verses is to actually think about the meaning
of the verse and to generate the thought thinking “I am going to receive or
listen to these teachings for the purpose of achieving enlightenment for
the benefits of all sentient beings.”
Generating the mind of enlightenment essentially means developing that
yearning or aspiration to achieve omniscience (full enlightenment) for the
benefit of others. That is what a mind of enlightenment is. If we yearn for
enlightenment in order to accomplish our own purpose, then it doesn’t
become bodhicitta (the mind of enlightenment).
Many of us here have already received the bodhisattva vows and some even
have received the tantric vows. The essence of the bodhisattva vows is
essentially taking the oath to work for others only, and is to achieve
enlightenment solely for that purpose. Although we have taken these vows,
but if we look at the reality, the vows that we have taken are just
literally become a mere promise only; nothing more than words. When we take
the vows that is supposed to be an attitude of bodhicitta which, of course,
is something that we don’t have. After having taken the vows, then there is
supposed to be the practice of cultivating and increasing bodhicitta and of
which we do not have. Actually the kinds of promises that we made are
essentially empty ones. We all are like that. If you ask “What is the
practice that should come after generating the mind of enlightenment and
having taken the bodhisattva vows?”  The practice that comes after that is
explained in a very condensed way in the short text called The Eight Verses
of Mind Training. The practice essentially is a combination of method and
wisdom:
    • The first seven verses of the text deal with the method aspect of the
      path.
    • The last verse deals with the training in wisdom.
So if we want to ask “What should be the characteristics of the real Dharma
practice? What is the hallmark of dharma practice?” The hall mark has to be
this mind training and that is the real Dharma practice. Just taking
initiations and reciting sadhana will not change the mind. Or even just
taking the bodhisattva vows without having trained the mind in such a way,
then taking the bodhisattva vows alone does not change our minds, reciting
mantra alone does not change our mind, and studying the dharma does not
change the mind. It is very difficult for the mind to be changed just by
doing all these things. Then how can we change our mind for the better?
There is only one way out. The way to transform the mind is to change our
way of thinking. There is no other way out, so we have to reflect and
think.
It is very clear that if we honestly look at our own lives, even those of
us who have been learning or have being exposed to and in contact with the
dharma for a very long time such as 20 or 30 years, actually we have
nothing to show off as there is no progress whatsoever. It doesn’t matter
how many mantras we have recited or how many prostrations we have done if
we never ever sat down to change our mind and our way of thinking. Since we
never practice the meaning of mind training, therefore we find ourselves
pretty much the same as we were when we started. There was no real
transformation. So the faults lie in not having practiced the mind
training. Not only have we not improved, perhaps we may have even
degenerated, over time we get more anger, more afflictions, more
disturbances in the mind, and more discursive thoughts. If we honestly look
at it then that may be really be the case of not really practice.
When the teachings tell us our faults, we really have to look in our own
minds to recognize and to acknowledge. The way we learn the dharma makes a
difference in our attitude. If we have trust, faith and respect for the
speaker or the instructor, then we will take those teachings and
instructions to heart. Then we will actually look in at ourselves and see
that we have this fault and that fault. If we don’t know how to listen,
even we may be physically present and hear “He is saying there are this
fault and that fault. I have this fault and that fault.” But that is about
it. We may have registered of what is being said, but we will never ever
look at ourselves and acknowledge that we actually have those problems.
That is the reason why the practice of correctly relying on the virtuous
friend is taught right at the beginning in The Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment. From the side of a listener, if you have strong yearning for
the Dharma and then if you seek out and listen to the Dharma from somebody
that you really can devote to, somebody that  you can trust, somebody who
affects your mind in a very positive way or somebody you really believe in,
then when these two conditions come together - yearning from your side  and
listen to the Dharma from somebody that you really have faith in- then even
if you receive a very short teaching, that teaching will be very effective
for the mind.
If you receive teachings from somebody that you really have a lot of faith
in, and when it combines with your own strong interest and yearning for
learning, even that short teaching or instruction will be very effective
for the mind.
The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment mentioned about the defining
characteristics of the student who relies on the teacher. One of the
defining characteristics is that a suitable receptacle for the teachings
must have is being diligent i.e. somebody who have strong yearning for the
Dharma. When these two conditions come together - you have strong yearning
from your side and you receive teachings from somebody that you have faith,
trust and devotion with- then that teachings will become very effective.
When there are coming together of these conditions, then you will
experience or taste the teaching, you will see a positive change and you
would really want the Dharma. When that happens, whether you call it as
receiving blessings of the virtuous friend, or receiving blessings of the
Buddha, the point is that there is a transformation of the mind. So your
mind is transformed when you are receiving the blessing. That means that
the Buddha’s enlightened activities have engaged you. As said in verse 27
of The Tathagata Essence: “Because a perfect Buddha’s body is pervasive”,
that is the meaning when the mind of the person, who has been engaged by
the enlightened activities of the Buddha, has changed.
In the section on correctly devoting to the virtuous friend where we
meditate on our own gurus as Buddha, one of the reasons that is posited is
that the guru is Buddha because he is the agent of all the Buddha’s
activities.
It is only when the mind has transformed into a positive way through
learning and listening to the instructions of our own virtuous friend and
only when we have some experiences after practicing those teachings, then
we can start to really see the virtuous friend is the agent of all the
Buddha’s activities.
We must never lose the meaning of Dharma in whatever we do. Whether we are
listening to the Dharma, learning the Dharma, reciting Om Mani Padme Hung,
making prostrations or whatever it is that we do, we must never ever forget
the purpose and the meaning behind those things. What are the essential
purpose and the meaning behind those activities? It is all for subduing and
disciplining our mind. We must never ever forget this. This should be in
the back of our mind all the time.
In Engaging in Bodhisattva’s Deeds, Shantideva said very clearly that if we
engage in our activities with a distracted mind, be it prostrations,
reciting mantras, reciting prayers, study the Dharma or listening to
Dharma, whatever it may be, then all those activities become meaningless
and will not fulfill the purpose.
Why all these activities become meaningless if we do them with a distracted
mind?
If the mind hasn’t change for the better, then it is meaningless because
the purpose has not been fulfilled. We hear about all these things but
somehow our minds always remain very hard and very stubborn because as we
continue to listen to the teachings yet our mind still doesn’t change.
Verse 1
Determined to obtain the greatest possible benefit from all sentient
beings, who are more precious than a wish-fulfilling jewel, I shall hold
them most dear at all times.
The verse is saying: From my own side, I view all sentient beings without
exception as more precious than the wish-fulfilling jewel.
The first verse is highlighting the need to generate the mind that
cherishes others. There are a couple of things that we need to think about.
There are some commentaries which explain that sentient beings are like
wish-fulfilling jewel.
If a wish-fulfilling jewel is stuck in the mud or is covered with mud, then
it will not be able to be of benefit to anyone. It is said that if one
finds a wish fulfilling jewel, take it out of the mud, give it a good
clean, anoint it with scented water, install it on the top of a victory
banner on the 15th day of the lunar calendar and then supplicate it, then
one’s material needs or wishes will be granted.
Likewise, if our view of sentient beings do not change and we just look at
sentient beings in the usual ordinary way, then from the side of those
sentient beings, they would not be able to give us the happiness of future
lives, liberation and enlightenment.
However, if we change our way of looking at sentient beings by first
recognizing that they are the basis for the practice of generosity, they
are the objects in relation to whom we can practice ethical discipline, and
likewise patience, joyous perseverance and the rest of the perfections,
then by focusing on sentient beings we practice generosity, cultivate
ethical discipline, practice patience and so forth, then these sentient
beings can give us happiness of this life, happiness of liberation and
happiness of full enlightenment.
This is how we can understand that sentient beings are similar to this wish
fulfilling jewel.
So the verse is saying that if we from our own side were to benefit others
and cherish others, then those sentient beings will become the source of
our happiness. It is clear that the happiness we experience in this life is
dependent on others. If we do not rely on others, there is no way we can
achieve many of the happiness and pleasures of this life. Likewise, we can
never achieve the bliss of liberation without relying on others. Of course
then enlightenment is impossible if we do not rely on others.
The point to be made here is that if we cherish others, then the happiness
of this life will comes, the happiness of liberation can be achieved, and
likewise the happiness of full enlightenment will also occur. If we do not
cherish them, then none of this will happen.
Not only are sentient beings similar to wish fulfilling jewel. Here the
verse is saying that sentient beings are more precious than a wish
fulfilling jewel. As I have mentioned earlier, if we do find a wish
fulfilling jewel and then supplicate to it, it will grant us all our
material wishes. But the wish fulfilling jewel can never ever grant us the
happiness of future lives, liberation and full enlightenment, unlike
sentient beings through the example that were mentioned earlier. If from
our own side we train to cherish sentient beings, then in dependence on
sentient beings we can achieve the happiness of future lives, liberation
and full enlightenment. As such, sentient beings are more precious than a
wish fulfilling jewel.
The verse is saying that with the determination to achieve the highest aim
or goal - the happiness of future lives, liberation and enlightenment - all
these will happen if from our own side, we change our perspective of
sentient beings and cherish them, then we will achieve all these goals.
Because we ourselves will achieve all these goals if we change our mind and
cherish them, the conclusion then as in the last line “I shall hold them
most dear at all times”.
In the normal way it is being phrased, these verses always end with “May I
do this, may I do that”. In this case, “may I hold them most dear at all
times, may I cherish them at all times”. But there are some versions in
which the last line is phrased as “I shall hold them most dear at all
times”, and this is more powerful. In the original version it is just
making a wish or it is more like a prayer “May I do this, may I do that”.
But if we change it to “I will hold them most dear at all times”,
essentially it is more forceful in that you are making a commitment telling
yourself “This is what I must do.”
Instead of the usual way of saying “May I hold them most dear at all
times”, but if it is changed to “I will train, I will cherish them and hold
them most dear at all times”, then it becomes like a pledge or an oath. In
order for the oath to be effective, first you must understand why you are
doing it, you must see what is in for you, what are the benefits of
cherishing others, what are the benefits of changing our own world view of
others? As the verse say, you are determined to achieve the highest aim, so
if you see the benefits and the advantages of cherishing others, then you
would take on the pledge and make the oath.
Shantideva said in his Engaging in the Bodhisattva’s Deeds:
Since the Buddha and sentient beings are equal in being the cause for your
enlightenment, then why do you only respect one and look down on the
other?”
In order to achieve enlightenment, we have no choice but to rely on the
Buddha. Without relying on the Buddha, there is no way to achieve
enlightenment. In the same way, in order to achieve enlightenment, we must
rely and depend on sentient beings as well. Without which there is no
enlightenment. As such, sentient beings are equal in weight as a cause of
enlightenment. For that purpose, all the more, there is another reason to
say that from our own side, we have to change our way of thinking and then
cherish sentient beings. If we want enlightenment, then that is what we
have to do.
There is no way to achieve the state of full enlightenment without
cherishing sentient beings. The whole point of generating the mind of
enlightenment and then taking on the bodhisattva vows essentially is one
taking the oath and making the pledge to achieve enlightenment for the
purpose of benefiting others. As such, from our own side if we do not
cherish sentient beings, then how is it possible to achieve enlightenment?
The very first step in mind training, in moving towards bodhicitta, is to
cultivate this big world view that. Of course this comes from the
understanding of all the different points, the reasons and purposes “What
is in for me?” then we first need to have the big world view that
encompasses all sentient beings i.e. the view that wants to cherish all
sentient beings.
So first we need to cultivate that kind of very big and encompassing mind.
After that, on a practical level, what do we need to do? Even if we do
cultivate that big mind, it is just at the level of wish. It is just an
attitude. Even if we have that attitude, there is no way to be of benefit
to all sentient beings at that time as we will not be in any position to be
of any real benefit to all sentient beings. Yes, we start off with the big
attitude, but on the practical level, how do you translate it into
practice? What kind of conduct we should have? That is indicated in the
second verse.
Verse 2
When in the company of others, I shall always consider myself the lowest of
all, and from the depths of my heart hold others dear and supreme.
On the practical level, when you apply that attitude in life, as it says “I
shall always consider ourselves the lowest of all”. This is an antidote to
pride. Having a very strong pride creates a lot of problems and disturbance
for ourselves.
“When in the company of others” means when we interact with others, we
should always consider ourselves the lowest of all. In our interactions
with others, we either consider ourselves superior than the other person or
we think that we are equal; we are peers.  But that kind of attitude,
either holding ourselves more superior or as equal to others, brings about
a lot of complications in our interactions or relationships with others.
This is quite evident from our experiences in life. In our interactions
with others, when there are problems in relationships, when there is no
harmony and when relationships don’t go well, it come because of the
attitudes of either holding ourselves as superior, “I know better. I’m
better than you or we are equals”.
If from our own side we take a lower position and see ourselves as lower,
then it makes our interactions with others much more smooth and easier. For
example, if we really consider ourselves lower and if someone say something
bad about us or look down on us, thinking we are lower, we can accept it
from the beginning “Okay, I’m lower” and our mind won’t get disturbed. That
is quite clear, right?
The fact expressed in this verse is very clear. It is not something that is
hidden or obscure. All of us have experienced it. It is very clear that our
ego and our pride cause problems in our interactions with others and in our
relationships with others. So the verse is telling us where our problems
lie. It is saying we must recognize and identify our ego and our pride, and
then we must do something about it.
There is no other way to deal with pride other than to see ourselves lower
than others. It says “I shall always consider myself the lowest of all, and
from the depths of my heart hold others dear and supreme”. “From the depths
of my heart” means not just paying lip service and saying “You are
wonderful. You are so precious. You are so nice” but is should be from the
depths of the heart to have that thought. On one hand, we have to lower
ourselves to the lowest of all, then at the same time to sincerely feel
that others are supreme.
I guess naturally we might wonder, “How is it possible that I am actually
the lowest of all? I may be lower than some but how is it possible that I’m
lower than all?” “I am definitely richer than some. I am definitely more
handsome or pretty than some. I’m more intelligent than some” and the list
goes on. We may wonder: How is it possible?  Maybe we won’t think “He is
fatter than me”.

Eight Verses of Thought Transformation by Geshe Langri Tangpa
(http://www.lamayeshe.com/?sect=article&id=733)
1. Determined to obtain the greatest possible benefit from all sentient
beings, who are more precious than a wish-fulfilling jewel, I shall hold
them most dear at all times.
2. When in the company of others, I shall always consider myself the lowest
of all, and from the depths of my heart hold others dear and supreme.
3. Vigilant, the moment a delusion appears in my mind, endangering myself
and others, I shall confront and avert it without delay.
4. Whenever I see beings who are wicked in nature and overwhelmed by
violent negative actions and suffering, I shall hold such rare ones dear,
as if I had found a precious treasure.
5. When, out of envy, others mistreat me with abuse, insults, or the like,
I shall accept defeat and offer the victory to others.
6. When someone whom I have benefited and in whom I have great hopes gives
me terrible harm, I shall regard that person as my holy guru.
7. In short, both directly and indirectly, do I offer every happiness and
benefit to all my mothers. I shall secretly take upon myself all their
harmful actions and suffering.
8. Undefiled by the stains of the superstitions of the eight worldly
concerns, may I, by perceiving all phenomena as illusory, be released from
the bondage of attachment.

Tathagata Essence Exam Briefing (Only for those taking the coming exam)
You were given four questions to write. Although there are four separate
questions, your answers should be written in such a way that they form one
coherent picture because the subjects covered by those questions are
interconnected. I think it would be better if you could write the answers
to those four questions in such a way that they form one coherent picture.
Imagine that you are explaining what the Three Jewels are to somebody who
doesn’t know anything about it.  You are supposed to introduce the Three
Jewels to that person and help that person to gain an understanding about
the Three Jewels. For example, the Buddha possesses the qualities of
knowledge, mercy and power, and the ability to protect you from all the
sufferings. By using the Buddha as an example, there are eight qualities.
The Buddha Jewel is said to posses the eight qualities. The primary ones
are the qualities of knowledge, mercy and power. The quality of power is
derived from the quality of mercy. Why is there a quality of mercy? Because
there is the quality of knowledge, so it comes back to the quality of
knowledge. If you remember the quality of knowledge - knowledge of the mode
of phenomena (how things exist ultimately) and knowledge of the diversity;
basically realizing the two truths. Of these two types of knowledge the
principal one is the knowledge of the final nature of reality. It all goes
back to that. Since all of you have done quite a fair bit of study, and
have looked at the qualities of the Three Jewels in lot of details, so when
you write, your answers should have some profundity.
What I have just said is just one of the possible scenarios; just to give
you an idea. The important thing is that you have to think well before you
write. You have to think about stuff and how you want to approach the topic
before you write, so as you write you should also think.
At the end of the day, the purpose of the exercise with regards to the
Three Jewels is that you should discover and feel that the Three Jewels
have the power to protect you. That is the favor you are suppose to give to
the person whom you are explaining to. That is one of the aims - to feel
what the Three Jewels really have the abilities to protect you from
suffering.
As for regarding question 4 (Explain how the nature of mind is clear light
and the defilements are adventitious?), it is said that the nature of the
mind is clear light, and the Dharmakaya, the enlightened activities of the
Truth Body is always emanating spontaneously and effortlessly, emanating
uninterruptedly, engaging sentient beings. How are you going to put these
two together? How do you put together that within us have the natural
propensity (capacity or potential) to be enlightened?
From the side of the Buddha, they have all the powers and capacities to
benefit and help us sentient beings through their enlightened activities.
From our side, we have always had the Buddha nature (tathagata essence or
potential) to begin with. You talk about enlightenment when these two come
together. So you have the basic constituent then you talk about
enlightenment. Again here there is a connection to the presentation of the
vajra topics, isn’t it?
If you have an alternate view to what was presented, you can also present
your view. For example, you can argue that not all sentient beings possess
the lineage, which means not all sentient beings can be enlightened. It is
okay if that is what you feel. You can say not all sentient beings will
become enlightened because of such and such reasons but you need to state
why.
Another example, you can argue that the Buddha does not possess the power
to benefit or help all sentient beings, because if he does, for example,
then he is no different from a creator god. You can argue by stating your
reasons of why you think the Buddha does not have the power to benefit all
sentient beings, or not all sentient beings can be benefited by the Buddha.
The point here is that whatever position you take, it has to be well
thought out, and you must stand for what you believe.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Okay are you clear? Are you clear of what I am
saying or not?
You shouldn’t feel any pressure or stress behind this exercise. This is
completely voluntary. You are asked to write of what you think and feel
about it. That is all. Some people said that there is not enough time (to
prepare). Whether it is two weeks, three weeks or one month, the thinking
behind the exercise is the same.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I am talking about my experience.
There were times that I thought “Okay, I am going to give myself three
months for this particular exercise or exam. Although I gave myself three
months, but for the first two months, since there was so much time, I
didn’t do much about it and then I crammed everything into the last month.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Ya, I think we are all the same. I think must
be the same. No? Okay. Could be. Could be there are same people, that day I
said two weeks, maybe that day people already start. Some of you may have
already started. Some of you haven’t start. So those who didn’t start, they
say “I need more time”. Those who are already starting, I think they have
enough time. That is what I am trying to tell you. The point is that,
whether I give one month or three or two weeks, if you want to write, I
think there is enough time.
Actually there is greater benefit to engage in such a kind of exercise
where you have to write of what you think. In fact the greatest benefit is
to do it orally when you present your answer. You are only able to do that
when you are able to speak with confidence, or write and speak with
confidence. That shows how much you know. Sometimes we just sit there and
listen and we think we know. When you are asked to present, then you will
really know whether you know or not. So that is why this exercise is
important. We can learn much more in such a way.

