Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson08_rev.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.723473
================================================================================


Student 1: In the earlier lesson you mentioned that the bodhisattva
superiors that have a definite lineage are the ones that don’t have any
more karma and afflictions and how they take on the sufferings of sentient
beings willingly and taking rebirth in samsara willingly. I’m just trying
to link this information with some of the knowledge that we have learned in
the Tathagata Essence.
So saying the bodhisattva superiors that have the level of predispositions
of ignorance have been freed from contaminated karma but have
uncontaminated karma, in the context of the Wheel of Sharp Weapons, the
bodhisattva superiors who willingly taking rebirth for the sake of sentient
beings, are they the bodhisattva superiors from the 8th to the 10th
grounds?
So when they take rebirth willingly and it's without karma and afflictions,
how does this level of predispositions of ignorance affect their karma in
the sense of, they are still taking rebirth and still have those kinds of
subtle afflictions?
Can you please explain in more detail from the perspective of the sutric
path?
From the tantric perspective, how do we use the information about
bodhisattva superiors who are willing to take rebirth to benefit sentient
beings in terms of utilizing afflictions such as attachment and so forth?
How does it differ with the different levels of tantra? Does it
specifically focus on just taking desire into the path or from their side
that particular bodhisattva superior can willingly choose to display wrath
for the benefit of sentient beings? Or just mainly the afflictions that
they are utilizing are taking desire into the path?
Khen Rinpoche: The bodhisattva superiors that are mentioned in the text are
those who take rebirth in cyclic existence intentionally due to the force
of the prayers. This can be any bodhisattva superior; not necessarily those
who are on the pure grounds. Even the bodhisattvas on the 1st ground take
rebirth in cyclic existence intentionally to benefit sentient beings but
their taking rebirth in cyclic existence is not due to karma and
afflictions. It is said that the bodhisattva superiors do not possess true
suffering, and their body is not true suffering.
Usually we talk about the sufferings of birth, ageing, sickness and death,
so bodhisattva superiors do not experience that. When one becomes a
bodhisattva superior, that person’s body becomes a mental body.
When the bodhisattva superiors achieved the 8th ground, the afflictions are
abandoned. Prior to that, the afflictions are not abandoned. It is not that
they can’t abandon it but they don’t make a point of focusing on abandoning
the afflictions.
Khen Rinpoche: I have my qualms, so I don’t know
The bodhisattvas abandon the afflictions on the 8th ground. If we say that
the afflictions are not the main object of abandonment of the bodhisattva
superiors from the 1st to the 7th ground, then this begets the question: Up
to the achievement of the 8th ground, what is then their principal object
of abandonment? If you are asked this question, what are you going to say?
Khen Rinpoche: Anybody has any answer what? Somebody says subtle self
cherishing.
I guess if we say the principal object of abandonment is the apprehensions
of true existence and the view of the transitory collection, but not
attachment. It is clear that the attachment (desire) is not the main object
of abandonment for these bodhisattva superiors. The bodhisattvas abandon
the afflictions on the 8th ground. So the bodhisattva superiors on the
three pure grounds take rebirth due to uncontaminated karma and the level
of the predispositions of ignorance.
From the 1st to the 8th ground, the bodhisattvas still need to depend on
coarse exertions to take rebirth.
Coarse exertions are exhausted upon the achievement of the 8th ground. On
the three pure grounds, the bodhisattvas still need to depend on subtle
exertions to take rebirth. That rebirth happens due to uncontaminated karma
and the level of the predispositions of ignorance.
The ordinary bodhisattvas on the Path of Accumulation and Path of
Preparation take rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions.
There is also taking rebirth through the force of prayers. For example, the
bodhisattvas abiding in the pure land take rebirth in cyclic existence due
to the force of their prayers.
It is said that there is no negativity in the pure land. Do these
bodhisattvas in the pure land possess afflictions or not? What do you
think?
(Students responded)
If you say they have afflictions, does that means they would accumulate
karma in the pure land?
Can the bodhisattvas take rebirth in cyclic existence?
Are there bodhisattvas abiding in pure land who take rebirth in cyclic
existence due to karma and afflictions?
By saying no pervasion, are you saying there are such bodhisattvas who take
rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions?
It is clear in the teachings they say that the bodhisattvas abiding in pure
land take rebirth in cyclic existence due to the power of their prayers,
not through the force of karma and afflictions. If the bodhisattvas in the
pure land do take rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions,
then why do you want to go there in the first place? What is the purpose of
going to pure land?  So being in pure land is no different from somebody
who is not in pure land because somebody who is not in pure land has no
control, isn’t it? If bodhisattvas abiding in pure land take rebirth in
cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions, basically what you are
saying is that they also have no control and have no freedom whatsoever.
Student responded (inaudible)
Student 2: As Khen Rinpoche said “In the first place what is the point of
going to a pureland as a bodhisattva if he will take rebirth in cyclic
existence due to karma and afflictions?”
My proposal was that the whole idea of a bodhisattva praying to go to a
pureland like Amitabha Pureland is because it is said that there one can
quickly become enlighten by receiving teachings from Amitabha Buddha. So
when one has become a Buddha in the pureland, one can come back to help
sentient beings as a Buddha.
I’m not sure whether a bodhisattva will come to cyclic existence as still
being a bodhisattva or whether he will come back as a Buddha. If he returns
still as bodhisattva, in that sense, there is no benefit of going to the
pureland. The only reason for going to the pureland is because one wants to
become enlighten quickly.
Khen Rinpoche: Then going by what you have said, isn’t the path to
enlightenment is quicker if you are abiding in cyclic existence.  It takes
longer to be enlightened in the pureland, isn’t it?
Student 2: Is that so?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You don’t think so?
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t it the case that the bodhisattva will achieve
enlightenment quicker by being in a samsaric environment world rather than
being in a pureland. Here the person in question is a bodhisattva.
Student 2: I’m not sure.
Ven Gyurme: If they want to come down, we want to go up. We change place.
That’s what they say.
Khen Rinpoche: It is a stronger renunciation when you abide in a samsaric
environment. Due to the force of a stronger renunciation, then the
compassion that is generated is much stronger.
Student 2: I don’t think that is necessarily the case.
Khen Rinpoche: There is more suffering here, isn’t it.
Student 2: I think it would depend on the bodhisattva practitioner because
everybody has a slightly different path and different inclination.
Khen Rinpoche: If you think about this, according to your logic, the people
who go to pureland are of dull faculties.
Student 1: Is that a statement of fact?
Ven Gyurme: No, going by this way of thinking first.
Student 2: By my argument, is it?
Ven Gyurme: By the fact that there is stronger renunciation (in samsara).
If you don’t see suffering, how you have renunciation? If you don’t have
renunciation, how you have compassion?
Student 2: Yes, but he is a bodhisattva. We are talking about whether the
bodhisattva is remaining in cyclic existence or choosing to go to pureland.
But we are forgetting that he is already a bodhisattva who has already
renounced self cherishing. By definition as a bodhisattva, he has already
renounced self-cherishing. He cherishes others on the basis of the
recognition of the suffering of others, and by recalling the kindness of
others. That is why he wants to practice. I’m not sure whether it is the
case that it is easier to practice here or in the pureland. It depends on
his mind. He may decide maybe for me as a practitioner; it is better I go
to the pureland quickly and meet Amitabha Buddha and become enlightened and
then come back as a Buddha. Otherwise, what  is the purpose of pureland
practice? I’m just wondering.
Ven Gyurme: That is why is for the dull faculties’ ones.
Student 2: Is that a statement or fact that a pureland practice is only for
practitioners of dull faculties? What I’m hearing now is only dull
faculties practitioners want to go into pureland practice, am I
misunderstanding this?
Khen Rinpoche: The main point is this: What you are saying is you can
achieve enlightenment quicker in the pureland. What I am saying is that you
will achieve enlightenment quicker in a samsaric environment. That is the
difference in view. So which one will achieve enlightenment quicker? It
doesn’t matter whether he is a bodhisattva or not a bodhisattva, which
person achieve enlightenment faster?
Student 2: I’m no longer sure. But if Khen Rinpoche says you can achieve
enlightenment faster in cyclic existence then that must be the correct
answer.
Ven Gyurme: Actually you are sure already because you are saying going to
pureland. You already take the view.
Student 2: That is what I’ve heard in the past. In Vesak Day, Khen Rinpoche
gives instructions on how to get to pureland and why would people try to go
to pureland.
Ven Gyurme: We have to check their level of faculty.
Khen Rinpoche: I said it is faster in the pureland?
Student 2: No, you didn’t say that. Then I’m asking what the purpose of the
pureland practice is?
Ven Gyurme: You have no self-cherishing?
Student 2: We know that there is no suffering there.
Ven Gyurme: For ordinary folks are necessarily self-cherishing, isn’t it.
Student 2: Is that so? Because they are dull faculty?
Ven Gyurme: No.
Student 2: I’m not sure now.  I’m just saying maybe for different people
there might be different ways of getting enlighten.
Khen Rinpoche: What was the original point? What are you trying to put
across?
Student 2: The original point was that Khen Rinpoche was saying: Do
bodhisattvas take rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions?
Ven Gyurme: Do they have afflictions?
Student 2: Yes, if it is an ordinary bodhisattva. But the bodhisattva
superiors on the 8th ground have no afflictions.
Khen Rinpoche: It is stated clearly that there is no true suffering in the
pureland. I guess probably you have to say that they don’t have true
origins. If you say that the people in pureland have true suffering, it
follows that their aggregates, whatever body they have, is necessarily true
suffering. You have to say that, right? If it is true suffering, it is in
the nature of suffering. If it is in the nature of suffering, then it
follows that there is no difference between the bodies of those people in
pureland and the bodies that we have.
Student 2: Agree.
Ven Gyurme: So there is no true suffering, right?
Khen Rinpoche: As a practitioner, it doesn’t make a big difference going to
pureland as in fact there is no suffering there. There is suffering here in
the samsaric environment. Because there is no suffering up there and here
there is a lot of suffering, then renunciation will be generated quicker.
It is more difficult to generate renunciation up there.
Student 2: Granted. But he is not going to pureland as an ordinary
practitioner. He is going as a bodhisattva. Then I have a question: How
does a bodhisattva end up in a pureland? Because I thought a bodhisattva is
practicing for full enlightenment. So if the argument is that it is better
for him to practice in samsara and it is a faster way of becoming fully
enlightened in samsara, how come this poor bodhisattva ended up in a
pureland? Is it the way he dedicated his prayers and then something went
wrong that he ended up in pureland where him being able to gain full
enlightenment for the benefit of others is going to be delayed. This is
what I’m getting from this discussion.
Khen Rinpoche:  It is clear that there are ordinary beings, non-
bodhisattvas, who take rebirth in pureland. It is also clear that there are
ordinary bodhisattvas who take rebirth in pureland. If there are ordinary
bodhisattvas who take rebirth in pureland, then we need to ask the question
as what you did: Why on earth did they end up in the pureland? Why did they
go to the pureland?
To take rebirth in a pureland, first you need a very strong yearning to be
born in the pureland. Base on that, you need to make very strong
aspirational prayers and maybe you will end up there. But you don’t end up
there by accident. The point is that you end up in the pure land through
full intention.
Student 2: Noted. Exactly that is my point.
Ven Gyurme: So the point is by full intention.
Student 2: Correct. I accept that.
Khen Rinpoche: It is quicker to achieve enlightenment in the place of
samsara than to achieve enlightenment in pureland. Then why do bodhisattvas
want to go to pureland?
Student 2: Exactly that is my question. They end up there because they
aspire and make strong prayers.
Khen Rinpoche: Why?
Student 2: We are going around in circle because that was your question.
Khen Rinpoche: If you think about it, these bodhisattvas who go to the
pureland because of they fear of suffering in the cyclic existence. So what
is the implication?
Student 2: The implication is that they chicken out.
Ven Gyurme: They got scared.
Ven Gyurme: Are you saying that they gave up bodhicitta?
Student 2: No, I think not giving up bodhicitta but they got scared of the
hard work involved. I mean even Chenrezig got scared. It is not a big deal
for feeling scared.

Ven Gyurme: Anyway I don’t believe the story.
Student 2: I can only go by the traditional story. It is natural to feel
that level of fear. In that sense it sounds like they lost that courage to
work for sentient beings. That doesn’t mean that they gave up. They got
scared because they realized how hard it is going to be. Therefore , they
pray to go to pureland instead. Is that what Khen Rinpoche is saying?
Ven Gyurme: They are scared but they still want to work for sentient
beings?
Student 2: I hope so because they are still bodhisattva. In pureland they
are still bodhisattvas, which means by definition as a bodhisattva, they
still working for the benefit of sentient beings. So maybe going to a
pureland might be an easier way of becoming enlightened for the benefit of
sentient beings.
Khen Rinpoche: Probably the bodhisattvas who pray and end up in the
pureland are the ones who are afraid of being sucked in into the sufferings
of cyclic existence, and then coming under the control of karma and
afflictions. They are afraid of that, so they pray to go to the pureland. I
guess their goal still remains the same - to achieve enlightenment.
Student 2: I have related question: I am wondering whether they could end
up in the pureland not necessarily because they pray for it, but because of
the power of their practice. The reason I’m saying this is I’m just
recalling a story of Potawa who is one of the composers of this mind
training text, I may have remembered the story incorrectly but apparently
it was said that he prayed day and night to go to the hell realms to rescue
these hell beings. As he was dying, he complained to his attendant: “I
prayed so hard my entire life to go to the hell realms to help hell beings
but all I can see now are the Dakas and Dakinis around me” by the sheer
power of his bodhicitta and his practice.
Ven Gyurme: So prayers don’t work?
Student 2: No. In the sense of positive nature of his actions and his
thoughts, although he prayed to go to hell, the vision that he had when he
was dying was all the dakas and dakinis coming to bring him, presumably, to
a pureland. I am just wondering whether another way of ending up in the
pureland is not really praying for it but because of certain practices one
automatically end up in the pureland. Not only for the speed, but the
purpose of a bodhisattva to actively make prayer going to a pureland.
Khen Rinpoche: It is stated very clearly in the teaching that for ordinary
folks to be reborn in the Amitabha pureland, you need to do the followings:
    - You need single pointed yearning to go there.
    - You bring to mind over and over again of Amitabha Buddha and his
      pureland.
    - You need to make aspiration prayers to go there over and over again.
There is this account that you spoke of, but what I think is that this
account is spoken of in the context of the benefits of generating
bodhicitta. This illustrates how beneficial generating bodhicitta is. The
stronger the bodhicitta, the more merits you accumulated. Likewise, the
stronger your bodhicitta, the further you are away from the lower realms.
You are not going to end up in the lower realm. Because of the vast
accumulation of merits then that could result in a rebirth in a pureland.
Of these historical accounts that you find in the teachings, there are many
such examples that go against the general trends or general structures of
things.  They do occur and it is something that we need to think about.
Generally speaking for an ordinary person be born in the pureland, the
prerequisites must come together.
In Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakosha (The Treasury of Manifest Knowledge), it is
stated that one achieves the Path of Seeing for the very first time on the
basis of a desire realm’s body. I am not sure whether this particular
position is necessarily just an assertion of Hinayana tenets or not
although Abhidharmakosha is generally a text of Hinayana tenets. Anyway
this is what it is being said. Why? In order to generate the Path of Seeing
for the very first time in one’s whole existence since beginningless life,
one needs very strong renunciation. As such, it is said that the initial
achievement of the Path of Seeing must be accomplished on the basis of the
desire realms’ body.
It is also mentioned clearly in the Abhidharmakosha that when one is
already in the level of the supreme mundane quality of the Path of
Preparation, that individual will not take rebirth in the form or formless
realms because the transition from the level of the supreme mundane quality
of the Path of Preparation onto the Path of Seeing is within one meditative
equipoise.
But prior to that on the initial levels (heat, peak, forbearance) of Path
of Preparation, there are individual who do take rebirth in the form or
formless realms. If we put all these together does it mean that those (who
are not superiors yet) in the pureland have to take rebirth in the desire
realms before they can achieve the Path of Seeing for the first time,
because there is not much disenchantment with cyclic existence in the
pureland? If you say “yes”, it follows that you cannot achieve
enlightenment in the pureland. There is no achievement of enlightenment
when one is in the pureland because one  still have to get a rebirth in the
desire realms.
As such, there are two views:
   1. One view is quoting what Vasubandhu had said in his Treasury of
      Manifest Knowledge: the position that one cannot achieve enlightenment
      in the pureland.
   2. There are other masters who said that once you get to some pureland,
      you will definitely achieve enlightenment there.
So, there is a position that when one takes rebirth in the pureland one has
no negativities and suffering and one will never have to take rebirth in
the cyclic existence again due to force of karma and afflictions because of
the power of the basis, the kind of rebirth that one has. In the commentary
on the Amitabha Buddha Pureland, it is said that for the beings in Amitabha
Buddha’s pureland to take rebirth in cyclic existence, it can only happen
due to the force of prayers. The people who do actually make strong prayers
to be born in cyclic existence are in pureland are probably the
bodhisattvas because only they have the courage to aspire to that and to
work for sentient beings.
Student 2: Earlier you mentioned that one of the reasons that bodhisattvas
end up in the pureland is because they got scared of the suffering in
cyclic existence. They thought “At least I go to pureland, I can become
enlightened.” But here now we are saying that the bodhisattvas who are
likely to make strong prayers to return to cyclic existence.
Ven Gyurme: There are bodhisattvas who prayed to go to pureland and they
end up in pureland. Khen Rinpoche is saying that they are people in
pureland who do pray to come back to cyclic existence. Who are these
people? Probably has to be bodhisattvas. You say there is a problem?
Student 2: I am just trying to clarify how come they went up there because
they were so scared of the suffering of cyclic existence but now they are
making strong prayers to come back (to cyclic existence). Is that because
of the power of practice that they do in pureland? There must be a reason
that the mind somehow got less scared.
Khen Rinpoche: We are just having a discussion of the possibilities. We are
not saying that it is for sure like this or for sure like that, 100%.
Khen Rinpoche: It is stated clearly there are people up there who pray to
come down and they take rebirth in cyclic existence due to the power of
prayers. That is clear. It is also clear that those who go up are doing out
of fear, However, there are people who are coming down. The question is
“Why are they coming down?” It is not possible to make prayers when you are
up there to come down to cyclic existence when you don’t have courage, when
you don’t have strong motivation and when you don’t have strong compassion.
No way. In the first place those people who don’t have strong courage and
compassion wouldn’t be aspiring. So, we are pondering about this. What
answer could that be other than they see that it takes a longer time to
achieve enlightenment up there? They see that by taking rebirth in the
samsaric environment, their disenchantment in samsara is stronger,
bodhicitta is stronger and if that is stronger , then one will achieve
enlightenment quicker, isn’t it?  This is what I think. This is the reason
for them making the prayer to get out of pureland.
Student: Thank you very much Khen Rinpoche. That makes sense to me.
Ven Gyurme: So, now you accept that it is quicker to achieve enlightenment
here and not up there right? Making the wrong prayers?
Student 3:  For those ordinary bodhisattvas from the pureland, if they pray
to take rebirth in cyclic existence. If that happen and since it is not due
to karma and afflictions, I was just wondering what kind of aggregates do
they have? It is not a mental body, it is not true suffering then what kind
of aggregates is that?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Good question. Anybody can answer? All the
scholars please come and answer.
Ven Gyurme: From having no true suffering to having suffering right?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Anybody? The question is “When you come back
from pureland to samsara, what kind of body you have?” Human body?
Khen Rinpoche: Is the body of the bodhisattva who has taken rebirth in this
world from the pureland a true suffering like us?
Student response inaudible.
Ven Gyurme: Not qualified true suffering?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Half qualified.
Student: Could it be like as said that certain of our teachers come down
from the pureland to help us, but they manifest the experiencing illness,
aging. That is why I said it is not a fully qualified true suffering body.
Khen Rinpoche: There is no qualm about bodhisattva superiors. That is quite
obvious. We are talking about ordinary bodhisattvas in the pureland who end
up in the desire realms, what kind of body do they have? Is it true
suffering or not? Just answer yes or no.
The body of this individual is not a mental body. What other option do you
left? True suffering, right? There is no option. If you say it is true
suffering, what are the implications? What is the absurd consequence?
The implication is that if you say that the body of this individual, an
ordinary bodhisattva, who has just come from the pureland, is the true
suffering then that must be the result of the karma and afflictions since
true suffering is the result of the karma and afflictions. Then it follows
that there is karma and afflictions in the continuum of that person in the
pureland.
Student response inaudible.
Ven Gyurme: The bodhisattvas in the pureland have already enlightened don’t
have defilements? They don’t have obscurations? We are saying that there is
no karma and afflictions.
Student 4: In the first place, there wasn’t any explanation how an ordinary
person or ordinary bodhisattva ended up in the pureland does not possess
karma and afflictions. He did not practice abandon these yet when he ended
up in the pureland. It is not logical to me that his karma and afflictions
automatically disappeared.
Khen Rinpoche: We don’t say that their afflictions and karma have been
abandoned. The teachings mentioned that the afflictions of the person in
the pureland are stopped just by virtue of the power of the pureland - the
power of the place.
Student 4: That means they still can be in possession of the karma and
afflictions?
Ven Gyurme: That has not abandoned.
Student 4: Therefore when they come back, those karma and afflictions
manifest as true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: It does not manifest in the pureland.
Student 4: Not manifest in pureland but manifest back here in the samsara.
Ven Gyurme: If it doesn’t manifest how to take rebirth?
Student 4: It is stopped. He is still in possession of karma and
afflictions, so somewhere in the continuum they still possess karma and
afflictions.
Khen Rinpoche: If you think of the twelve-link of dependent origination, in
order to get a contaminated aggregate true suffering, three actualizing
factors must be present: craving, grasping and potential existence. If they
are not manifest, you cannot actualize the result. If the actualizing
factors are not manifest then the actualizing karma doesn’t come into being
then you cannot have this result.
Student 4: Do they possess these actualizing factors in the continuum while
in the pureland? Even though it is stopped but do they possess these
actualizing factors?
Ven Gyurme: No, cannot manifest in the pureland.
Student 4: If they cannot manifest in the pureland then there is no way
they can take rebirth back to the cyclic existence. The same reason
applies.
Khen Rinpoche: That is why it said that it is that rebirth from the
pureland into the cyclic existence is not due to the force of karma and
afflictions. We are trying to ascertain whether the rebirth from the
pureland down to our desire realms is due to karma and afflictions.
Student 4: It is very clear it is not due to karma and afflictions. It is
due to the power of prayers.
Khen Rinpoche:  If it not due to the karma and afflictions, you have only
one answer left. It is due to the power of prayers.
Student 4: So, there is a body that is formed due to the power of prayers.
This is the first time I am hearing this.
Khen Rinpoche: That is why we have that qualm: If you take rebirth from the
pureland then you become a human being, then the question: Is the human
body that you have true suffering or not?
Student 4: No
Ven Gyurme: How you say no?
Student 5: You mean it is true suffering due to prayers? He prays “I want
to have true suffering.” That is the only way because it cannot manifest.
Then how? You have to pray right? I don’t see other possibility.
Khen Rinpoche: Why is the body mind complex that we have is called
contaminated appropriated aggregates? The only reason being because it is s
due to the karma and afflictions. That is why it is called a suffering
aggregate.
If you take rebirth as human being from the pureland that rebirth is not
due to the force of karma and afflictions. That rebirth is due to the force
of prayers. Then you have to say that this body is not true suffering.
Student 6: When Rinpoche take rebirth, are those bodies true suffering? I
think it is not.
Khen Rinpoche: If the guru you taking about in question is in reality a
Buddha then no need to talk. Or if he is in reality a bodhisattva superior
then there is no need to say it is not due to karma and afflictions. Here
what we are saying is if the person in question is an ordinary person, not
a superior.
It is mentioned in the teachings of the Stages of Clear Realization,
literally the Perfection of Wisdom literature, bodhisattva superiors do
take on an aspect of the animal body but that is not an actual animal body.
That is fine for bodhisattva superior. Can we extend this line of reasoning
or this way of explaining for ordinary beings? Like in the teaching of
correctly devoting to the virtuous friends, they say that from your side,
you have to look at the virtuous friends is not sick but he is showing the
aspect of being sick, showing a lot of different aspects but in reality he
is not sick but looks like he is sick. If the individual in question is
really a Buddha or bodhisattva superior then there is meaning to say that
they are showing aspect. If the person is an ordinary being there is no
meaning in saying they are showing ordinary aspect of being sick but he is
really sick. He is dying and is sick.
In the Buddha’s life story, he was born, then he aged and then he passed
away. From the Mahayana’s perspective, it is said that the Buddha did not
die but manifested passing away.
Student 6: What I heard about bodhisattva in the pureland is that they pray
to be born in our world because they have the aggregates of a human body
which make it easier to practice tantra and achieve enlightenment in one
lifetime. I have actually not heard of it them praying to be reborn because
it is easier to develop renunciation quicker. I guess the reason could be
in order for them to be reborn as bodhisattva in the pureland, they would
have already bodhicitta which means that they have already developed
renunciation before that. Why do they still want to pray to reborn here to
develop renunciation in a quicker way?
Khen Rinpoche: There is a difference in the strength of their renunciation
and compassion. There will be difference in the strength of those minds
generated. Shakyamuni Buddha and Maitreya Buddha prior to achieving
enlightenment were both bodhisattvas of course, but who achieve
enlightenment earlier? It was Shakyamuni Buddha. Why? It was said that his
compassion was stronger. Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment earlier
than Maitreya Buddha. When both of them are bodhisattvas, who became a
bodhisattva first? It was Maitreya because Maitreya generated bodhicitta
much earlier before Shakyamuni Buddha but in the end Shakyamuni Buddha
achieved enlightenment earlier than Maitreya Buddha. That happens because
of the strength of bodhicitta that Shakyamuni Buddha generated while he was
on the path. The point here is that there is a difference in the strength
of the renunciation and bodhicitta in the mind of the person who is in the
pureland and the mind of the person who is in this world. Because of the
difference then there is a difference in the strength of the bodhicitta and
therefore the speed of achieving enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche (In English):  Whatever we discussed today is not my final
answer. We only have some discussions, that is all. Get more ideas. You can
think more. I don’t have the exact answer. But it is good to think more.









