Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/lesson4.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.414519
================================================================================


Eight Verses of Thought Transformation
Verse 5
When, out of envy, others mistreat me with abuse, insults, or the like, I
shall accept defeat and offer the victory to others.
In the situations when we are experiencing such mistreatment from others
motivated by their jealousy, the verse is saying that we should remain
undisturbed, the mind remains undisturbed and to train in accepting lost or
defeat. This is an advice that is meant to for the practice of patience. So
it is said that in verse 5, when we are experiencing such situations, if we
do remain undisturbed and abide in the practice of patience, the benefits
we will gets from this practice of patience is greatly exceeded the merit
that is accumulated from the practice of generosity and ethical discipline.
Likewise, the purification of the negativities is effected if one remains
in the practice of patience. However, if our mind becomes disturbed and we
are unable to abide in patience in such situation, then our hatred will
greatly destroy our merit. As mentioned by Shantideva in his “Engaging in
the Bodhisattva Deeds”: “There is no greater negativity than hatred
(anger).” Shantideva said “There is no negativity like hatred and there is
no fortitude like patience.” In such situation, the verse advises us to
accept the defeat and take on the lost. We can relate this to karma, isn’t
it? Since we will never ever experience the result of an action that we did
not create in the past, as such there is a point in accepting the lost.
Verse 6
When someone whom I have benefited and in whom I have great hopes gives me
terrible harm, I will regard that person as my holy Guru.
The object or the person mentioned in verse 6 is either the people whom we
have helped greatly and or those whom we have a lot of expectations and
have placed great hopes on them.  When these people harm us or take
advantages of us, we are advised to look at them and regard them as our
guru.
Generally speaking when those people whom we think we have helped greatly
and those people that we have a lot of expectations and have placed great
hopes on them do something that we don’t like or harm us, we find it more
difficult to tolerate and accept them comparing to someone who has not
helped us much, or someone whom we don’t have much expectations of because
if those people harm us, it doesn’t buck us as much. If somebody whom we
have helped greatly and or whom we have great expectations were to harm us,
most people in the world would generally consider that really unacceptable.
However, the advice here is for somebody who is a serious practitioner of
bodhicitta and is a dedicated practitioner of mind training, then for such
a person, the advice is to regard people whom we have benefited and people
whom we have great hopes do harm us, then this practitioner should regard
that kind of people as their gurus.
The practice of patience is done when we are upset and when we are angry.
So in order to practice patience, we need the conditions for the practice
i.e. the object (of patience). It is only in the situation when we receive
harm from another person, then that is an opportunity for us to practice
patience. And that person who is harming us then becomes an essential
condition for the practice of patience. As such, we can look at that person
as a teacher, a guru.
Many a times when we extend our help to others, we usually help with
expectations, such as we expect something, whatever it is. We also have a
view of how things should turn out after helping that person. It is taught
in the teachings that in the practice of bodhicitta and the practice of the
perfection of generosity, perfection of ethical discipline and so forth,
whatever help we extend to others, we do it without expecting anything in
return. We don’t even expect good karma. We are not going to meet the
expectation of accumulating merits or wanting to experience the positive
effect from the ripening of that merit. So in the practice of bodhicitta,
whatever helps we offer to others, all these have to be done without any
slightest expectation of any rewards and not even expecting the good karma
will come back and ripen upon us. However, our problem is that when we
help, we have all sorts of expectations, and the greater the expectations,
the greater the hurt we will have when our expectations are not met. In the
first place, if we have extended our help sincerely without any
expectations, even if we are really harmed by the people whom we have
helped, the pain or hurt will not be so great. Yes, there is hurt but there
isn’t any pain when the things to turn out in a certain way.
In the context of the Mahayana mind training, bodhicitta, it is said that
whatever practice we do, we should not be done with expectation of any
reward or ripening of good karma in the future. I think not expecting any
rewards or good karma in the sense of something that has to do with
samsaric experience. For example, consider the mindset of the person of
small capacity, they do accumulate merits and they do abandon non-virtues.
They also practice generosity, but deep down, all those practices are done
with the expectation of something in return such as practicing generosity
because one wants to be rich. As such, the person of small capacity engages
in the practice of generosity looking for wealth and prosperity in the
future lives. They engage in the practice of patience perhaps looking for a
pleasant physical appearance and a good physical body in the future.
Although these practices are done looking for happiness in the future lives
is dharma, but nevertheless, it is done with expectations. The results are
just a rebirth as a human or a celestial being in samsara. Essentially it
is still an experience that is included in cyclic existence (samsara).
If we compare those people who practice charity looking for something in
this life versus somebody who practices charity looking for happiness in
the future lives. These are expectations but the expectations are a bit
different. I would think that those people who give looking for something
in this life will face with more difficulties and more unhappiness. I don’t
think the person of medium capacity and person of great capacity are
looking for any kind of rewards or ripening good karma. The person of
medium capacity is not looking for samsara but he is looking for liberation
from the cyclic existence. As such, we could say that perhaps they don’t
have the kind of expectations of reward or ripening of good karma.
Likewise, the person of great capacity is looking for enlightenment to help
others. I don’t think we could say the person of great capacity have the
expectation of reward.
It is said in the teachings that in the practice of mind training,
bodhicitta, whatever practice one does, one should not be doing it with any
sense of expectation of rewards or ripening of good karma and so forth. For
such practitioners, when they receive harm from people whom they have
benefited greatly, they are advised to look at this people as a teacher and
reminding themselves of the need to practice without expecting any reward.
When we extend our helps to whoever it may be, those people become our
friend. Then when that person harms us, immediately they become the enemy.
It is evident that friends become enemies. This is the fault of samsara. In
the teachings it talked about how samsara is uncertain in that friends can
become enemies due to some conditions.
Back to verse 6 again, in the situation when we received harm from somebody
whom we have benefited, then we can look at the person as a teacher
teaching us the particular fault of cyclic existence - the fault of
uncertainty. The point here is regarding that person as our teacher or
guru. That person is a teacher of patience telling us how we should not
have any expectation of reward.  That person as a teacher shows us the
faults of cyclic existence. Likewise, thinking about how karma does apply
in this situation as well, if we did not create the cause in the past,
there is no way that we will experience the result. The reason why we
experience people returning harm for the benefits we have done for them is
due to our own actions of harming that person in the past. In that sense,
it is appropriate to receive harm in return as a result of something we
have done in the past.
It is clear that we do experience problems and sufferings because of our
negativities. Otherwise, there are no reasons to experience problems and
sufferings. Let’s take the Superiors who have abandoned the negativities as
an example. It is said that they never experience problems because they
have already abandoned the cause of suffering.
Because of having accumulated negativities in the past, we are experiencing
harm from somebody. Essentially, it is the doing of our negativities that
is causing that person to dislike us or to have malice towards us. That
person who is harming us accumulates negative karma as well. If we do think
about it, essentially we are responsible for that person’s accumulation of
negative karma. All the more, therefore, it is inappropriate to get upset
and angry.
The Kadampa masters tell us that the best thing to do when we receive harm
from somebody whom we have benefited, the best response is to meditate on
compassion. The teachings tell us that in such situations when we
experience abuse, slander, harm or hurt from others, we should even make
the prayer “May those beings have the fortune to achieve enlightenment
because of having done those things in relation to me.”
In general, we regard the virtuous friend, the guru, the person who gives
us vows, transmissions, teachings, advices and so forth, as kind. Generally
speaking, it is considered to be not very appropriate to disregard their
teachings and their advices. We can receive vows from the teachers but if
we don’t keep the vows, then we are not going to achieve anything. When we
receive the teachings from the virtuous friend, but if we don’t practice
them then we are not going to achieve anything. Likewise, when we do face
with the enemy, who is the teacher of patience, but we don’t practice
patience, then we are not going to achieve anything as well.
We talked about virtuous friend, the guru. What exactly is a virtuous
friend? Essentially, that person must be somebody who is effective for our
mind in that through his teachings and his guidance, our mind does actually
change and transform. So the person who can do that to us can be a virtuous
friend. In reality, the virtuous friend, our guru, has to be someone who
does not giving us any face and can tell us right in our face where and
when we are wrong. In reality, the virtuous friend has to be somebody whom
we can accept when telling us in our face “You are just wrong.” Then the
relationship will be effective.  Of course, for that to happen in the first
place there must be a stable relationship between that particular guru and
the disciple in question. There has to be a stable and good relationship.
There has to be devotion and also faith from the disciple side. Otherwise,
this is not going to work. If the relationship and connection is not
stable, not strong and there is no faith, then if the teacher tells us
right in our face what is wrong with us, instead of benefit, there is only
harm and problem to us.
Many of you know the story of how Marpa treated Milarepa. If we look at
this example, we can see how Milarepa was able to bear so much hardship and
how his mind was so transformed from his relationship with his teacher
Marpa. But in this days and time, if you look at people who are in the role
of teachers, most of the time the teachers have to be politically correct
i.e. they have to say things that the listeners like to hear. The teachers
have to act according with the wishes of the audiences and listeners. As
such, we don’t any progress from both side; both the teacher and student
don’t progress. The position and role of the teacher and disciple sometimes
become blur as such sometimes I am wondering who is the actual teacher.
The great yogi Padampa Sangye says “Guru scolding is like the recitation of
a wrathful mantra.” Of course this advice is meant for those who have
devotion and faith. When the guru scolds us even in the midst of other
people, whether we have committed a mistake or not, if one has faith then
one is able to regard the scolding as a wrathful mantra. We do think highly
of wrathful mantra so we have no issue in adopting them and happily
reciting them. Actually the guru scolding us is one of the best antidote
and remedy to our ego. In the first place, what is the reason that we
cannot tolerate scolding from the guru or from anyone else?  It is our ego.
Because of our pride, we just cannot accept it.
It is said “A scolding is like a wrathful mantra and a beating is like
receiving initiation.” So if one has the idea that receiving a beating is
like receiving an initiation, then one will have no issue with that and one
will receive it happily because, generally, people like to receive
initiation. It is said that a beating from the guru is like receiving
initiation so beating from the virtuous friend is said to purify lots of
negativities. This advice is for those who has faith. If there is an
obstacle to be pacified, this is thing that will pacify our obstacle. If
there is anything that can bless us, this is the very thing that can bless
us. So when we do get beating or a scolding, that is the real blessing
because it is a remedy to our ego and our pride. When our mind does change
and transform for the better and when there is an antidote and remedy to
our ego and afflictions, then that is the real blessing. Therefore, it is
said that this is blessing.
These are advices for practitioners, those who really want to practice,
those who know how to think, and those who know how to practice.
Essentially, these are just adopting a different mental perspective. So if
we know how to think on the so-called practice, then it is said that it is
possible to put up with scolding, beating, seeing the enemy as person as so
forth. The teachings tell us that wherever we go or whoever we relate to,
whether the person is a friend or enemy, if we can look upon them and
regard them as a teacher, we will always be able to stay happy. All of this
is possible if we do practice. It is a matter of training. If we are able
to adopt this kind of view of regarding whoever we meet as a teacher,
whether is a friend or an enemy, it is said that we will always be happy
everywhere.
This is pretty much the same as what is being said in the guru puja. There
is a verse that says: When the environment is filled with the results of
non-virtue, when suffering pours upon us in our life like rain, we should
experience and look at them as the results of ripening of non-virtue. In
such a way, then may we be able to bring all the obstacles, all the
unfavorable conditions and make them a positive condition that will
contribute to our enlightenment.
In short, whatever good or bad that happens to us, it is all results of our
own karma. If we can remember and accept this, then I guess we will always
be calm and happy.  As I have mentioned in the previous lesson, Aryadeva in
his Four Hundred Verses talks about making a distinction between the person
and his afflictions. I think making this distinction is very important.
Likewise, Chandrakirti said that when experiencing harm from somebody, we
should attribute the problem to the person’s afflictions and not to the
person himself. We should not get upset with the person. The teachings say
we should not confront and oppose the person but rather we should confront
and oppose that person’s afflictions. We should have affection for the
person but oppose his afflictions.  Likewise, we don’t see that we are our
pride. In reality, we and our pride are different things. When we receive
harm from another person such as scolding or verbal abuse or whatever it
is, we find it very difficult to tolerate because we feel that he is
attacking on us. We tend to conflict the two - our ego and our self - into
one. But if we can entertain the view that that person’s abuse is directed
at “my ego and not me”, then it makes it a little bit more palatable and
easier to handle. The reality is that our afflictions, especially our
anger, pride, ego, are our real main enemies.  When somebody harms our
afflictions such as our pride, actually we should be happy, isn’t it? That
is the reality, and we should be happy and thankful. Of course that is not
what we think. If we really think well and see that there is indeed a
difference between our self and our afflictions, then it is possible to
really think that that person’s abuse and harm is directed at “my ego, my
pride, my afflictions” rather than seeing it as a personal attack. If we do
see the point behind this distinction, then it will make a difference, but
this is difficult for us to accept.
If we think well and be honest with ourselves, we call ourselves
practitioners and we say we accept karma, but when we experience a small
problem we cannot even deal with it. We don’t want to deal with it, and we
cannot tolerate it. This is very obvious sign that we are not practicing
dharma at all.
It doesn’t matter how many prayers we recite a day, the sadhana we do or Om
Mani Padme Hung that we recite every day of our life, but when even
something small happens, we cannot tolerate and put up with it. This is a
clear sign that we are not practicing dharma.
When somebody stares at us in an unfriendly way or criticizing us or say
something unpleasant, even that we cannot tolerate. When we think about the
dharma practices that we have done all these while, there is nothing to
show off.  We have to reflect on this. Practicing dharma means changing the
mind for the better and subduing the mind. The result of practicing dharma
is that our mind should be calm, relax and virtuous regardless of the
situation, whether we are happy, we are sad, or we are suffering.
I don’t remember exactly who, perhaps is Guntang Rinpoche, says that “One
looks like a dharma practitioner when things are going well. One keeps up
the appearance of doing one’s prayers and practices. One has the appearance
of someone who is practicing dharma. However, when something bad happens,
one cannot tolerate and don’t know how to deal with it. Then the appearance
of a practitioner is gone right away.”
The teachings tell us that if we are a dharma practitioner and want to be a
practitioner, we should not become like this. If we want to be a dharma
practitioner or are a dharma practitioner, we have to be an actual dharma
practitioner and not just look like a practitioner. Unfortunately we only
have the form of a practitioner. We say we do prayers and so forth, and we
look like we are practicing. We think we are practicing when things are
going well, but when something bad happens in our life with some
difficulties and challenges, we don’t how to deal with it, we don’t know
how to react but react in a negative way, we cannot put up with it and
refuse to accept it. That is a sign that we have never been practicing
dharma. Therefore, the teachings tell us to keep this in our mind that we
should really try to become a practitioner and not just look like a
practitioner.
There are many such practical and realistic advices on the practice said by
the great Kadampa master in the past. The teachings of the Kadampa masters
are very straight forward, very practical and realistic. They tell us right
in our face immediately what is wrong with us and what we need to do. We
should regard these teachings, advice and instructions as an introduction
to our faults. They are telling us what is our problem and what we need to
do with it. They are telling us that we need to get rid of those faults. We
should regard whatever teachings that we learn and practice as the clear
indications of our faults and what we need to do. Whatever we learn and
practice must transform our minds for the better. In particular, they must
result in our afflictions becoming weaker overtime.
Verse 7
In short, both directly and indirectly, do I offer every happiness and
benefit to all my mothers. I shall secretly take upon myself all their
harmful actions and suffering.
If there is any benefit that we can offer both directly and indirectly to
others then we should do so and we take upon ourselves all the sufferings
of others. This shows the practice of tonglen - the practice of giving and
taking. There is a mind training prayer which goes like this: When I
experience problems and suffering, may my experience of all the suffering
dry up the ocean of sufferings of all sentient beings.
When we experience happiness and the benefits of all the good things, it is
the result of having accumulated merit in the past. We dedicate all these
happiness to all sentient beings wishing that may they also experience this
happiness. If we do actually have these helpful mental attitudes, then if
we meet with destitute and the poor, we will really happily give food,
clothing, and any necessities. On the practical level, it will show and
manifest in a practical action. Even in situations when it is not possible
to do something directly on a practical level, we still can secretly do it.
Here “secretly” means we do it on a mental level i.e. even if we cannot
actually give but mentally we can dedicate and give. As it is done in the
mind where nobody can see, therefore, that is one explanation of the word
“secret”.
In is said in Engaging in the Bodhisattvas Deeds that the practice of
exchanging self and others is to be done in secret. In the first place, why
the practice of exchanging self and others is secret? Because such a
practice of exchanging self and others is something that cannot fit the
mind of the Hearers and the Solitary Realizers. Even amongst the
bodhisattvas, there are bodhisattvas who are dull faculties and sharp
faculties. It is said that even the practice of exchanging self and others
cannot fit in the minds of the bodhisattvas of dull faculties. Such a
practice of exchanging self and others is meant for those who are of sharp
faculty bodhisattvas.
Verse 8
Undefiled by the stains of the superstitions of the eight worldly concerns,
may I, by perceiving all phenomena as illusory, be released from the
bondage of attachment.
This verse shows the practice of wisdom. It is said that we should dedicate
the merit after any practice. The dedication has to be sealed with
emptiness. That is how we should understand it. When we talk about the
eight worldly dharmas (eight worldly concerns), there are three forms of
eight worldly concerns:
   1. The eight black worldly dharmas
   2. The eight white worldly dharmas
   3. The eight mixed worldly dharmas
Whatever we do in life, what practice in particular, it should not be done
with the motivation of the eight worldly concerns i.e. it should not be
stained by the eight worldly concerns. The eight worldly concerns that we
usually talk about are the eight black worldly dharmas. That simply refers
to the motivation of attachment to this life’s happiness:
    • Everybody is happy to be happy, and not happy when suffering.
    • Everybody is happy to be praised, nobody likes to be criticized. We
      hate criticisms.
    • Everybody likes good reputation, we dislike bad reputation.
    • (Taking delight in having money and material possessions, and
      disappointed, upset, angry when we lose them or don’t get them)
These are our worldly concerns. So whatever practice we do, basically
whatever we do in life, if it is mixed with these eight worldly concerns.
If it is a dharma practice but is motivated by these eight worldly
concerns, then that practice will never become a dharma practice.
It is not that we don’t need happiness, gain, praise and good reputation.
It is not about rejecting them. In fact, there is a case for wanting
praise, good reputation, gain and just to be happy. The point is not to be
so emotionally attached and involved with them until the point where the
mind becomes disturbed by these things.
If we are very emotionally attached and involved with these things such as
we want praise, good reputation, gain and so forth, then we build up a lot
of expectations, hopes and fears. The greater our attachment to these
things, the greater would be our fears, our expectations and our hopes.
Driven by our expectations, our fears and our worries, then we become
hypocrites. We have to pretend and act and speak in ways we don’t actually
feel like doing most of the time such as pretend to smile when we don’t
feel like smiling, say nice things to people but actually we don’t really
mean it at all. We say it because we want something.
Because of attachment to gain, to praise, to reputation, we act in all
kinds of ways like a hypocrite saying things that we don’t mean. When
someone does catch it and knowing what we are up to, then they will
gradually lose their trust in us. All these come from very strong wanting
to be famous, wanting to be praised, wanting to gain. We need material
development, we need to be happy, and it is okay to be praised and have
good reputation, but if we become very emotionally attached and involved in
these things, then this become the condition for us to meet with many
problems, a lot of fear, anxiety, hopes, worries and so forth. It happens
to all of us, everybody, even so-called practitioners, because of
attachment to praise, reputation, then people having to put up a false
front by having to act holy. There are some teachers who just putting on an
act by pretending to be holy. Even people who meditate sometimes deep down
they are looking for praise.  Even though they are not really meditating,
they have to put on front as if they can sit very well and meditate because
they want people to regard them as good meditator.  Anyway, whatever we do,
whether it is meditation, study, or practice, we have to check on ourselves
to make sure the so-called practice of dharma actually becomes dharma and
not just look like dharma.
I can’t really say much about the eight white worldly dharmas and the eight
mixed worldly dharmas.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Does anybody know? If I find something on this,
I will let you know.
“By perceiving all phenomena as illusory, be released from the bondage of
attachment” - whenever we dedicate our merit, we should seal the dedication
with emptiness. When doing practices such as generosity by giving, we can
bring to mind how the agent, object and action are illusory.
“Attachment” is grasping which refers to the apprehension of true
existence. So by perceiving everything as illusory, we can be freed from
the bondage of that apprehension of true existence.
This is all about Eight Verses of Thought Transformation. We will start
with the other text (Wheel-Weapon Mind Training) in the next lesson. This
Eight Verses of Thought Transformation is very short and concise but very
effective. It would be very good if we can memorize this text and treat is
as a daily prayer. If we can recite this every day from memory and reflect
on it as we recite, I think this would be the most effective daily prayer;
you can call it as the best sadhana as the words are not difficult to
understand. We may recite so many prayers and sadhanas in our daily lives,
but if we think about it, at our level what practical real benefit can they
offer to us in our daily lives?  I’m not saying that you should stop
whatever prayers and sadhanas you are already reciting. I think I have
mentioned to you before that someone had asked me “Can I stop doing some of
my prayers because I have too many?” I have given you the answer, right? As
I mentioned before, if you are not reflecting or meditating anyway, then it
is better to at least recite some prayers rather than not recite your
prayers. However, in the case of somebody who is really reflecting and
meditating consistently on the teachings such as this particular prayers,
even if he miss out on some of the other prayers or doesn’t do some of the
other prayers, I don’t see anything serious about that. But if you are not
doing this, and end up also not doing the daily recitations, then I think
that is really also pointless.
 This prayer is short, and is not difficult to understand but it is
difficult to implement. If we can memorize this teaching and then reflect
on it daily, then there is a practical benefit. In particular, when we meet
with challenges and difficulties, those moments when we are upset, or when
somebody whom we have to associate closely on a regular basis such as
friends or close one saying something nasty  or something that we don’t
like, then immediately the person becomes an enemy. In this situation, it
would be helpful if we can bring to mind these verses. The eight verses are
telling us to be patient and to view everyone as precious, as dear, as a
loved one, as a friend.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Now you exchange the exam paper with somebody
else. Give your paper to those who want to read. You can request each
other. If you don’t want, then pass back to me. If you want to read the
paper of somebody who wrote better, then ask them. Read and then bring back
on Thursday. If you don’t want your paper to be read by others, then put
here. Those who want to read other’s paper, you can request to read his
paper. By reading, you benefit yourself. Clear? Anyway, on Thursday, you
must bring back all the papers to me.

