Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/WheelWeapon/Wheel_weapon Mind Training.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:47.785645
================================================================================

 
 
  
Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
     
by  
Dharmarakshita 
    
 
 
Translation 
Geshe Lhundub Sopa  
with Michael Sweet & Leonard Zwilling  
 
 
excerpt from  
 
Peacock in the Poison Grove 
Two Buddhist Texts on Training the Mind 
 
  
 
   
 
 
   
© Wisdom Publications 
All rights reserved 
   
 
             Permission granted for use in the FPMT Basic Program 
by Wisdom Publications. 
   
 
1 
The Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
 
  
Homage to the Three Jewels. 
The Wheel-Weapon That Strikes at the Enemy’s Vital Spot 
I bow down to the Great wrathful One, Yamantaka. 
 1 When the peacocks roam the jung le of virulent poison, the flocks take no delight in gardens 
of medicinal plants, no matter how beautiful they  may be, for peacocks thrive on the essence 
of virulent poison.  2 Similarly, when the heroes roam the jungle of cyclic existence, they do not become attached 
to the garden of happiness and prosperity, no  matter how beautiful it may be, for heroes 
thrive in the jungle of suffering.  3 Therefore, it is due to cowardice that persons avidly pursue their own happiness and so 
come to suffer; and it is due to heroism that bodhisattvas, willingly taking the suffering of 
others onto themselves, are always happy.  4 Now here, desire is like a jungle of virulent po ison: the hero, like the peacock, masters it; the 
coward, like the crow, perishes.  5 How can persons concerned only with their own desires master this poison? If they involve 
themselves in the other afflictions as well, it  will cost them their chance for emancipation, 
just like the crow.  6 Thus the bodhisattva roams like the peacock in th e forest of cyclic existence, converting the 
afflictions, which are like a jungle of virulent poisons, into an elixir. Willingly embracing the 
afflictions, the hero shall conquer the poison.  7 The ego-clinging of the helpless wanderer in cy clic existence is the messenger of the devil. 
Distance yourself from the savor of self ishness and hedonism, and willingly embrace 
hardship for the sake of others.
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
2 
8 
May the suffering of all beings, who, like myself, are driven by their karma and their habituation to the afflictions, be heaped upon me, the hedonist.  9 When I become enmeshed in selfishness, I will offer my own happiness to living beings so as 
to counteract it. In the same way, should a co mpanion be ungrateful to me, I will be content 
in knowing that this is in retr ibution for my own inconstancy. 
 10 When my body falls prey to terrible sickness, it  is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned 
upon me for injuring the bodies of living bein gs. From now on, I shall take all sickness upon 
myself.  11 When my mind falls prey to suffering, it is su rely the weapon of my own evil deeds turned 
upon me for troubling the minds of others. From  now on, I shall willingly take all suffering 
upon myself.  12 
When I am tormented by extreme hunger and thir st, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds 
turned upon me for swindling, stealing, and ac ting miserly. From now on, I shall willingly 
take all hunger and thirst upon myself. 
 13 When I am powerless and suffer enslavement, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned 
upon me for despising my inferiors and enslavin g them. From now on I shall make slaves of 
my body and my life for the sake of others.  14 When insulting remarks assault my ears, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon 
me for my verbal offenses of slander and so  forth. From now on I shall condemn my own 
verbal faults.  15 When I am reborn into an impure land, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon 
me for always cultivating impure vision. From  now on, I shall cultivate only pure vision. 
    
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
3 
16 
When I am separated from helpful and loving frie nds, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds 
turned upon me for luring away others’ companions. From now on I shall not separate others from their companions. 17 When all the holy ones are displeased with me, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned 
upon me for casting them aside and resortin g to bad companions. From now on I shall 
renounce bad companions.  18 When others sin against me by exaggeration or deprecation, it is the weapon of my own evil 
deeds turned upon me for reviling the holy on es. From now on I shall not revile others by 
exaggeration or deprecation.  19 When my material necessities waste away, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned 
upon me for scorning others’ necessities. From now on I shall provide for others’ necessities. 
 20 When my mind is unclear and my heart is sad, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned 
upon me for causing others to sin. From now on I shall renounce contributing to others’ 
sinning.  21 When I am deeply troubled over my lack of su ccess, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds 
turned upon me for hindering the work of the holy ones. From now on I shall renounce all 
hindering.  22 When my guru is displeased with me no matter what I do, it is the weapon of my own evil 
deeds turned upon me for acting duplicitou sly toward the holy Dharma. From now on I 
shall reduce mmy duplicity toward the Dharma.  23 When everyone contradicts me, it is the weapon  of my own evil deeds turned upon me for 
belittling shame and modesty. From no w on, I shall avoid rough behavior. 
 24 When there is disagreement as soon as my companions gather, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me for peddling my discontent and evil disposition everywhere. From now on without any ulterior moti ve, I shall behave well toward all. 
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
4 
25 
When all my kin become my enemies, it is th e weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon 
me for harboring evil thoughts. From now on I shall reduce my deceit and guile. 
 26 When I am sick with consumption or edema, it  is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned 
upon me for unlawfully and indiscriminately stealing others’ wealth. From now on I shall 
renounce plundering others’ wealth.  27 When my body is suddenly struck by contagious  disease, it is the weapon of my own evil 
deeds turned upon me for committing acts th at corrupted my vows. From now on I shall 
renounce nonvirtuous acts.  28 When my intellect is blind toward all that is wo rth knowing, it is the weapon of my own evil 
deeds turned upon me for claiming as the Dhar ma what ought to be put aside. From now on 
I shall cultivate the wisdom that comes fr om study, examination, and meditation. 
 29 
When I am overcome by sleep while practicing  Dharma, it is the weapon of my own evil 
deeds turned upon me for piling up obscuratio ns to the holy Dharma. From now on I shall 
undergo hardship for the sake of the Dharma. 
 30 When I delight in the afflictions and am greatly distracted, it is the weapon of my own evil 
deeds turned upon me for not meditating up on impermanence and the shortcomings of 
cyclic existence. From now on I shall increa se my dissatisfaction for cyclic existence. 
 31 When things get worse no matter what I do, it  is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned 
upon me for disparaging moral causality and dependent origination. From now on I shall 
strive to accumulate merit.  32 When all the religious rites I perform go awry, it  is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned 
upon me for looking to the dark quarter for help. From now on I shall turn away from the 
dark quarter.    
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
5 
33 
When my prayers to the Three Jewels go unanswe red, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds 
turned upon me for not believing in buddhah ood. From now on I shall rely on the Three 
Jewels alone.  34 When conceptual construction rises up as pollut ion demons and evil spirits, it is the weapon 
of my own evil deeds turned upon me for si nning against the gods and mantras. From now 
on I shall crush all conceptual constructions.  35 When I wander far from home like a helpless pe rson, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds 
turned upon me for driving spiritual teachers and others from their homes. From now on I 
shall not expel anyone from their home.  36 When calamities occur like frost and hail, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned 
upon me for not properly guarding my vows an d moral conduct. From now on I shall keep 
my vows and moral conduct pure.  
37 
When I, a greedy person, lose my wealth, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon 
me for not giving charity or making offeri ngs to the Three Jewels. From now on I will 
zealously make offerings and give charity.  38 When my companions mistreat me for being ug ly, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds 
turned upon me for venting my rage by erec ting ugly images. From now on I shall erect 
images of the gods and be slow to anger.  39 When lust and hate are stirred up no matter what I do, it is the weapon of my own evil 
deeds turned upon me for hardening my malevo lent, evil mind. Obstinacy, from now on I 
shall totally extirpate you!  40 When none of my practices reach their goal, it  is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned 
upon me for internalizing a pernicious view. Fr om now on, whatever I do shall be solely for 
the sake of others.   
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
6 
41 
When I cannot control my own mind even though  I engage in religious activity, it is the 
weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me  for concentrating on my own aggrandizement 
in the present life. From now on I shall concentrate on the desire for liberation.  42 When I despair as soon as I’ve sat down and refl ected, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds 
turned upon me for shamelessly flitting about fr om one new friend of high status to another. 
From now on I shall be serious ab out my friendships with everyone. 
 43 When I am deceived by others’ cunning, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon 
me for increasing my selfishness, pride, and insatiable greed. From now on I shall markedly 
reduce all of them.  44 When I am sidetracked by attachment or aver sion while studying or teaching, it is the 
weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me for not considering my own develish faults. From now on I shall examine thes e impedements and abandon them. 
 
45 
When all the good I’ve done turns out badly, it  is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned 
upon me for repaying kindness with ingratitude .From now on I shall very respectfully repay 
kindness.  46 In short, when calamities befall me, it is the weapon of my own evil deeds turned upon me, 
like a smith killed by his own sword. From now on I shall be heedful of my own sinful 
actions.  47 When I experience suffering in the wretched stat es of existence, it is the weapon of my own 
evil deeds turned upon me, like a fletcher kill ed by his own arrow. Fr om now on I shall be 
heedful of my own sinful actions.  48 When the sufferings of the householder befall me , it is the weapon of my own evil deeds 
turned upon me, like parents killed by their cher ished son. From now on it is right for me to 
leave worldly life forever.   
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
7 
49 
Since that’s the way it is, I seize the enemy! I seize the thief who ambushed and deceived me, 
the hypocrite who deceived me disguised as myse lf. Aha! It is ego-clinging, without a doubt. 
 50 Now, O Yamantaka, raise the weapon of action and spin it furiously over your head three 
times. Spread far apart your feet, which are th e two truths, open wide your eyes of method 
and wisdom, and bare your fangs of th e four powers and pierce the enemy! 
 51 O King of Spells who torments the enemy, su mmon that vow-breaker wh o is destroying me 
and others, that savage called “Ego-Clinging,  the Enchanter,” who, brandishing the weapon 
of action, runs uncontrollably throug h the jungle of cyclic existence. 
 52 Call him, call him, wrathful Yamantaka! Beat him, beat him, pierce the heart of the enemy, 
Ego! Roar and thunder on the head of the dest royer, false construction! Mortally strike at 
the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!  53 
Hum! Hum! O great tutelary deity, produce your miraculous apparitions! Dza! Dza! Bind the 
enemy tightly! Phat! Phat! I beseech you to rele ase me from all fetters! Shig! Shig! I beseech 
you to cut the knot of clinging!  54 Approach, great tutelary deity Ya mantaka. I beseech you at this very moment to rip to shreds 
this leather sack of actions and the five pois onous afflictions that mi re me in the mud of 
worldly action.  55 Although it has brought me suffering in the th ree wretched states of existence, not knowing 
enough to fear it, I rush to its cause. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false 
construction! Mortally strike at the he art of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 56 Although my desire for comfort is great, I don’t accumulate its causes. Although my 
tolerance for suffering is small, my desire and greed are great. Roar and thunder on the head 
of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally st rike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, 
Ego!   
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
8 
57 
Although that which I desire is near at hand, my effort to achi eve it is small. Although my 
projects are many, none of them are comple ted. Roar and thunder on the head of the 
destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Self! 
 58 Although I have many new frie ndships, my modesty and friendships are of short duration. 
Although I freeload off of others, I eagerly purs ue those who pilfer. Roar and thunder on the 
head of the destroyer, false construction! Mort ally strike at the heart of the butcher, the 
enemy, Ego!  59 Although I am skilled at flattery and asking for things indirectly, my despair is great. 
Although I assiduously amass things, miserline ss binds me. Roar and thunder on the head of 
the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike  at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 60 Although whatever I have done has been insign ificant, I am swollen wi th pride. Although I 
have no reputation, my hunger for it is gr eat. Roar and thunder on the head of the 
destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 61 Although my preceptors are many, my abilit y to keep my vows is small. Although my 
disciples are many, I give little time to help and look after them. Roar and thunder on the 
head of the destroyer, false construction! Mort ally strike at the heart of the butcher, the 
enemy, Ego!  62 Although my promises are many, my practical a ssistance is minimal. Although my fame is 
great, if it were examined, the gods and demo ns would put me to shame. Roar and thunder 
on the head of the destroyer, false constructio n! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, 
the enemy, Ego!  63 Although my learning is scant, my penchant for empty verbiage is great. Although the extent 
of my religious instructions is slight, I pret end to understand everything. Roar and thunder 
on the head of the destroyer, false constructio n! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, 
the enemy, Ego!    
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
9 
64 
Although my companions and underlings are numerous, not one is dependable. Although I 
have many masters, not one is a reliable prot ector. Roar and thunder on the head of the 
destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 65 Although I have high status, my merit is less than an evil spirit’s. Although I am a great 
religious teacher, my passions are grosser than a demon’s. Roar and thunder on the head of 
the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike  at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 66 Although my view is lofty, my behavior is wors e than a dog’s. Although my good qualities are 
many, their basis is carried off by the wind. Ro ar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, 
false construction! Mortally strike at th e heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 67 All desires enter into me and I blame all my quarrels on others for no reason. Roar and 
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false cons truction! Mortally strike at the heart of the 
butcher, the enemy, Ego!  
68 
Although I have put on the saffron robe, I appe al to evil spirits for protection. Although I 
have taken religious vows, my behavior is de monic. Roar and thunder on the head of the 
destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 69 Although the gods give me happiness, I worshi p evil spirits. Although the Dharma guides 
me, I deceive the Three Jewels. Roar and thun der on the head of the destroyer, false 
construction! Mortally strike at the he art of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 70 Although I have always resorted to secluded  places, I am carried away by distraction. 
Although I request instruction in the holy Dharma and the religious sciences, I cherish 
divination and shamanism. Roar and thunde r on the head of the destroyer, false 
construction! Mortally strike at the he art of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 71 Forsaking the moral path to liberation, I clin g to my home. Pouring my happiness into the 
water, I run after suffering. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the he art of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
10 
72 
Turning away from the gateway to liberation, I wander in remote places. Despite acquiring 
the precious jewel of a human body, I wind up in hell. Roar and thunder on the head of the 
destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 73 Putting aside the particulars of spiritual deve lopment, I engage in business. Leaving my 
guru’s school, I idle about the town. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false 
construction! Mortally strike at the he art of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 74 Abandoning my own livelihood, I plunder others’ property. Forsaking my parents’ food, I rob others of sustenance. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! 
Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!  75 Aha! Although my endurance for meditation is small, my prec ognition is sharp. Though I 
have not realized even the beginning of the path, I run around to no purpose. Roar and 
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false cons truction! Mortally strike at the heart of the 
butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 
76 When someone gives me useful advice, my host ile mind takes that person for an enemy. 
When someone deceives me, I repay that heartl ess one with kindness. Roar and thunder on 
the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mo rtally strike at the heart of the butcher, the 
enemy, Ego!  77 I tell my intimate friends’ secrets to their enemies. I shamelessly take advantage of my 
acquaintances. Roar and thunder on the head of  the destroyer, false construction! Mortally 
strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!  78 My frustration is intense and my thoughts are coarser than everyone else’s. I am hard to get along with and I continually provoke others’ ba d character. Roar and thunder on the head 
of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally st rike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, 
Ego!     
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
11 
79 
When someone seeks my assistance, I ignore  him and secretly cause him harm. When 
someone agrees with me, I won’t concur, but s eek quarrels even at a distance. Roar and 
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false cons truction! Mortally strike at the heart of the 
butcher, the enemy, Ego!  80 I do not appreciate advice and I’m always diffi cult to be with. Many things offend me and 
my clinging is always strong. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the he art of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 81 I exalt myself above the high and low and consid er holy people my enemies. Because my lust 
is great, I energetically pursue young people. Ro ar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, 
false construction! Mortally strike at th e heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
82 Because my friendships are of short duration, I cast aside former acquaintances. Because my 
new friends are many, I lay before them empty promises of enjoyment. Roar and thunder on 
the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mo rtally strike at the heart of the butcher, the 
enemy, Ego! 
 
83 Having no precognition, I eagerly resort to ly ing and deprecation. Having no compassion, I 
snatch away the confidence from others’ he arts. Roar and thunder on the head of the 
destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 84 Having studied little, I wildly guess about everyt hing. Since my religious education is slight, I 
have wrong views about everything. Roar and th under on the head of the destroyer, false 
construction! Mortally strike at the he art of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 85 Habituated to attachment and aversion, I revi le everyone opposed to me. Habituated to 
envy, I slander and deprecate others. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false 
construction! Mortally strike at the he art of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 86 Never studying, I despise the vast teaching. Never relying on a guru, I revile religious instruction. Roar and thunder on the head of  the destroyer, false construction! Mortally 
strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!  
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
12 
87 
Instead of explaining the scriptures, I falsel y set up my own system. Not having mastered 
pure vision, I curse and yell. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, false construction! Mortally strike at the he art of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 88 Without condemning sacrilegious activities, I launch numerous criticisms against all the 
Buddha’s words. Roar and thunder on the head of  the destroyer, false construction! Mortally 
strike at the heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego!  89 Having no shame about things I should be ashamed of, I am perversely ashamed of the 
Dharma, which is not something shameful. Roar and thunder on the head of the destroyer, 
false construction! Mortally strike at th e heart of the butcher, the enemy, Ego! 
 90 No matter what I do, it is never done right; everything I do is inappropriate. Roar and 
thunder on the head of the destroyer, false cons truction! Mortally strike at the heart of the 
butcher, the enemy, Ego!  
91 
Aha! You whose strength is that of the ultima te body of the Sugata who conquers the demon 
of the egotistic view, you wielder of the staff, the weapon of the wisdom of selflessness, turn 
it over your head three times, without hesitation!  92 I pray you, kill the enemy with your fierce wrat h! I pray you, subdue my evil thinking with 
your great wisdom! I pray you, protect me from my evil actions with your great compassion! I 
pray you, destroy this Ego once and for all!  93 However much suffering those in cyclic existence may endure, I pray you, heap it surely upon ego-clinging! However many of the five poisonous afflictions anyone may experience, I 
pray you, heap them surely upon this eg o-clinging, which richly deserves them! 
 94 Although through reasoning I have identified without a doubt all the roots of evil, if you 
judge that I a still abetting them, I pr ay you to destroy the holder himself! 
   
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
13 
95 
Now, drive all blame onto one thing! I shall cu ltivate gratitude toward all beings, take into 
my mind what others abhor, and turn over  the roots of my virtue to all beings. 
 96 Just as the pattern of colors in a peacock’s fe ather is due to poison, may the afflictions be 
transformed into the aids to enlightenment by my taking on the physical, verbal, and mental 
deeds of other living beings, past, present, and future.  97 I give the roots of my virtue to living beings so they may be cured, as a poisoned crow is 
healed by medicine. I dedicate my life to the liberation of all beings so they may quickly 
achieve the buddhahood of the Sugata!  98 Until I and those who have been my parents have attained enlightenment in the Highest 
Realm, may we support each other with a single  thought, even when wandering about in the 
six states of existence owing to our actions.  99 
When I enter the three wretched states of exis tence for the sake of even one living being, 
may I save him or her from the suffering of that wretched destiny without compromising a 
great being’s way of life. 
 100 At that very instant, the guards of hell will realize that I am a guru, and their weapons will 
turn into a rain of flowers.  May peace flourish unharmed! 
 101 Even those in wretched states of existence sh all obtain superknowledge and mantras, assume 
the bodies of gods and men, and generate bodh icitta. In return for my kindness, may they 
repay me with Dharma practice! Taking me as  their guru, may they properly attend me! 
 102 Then, may all the beings in higher realms also deeply meditate on selflessness, just as I do, 
cultivating the nonconceptual meditative absorpti on on the identity of existence and peace. 
May they recognize this identity!     
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
14 
103 
Having done so I will crush the enemy. Having done so I will crush conceptual construction. 
After cultivating selflessness through noncon ceptual wisdom, how can I not obtain the 
causes and effects of the form body?  104 Now hear this! Everything is dependently co-arisen. Being dependently co-arisen, they are not independent. Changing this way and that, th ey are false appearances and illusions; they 
are images that appear like a whirling firebrand.  105 Like the plantain tree, life has no inner core. Like a bubble, a lifetime has no inner core. Like a mist, it dissipates upon close examination. Like a mirage, it is beautiful from afar. Like 
a reflection in a mirror, it seems as if it were re aly true. Like clouds and fog, it seems as if it 
were really stable.  106 This butcher, the enemy Ego, is just the same. It  seemsas if it really exists, but it has never 
really existed. It seems as if it is really true , but it has never been really true anywhere. It 
seems as if it is vividly appearing, but it is beyond the realm of affirmation or denial. 
 107 And as for the wheel of actions, it is just the same: though it lacks an inherent nature, yet it 
appears, like the reflection of the moon in water. Action s and their consequences are a 
variegated multitude of falsehoods. Even though  they are just appearances, I urge you to 
embrace virtue and avoid sin.  108 When in a dream a peat fire blazes, we are te rrified by the heat, although it is without 
substance. In the same way, al though the hell realms and such are without substance, we fear 
the smelter’s fire and other tortures. As that  is so, we should forsake evil actions. 
 109 In a feverish delirium we may feel as if we are wandering around suffocating in a deep cave, even though there is no darkness at all. In th e same way, even though ignorance and the like 
are without substance, we should get rid of  our delusions through the three wisdoms. 
 110 When a musician plays a melody on a lute, the sound lacks inherent nature, if we analyze it. But when the sweet sounds emerge, their unanal yzed aggregate eases the anguish in people’s 
hearts. 
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
15 
111 
When we analyze all causes and effects, they lack inherent nature as either identical or 
different. Yet phenomena vividly appear to arise and perish, and we experience pleasure and suffering as if they really existed. Even thou gh they are just appearances, I urge you to 
embrace virtue and avoid sin.  112 When drops of water fill a jar, the first drop does not fill it, nor the last, nor each drop 
individually. Yet the dependently arisen aggregate fills the jar.  113 Similarly, when someone experiences their reward  of pleasure or pain, it is due neither to 
the first moment of the cause, nor to the last  moment, and so on. Yet the dependently arisen 
aggregate makes us experience pleasure or pain . Even though they are just appearances, I 
urge you to embrace virtue and avoid sin.  114 Aha! The appearance that delights our mi nd, though independent when unanalyzed, 
definitely lacks an inner core. However, the fact  that phenomena appear as if they exist is 
profound and difficult for the dull-witted to understand. 
 
115 Now, when you are absorbed in meditative equipoi se on this, what is there really to a mere 
appearance? How can either existence or non- existence exist? How can anyone anywhere 
assert “it is” or “it is not”?  116 Subject and object lack ultimate reality. If  your mind remains in its innate nature, 
uncontrived and shining, free from all discrimina tion and conceptual proliferation, you will 
become a great being.  117 Thus, by practicing the conventional and ulti mate bodhicitta, and thereby uninterruptedly 
carrying the two accumulations through to comp letion, may I perfectly realize the two aims. 
       
              Wheel-Weapon Mind Training 
16 
Colophon 
 In the dense jungle wherein roam many fearful beasts of prey, the great yogi Dharmaraksita, 
who understood both scripture and logic, composed The Wheel-Weapon That Strikes at the 
Enemy’s Vital Spot  according to his holy religious teacher’ s instruction, and he practiced it in 
the dark and terrifying jungle of our degenerate  age. He bestowed it upon Atisa, and Atisa 
too came to realize it by practicing it disinter estedly for the sake of taming sentient beings 
who are difficult to tame. Atisa spoke these verses:  I After I left my royal estate and practiced austerities, I met my supreme religious teacher due to the merit I had accumulated; he ta ught me this ambrosia of the holy religion 
and initiated me into it; having obtained the an tidote for the present age, I committed it to 
memory.  II Without partisanship toward doctrinal syst ems, I opened my mind and studied them 
all, and although I have understood teachings marvelous and vast, this is the teaching that 
will bring benefit to this degenerate age.  From among the inconceivably vast number of his Indian and Tibetan disciples, Atisa bestowed it upon Upasika (’Brom ston pa), the fit vessel, the disciple who was prophesied by 
numberless tutelary deities such as Lady Tara . The teaching was gien to tame the dangerous 
converts of the Tibetan borderlands.  The Conqueror Father and Son [Atisa and ’B rom] served as pandit and translator. 